THE PERPETVAL GOVERNMENT OF CHRIST'S CHVRCH.

Wherein are handled; The fatherly superiority which God first established in
the Patriarchs for the guiding of his Church, and after continued in the Tribe
of Leui and the Prophets; and lastly confirmed in the New Testament to the
Apostles and their successors:

As also the points in question at this day; Touching the Jewish Synedrion: the
true kingdom of Christ: the Apostles commission: the Lay Presbytery: the
Distinction of Bishops from Presbyters, and their succession from the Apostles
times and hands: the calling and moderating of Provincial Synodes by Primates
and Metropolitanes: the allotting of Dioeceses, and the Popular electing of
such as must feed and watch the flock: And diverse other points concerning the
Pastoral regiment of the house of God; By THO. BILSON Warden of Winchester
College.

Perused and allowed by public authority.

1. Cor. 14. Came the word of God first from you? or did it spread to you alone?

Iren lib. 3. ca. 3. We can reckon those that were ordained Bishops by the
Apostles in the Churches, and their successors to this present, which never
taught nor knew any such thing, as these dream.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. An. Dom. 1593.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IHaue been very unwilling (good Christian Reader) to enter into these
controversies of Discipline, that have now some space troubled the Church of
England. I remembered the words of Abraham to Lot; Genesis 13.
Let there I pray thee, be no strife betwixt thee and me, nor betwixt my men
and thine for we be brethren; and did thereby learn that all strife betwixt
brethren, was unnatural. I could not forget the saying of our Savior; John 14.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give you; and so collected how careful we
should be to Ephesians. 4.
keep the unity of the spirit in the band of peace. Profane writers could
tell me; by concord, the weakest things grow strong; by discord, the mightiest
states are overthrown: and that made me loath to increase or nourish the
dislikes and quarrels that have lately fallen out in this Realm, betwixt the
Professors and Teachers of one and the same Religion: yet when I saw the
peace of Gods Church violated by the sharpness of some men's humors; and their
tongues so intemperate, that they could not be discerned from open enemies, I
thought as in a common danger, not to sit looking till all were on fire, but
rather by all means to try what kind of liquor would restinguish this flame.

Another reason leading me to this enterprise, was the discharge of my duty
to God and her Majesty. for finding that some men broched their disciplinarie
devises under the title of Gods eternal truth, and professed they could no
more forsake the defense thereofthen of the Christian faith; and others defaced
and reproched the government of the Church here received and established, as
unlawful, irreligious and Antichristian; (for what lees are so sower, that
some hedge wines will not yield?) I was moved in conscience, not to suffer the
sacred Scriptures to be so violently arrested, and ouer-ruled by the summons
and censures of their new Consistories; as also to clear this state of that
injurious slander, as if not knowing or neglecting the manifest voice of
Christ's spirit, we had entertained and preferred the dregs of Antichrists
pride and tyranny.

These causes of great and good regard led me to examine the chief grounds
of both Disciplines, theirs and ours; and to peruse the proofs and authorities
of either part; that by comparing it might appear, which side came nearest to
the synce^itie of the Scriptures, and society of the ancient and incorrupt
Church of Christ. The which wholly to propose by way of Preface would be
exceeding tedious; shortly to capitulate, that the Reader may know what to
look for, will not altogether be superfluous.

The maine supportes of their new devised Discipline are; the general
equality of all Pastors and Teachers; and the joining of Lay Elders with them
to make up the Presbytery, that shall govern the Church. On this foundation
they build the power of their Consistory, that must admonish and punish all
offenses, hear and determine all doubts, appease and end all strifes, that
any way touch the state and welfare of the Church. Against these false
grounds, I show the Church of God from Adam to Moses, from Moses to Christ,
and so downward under Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, has been always
governed by an inequality and superiority of Pastors and Teachers amongst
themselves; and so much the very name and nature of government do enforce. for
if amongst equals none may challenge to rule the rest; there must of necessity
be superiors, before there can be Governors. It was therefore a ridiculous
oversight in our new platfourmers, to settle an ecclesiastical government
amongst the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, and yet to banish all
superiority from them.

Some finding that absurdity, and perceiving confusion of force must follow
where all are equal, and no Governor endured; confess it to be an
essential and perpetual part of Gods ordinance, for each Presbytery to have
a chief amongst them; and yet least they should seem to agnise or admit the
ancient and approved manner of the Primitive Church retained amongst us, which
is, to appoint a fit man to govern each Dioecese; they have framed a Running
regencie, that shall go round to all the Presbyters of each place by course,
and dure for a week, or foam such space; for the devise is so new, that they
are not yet resolved what time this changeable superiority shall continue.
With this conceit they marvelously please themselves, in so much that they
pronounce this only to be Gods institution, and this ouerseer or Bishop to be
Apostolic; all others they reject as humane; that is, as invented and
established by man against the first and authentike order of the holy Ghost.

Thus far we join, that to prevent dissension and avoid confusion there
must needs, even by Gods ordinance, be a President or Ruler of every
Presbytery; which conclusion, because it is warranted by the grounds of
nature, reason, and truth, and has the example of the Church of God before,
under, and after the Law to confirm it, we accept as irrefutable; and lay
it as the groundwork of all that ensues. But whether this Presidentship did
in the Apostles times, and by their appointment, go round by course to all the
Pastors and Teachers of every Presbytery, or were by election committed to
one chosen as the fittest to supply that place, so long as he discharged his
duty without blame; that is a maine point in question betwixt us. Into which
I may not enter, until we have seen what the Apostolic Presbyteries were,
and of what persons they did consist at the first erecting of the Church.

Certain late writers, men otherwise learned and wise, greatly misliking in
the government of the Church the Romish kind of Monarchy, and on the other
side shunning as much popular tumult and Anarchie, preferred a middle course
betwixt them of Aristocracie; thinking the Church would then be best guided,
when neither one, for danger of tyranny; nor all, for fear of mutiny did
bear the swaie; but a number of the grauest and sincerest, undertook the
managing of all matters incident to the Ecclesiastical Regiment. And for that
there was no possibility in every Church and parish to find a full and
sufficient company of Pastors and Teachers, to consider and dispose of all
causes occurrent; and the people (as they thought) would the better endure the
proceedings and censures of their Consistories, if some of themselves were
admitted to be Judges in those cases as well as the Preachers; they compounded
their Presbyteries partly of Pastors, and partly of Lay Elders, whom they
named GOVERNING PRESBYTERS; and by this means they supposed the government of
the Church would be both permanent and indifferent.

To proclaim this as a fresh devise of their own, would be some what odious,
and therefore they sought by all means as well with examples, as authorities,
to make it seem ancient. for the better accomplishing of their desire; first,
they took hold of the Jewish Synedrion, which had Lay Elders mixed with
Levites in every City to determine the peoples causes, and that order being
established by Moses, they enforced it as a perpetual pattern for the Church
of Christ to follow. To that end they bring the words of our Savior, Math. 18.
Tell it the Church, if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an
Ethnike and Publicane.

Next, they perused the Apostles writings, to see what mention might be there
found of Elders and Governors, and lighting on this sentence of Saint Paul; 1.
Tim. 4.
The Elders which rule well, are worthy of double honor; specially, they
that labor in the word and doctrine; they resolutelie concluded, there were
some Elders in the Church that governed, and yet labored not in the word and
doctrine; and those were Lay Presbyters. After this place they made no doubt,
but Lay Elders were Governors of the Church in the Apostles times, and so
settled their judgments in that behalf, that they would hear nothing that
might be said to the contrary.

Thirdly, because it would be strange that Lay Elders every where governing
the Church under the Apostles, no Council, story, nor Father, did ever so
much as name them, or remember them, or so conceive the words and meaning of
Saint Paul until our age; they thought it needful to make some show of them
in the Fathers writings; least otherwise, plain and simple men should marvel
to see a new sort of governors wrenched and forced out of S. Paul's words,
whom the Church of Christ in fifteen hundred years never heard of before.
And therefore certain doubtful speeches of the Fathers were drawn to that
intent; as where they say, Hiero. in epistola^ ad Titum, ca. 1.
The Church at first was governed by the common advise of Presbyters; and
Ambros. in 1. ad Tim. ca. 5.
the Church had her Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done; yea, some
of them were so forward and willing to hear of their lay Presbyters, that
wheresoever any Council or Father mentioned Presbyters, they straightway
skored up the place for lay Elders.

This is the warpe and web of the lay Presbytery, that has so enfolded
some men's wits, that they cannot vnreaue their cogitations from admiring their
new found Consistories. And in deed the credit of their first deuisers did
somewhat amuse me, as I think it does others, till partly inclined for the
causes aforesaid, and partly required, where I might not refuse, I began more
seriously to rip up the whole; and then I found both the slenderness of the
stuff, and looseness of the work, that had deceived so many men's eyes.

As first, for the Jewish Synedrion; I saw it might by no means be obtruded
on the Church of Christ. for the Judicial part of Moses law being abolished by
the death of Christ, as well as the ceremonial; the Tribunals of Moses must no
more remain, then the Priesthood does. Moses Judges were appointed to execute
Moses law. the punishments therefore and judgments of Moses law ceasing, as
under the Gospel there can be no question but they do; all such Consistories as
Moses erected must needs be therewith ended and determined. Again they were
civil Magistrates, that Moses placed in every City to judge the people, and
had the sword to punish as the law did limite; Levites being admixed with them
to direct them in the doubts and difficulties of the law. Such Presbyteries if
they frame us in every parish without the magistrates power and leave; they
make a fair entry upon the Princes sword and scepter, under the color of
their Consistories, which I hope they will be well advised before they
adventure. Lastly, that lay Elders in Moses law did meddle with discerning
or judging betwixt truth and falsehood, things holy and unholy, persons clean
and unclean, or did intermeddle with the sacrifices or services of the
Tabernacle, I do not read; but rather the execution and superuision of sacred
things and duties belonged to the Prophets, Priests and Levites. So that lay
Presbyteries under the Gospel can have no agreement with the Synedricall
Courts of Moses, much less any deriuement from them; unless they will tie
all Christian kingdoms to the Tribunals and Judicials of Moses law, and give
their Elders the sword in stead of the word, which God has assigned to
Princes, and not to Presbyters.

The words of Christ in the 18. of Matthew, Tell it to the Church, which they
urge to that end; if they were spoken of such Magistrates as Moses appointed,
and to whom the Jews by the prescript of his Law, were to make their
complaints; then pertain they nothing at all to the Church of Christ; but were
a special direction for those times, wherein our Savior lived, and those
persons, that were under the Law. If they be taken as a perpetual rule to
strengthen the judgment of Christ's Church, then touch they no way the
Synedrions of the Jews, or any other Courts established by Moses. Let them
choose which they will; neither hurts us, nor helps them.

The place of Saint Paul at a glimce seemed to make for them; but when I
advisedly looked into it, I found the text so little favoring them, that in
precise terms it excluded Lay Elders as no Governors of the Church. for the
Apostle there charge, that all Presbyters which rule well, should have double
honor. His words be plain. 1. Tim. 5.
The Presbyters, that rule well, (...), Let them be thought worthy of double
honor. Honor in this place is apparently taken for maintenance; as the
proofs following do import. 1. Timoth. 5.
Thou shall not musle the ox that treads out thy corn, and the workman is
worthy of his wages. Now by no precept, nor example, will it ever be proved,
that Lay Presbyters had in the Apostles times, or should have by the word of
God at any time, double honor and maintenance from the Church of Christ.
Wherefore they must either give all Lay Elders double maintenance, as Saint
Paul wills, which they do not; or shut them clean from these words, which
yield double maintenance by Gods law to Presbyters that rule well. What the
meaning of Saint Paul is in this place, though much might be said, and is
said of others, which I have omitted; yet to satisfy the Reader, I have laid
down four several expositions too long to be here inserted, which I
willingly permit to the censure of the wise, whether every one of them be not
more consonant to the true intent of Saint Paul then theirs is, and as
answerable to his words.

If Paul in plain words did not disclaim Lay Elders, as having no right to
challenge double maintenance from the church, nor other places contradict them;
yet were there no reason upon the needless and iointlesse construction of this
one sentence to receive them. for by what logic prove they out of this
place, there were some Presbyters that governed well, and labored not at all
in the word (...), which is as much as specially or chiefly, does distinguish
(as they think) the one sort from the other by a superior degree. does it not
distinguish as well things as persons? and note so well diverse respects as
diverse subjects? for example if we should say, Magistrates that govern well,
are worthy of double honor, specially they that hear the complaints of the
poor. Were he not very fansiful that would hence conclude, there are ergo two
sorts of magistrates, one that governs well, another that hears the
complaints of the poor? Again, out of these speches Counselors that be wise
are acceptable to their Princes, specially such as are faithful; workmen are
rewarded for their skill, but specially for their pains; Pastors that be
virtuous are to be wished for, but specially if they be learned: will any sober
man infer that fidelity and wisdom, skill and industry, learning and
virtue, do not meet in one subject, because specially goes between them?
Nothing is more common, then by this kind of speech to note as well two diverse
qualities in one man, as two sundry sorts of men; yea thereby to prefer a
part before the general comprising that part. As Teachers are to be liked for
their learning, specially for their knowledge in the Scriptures; good men are
to be loved for their virtues, specially if they be liberal.

In these speeches, they will say, the persons be diverse, as well as the things
for some Counselors be wise, that be not faithful; some workmen expert, that
be not painful; some Pastors learned, that be not virtuous.] That proves
true, not by any force of these speeches, but by the defect of the persons that
want fidelity, industry and integrity. for the words rather employ that both
parts should be, and therefore may be found in one man before he deserves this
adiection of specially. As a Counselor must be wise, and specially faithful,
before he can be acceptable to his Prince. A workman must be painful, as
well as skillful, before he deserve his wages. A Pastor must not only be
honest, but also able to discharge his duty, before he should be greatly
esteemed. And so by Saint Paul's words they may conclude, a Presbyter must not
only govern well, but also labor in the word, before he may be counted to be
specially, or most worthy of double honor: other collection out of the
Apostles words they can make none.

And that shall we soon find, if we resolve the Apostles words in such
sort, as the nature of the Greek tongue permits us. The words stand
precisely thus; (...), Presbyters GOVERNING WELL let them be counted worthy of
double honor; (...), SPECIALLY LABOVRING in the word and doctrine. The
participles, as every mean scholar knows, may be resolved not only by the
Relative and his verb, but by many other parts of speech and their verbs; which
oftentimes express the sense better then the Relative. As, 1. Timoth. 5.
(...), Thou shall not musle (thine) ox treading (out thy corn,) that is,
whiles he treads out thy corn, for after thou art not prohibited to musle
him. So in the sentence which we speak of, Presbyters governing well are
worthy of double honor; well governing is the cause of double honor, neither
is double honor due to Presbyters, but with this condition, if they govern
well. Then resolve the Apostles words either with a causall or conditional
adiunction, which is plainly the speakers intent, and we shall see how little
they make for two sorts of Presbyters. Presbyters, if they rule well, are
worthy of double honor, specially, if they labor in the word; or Presbyters
for ruling well are worthy of double honor; specially, for laboring in the
word. Here are not two sorts of Elders, (as they conceive) the one to govern,
the other to teach; but two duties of each Presbyter; namely to teach and
govern, before he can be most worthy of double honor.

Their own rules confirm the same. Those whom they call Teachers or Doctors
must they not labor in the word? There can be no doubt they must. Are they then
most worthy, or so worthy as Pastors be of double honor, who not only
labor in the word, but also watch and attend the flock to rule it well? I
trust not. Then Pastors are most worthy, and consequently more worthy then
Doctors of double honor, because they not only watch to govern well, but also
labor in the word.

If any man strive for two sorts of persons to be contained in these words,
though there be utterly no reason to force that collection, we can admit that
also without any mention of Lay Elders. I have showed two interpretations, how
diverse sorts of Presbyters may be noted by these words, and neither of them
Lay, to which I refer ye Reader that is willing to see more; I may not here
offer a fresh discourse of things elsewhere handled.

The brief is, Presbyters we read, and Presbyteries in the Apostolic
writings; but none Lay, that were admitted to govern the Church* Presbyters
did Act. 20.
attend and 1. Pet. 5.
feed the flock, as 1. Corinthians. 4.
Gods Stewards and were to Tit. 1.
exhort with wholesome doctrine, and convince the gainesayers; and Presbyteries,
(as themselves urge,) did 1. Timoth. 4.
impose hands. These be the duties which the holy Ghost elsewhere appoints
for the president, and the rest of the Presbytery; other then these (except
this place of which we reason) the Scriptures name none; and these be no
duties for Lay Elders: unless they make all parts of Pastourall chage
common to Lay Presbyters, and distinguish them only by the place; as if Pastors
were to ouersee and feed the flock in the pulpite, and Lay Presbyt ers in
the Consistory. Which if they do, they allow only words to Pastors, and
yield to lay Presbyrers, both Pastoral words and deeds; giving them
authority to feed and watch the flock of Christ more particularly and
effectually then Pastors do, or may by their doctrine. Such labyrinths they
leap into, when they seek for those things in ye sacred Scriptures, which
were never intended.

But were the word of God in this point indifferent, which for ought I yet see,
is very resolute against them; the general consent of alantiquitie that never
so expounded S. Paul's words, nor ever mentioned any lay Presbyters to govern
the Church, is to me a strong rampire against all these new devises. I like not
to raise up that discipline from the dead, which has lien so long buried in
silence, which no father ever witnessed, no council ever favored, no Church
ever followed since the Apostles times, till this our age, I can be forward in
things that be good, but not so foolish, as to think the church of Christ
never knew what belonged to the government of her self, till now of late; and
that the son of God has bin spoiled of half his kingdom by his own
servants and Citizens for these 1500. years, without remorse or remembrance of
any man, that so great wrong was offered him. I can yield to much for quietness
sake; to this I can not yield. They must show me their Lay Presbyteries in
some ancient Writer; or else I must plainly avouch their Consistories (as they
press them) to be a notorious, if not a pernicious nouelty.

Jerome, Ambrose and others, are brought to depose, that the first Church had
her Senate and Elders, without whose advise nothing was done. but how
wrongfully the devise of Lay Elders is fathered on them, I have declared in a
special discourse, I will not here repeat it; only this I say, if any of them
affirm, that in the Primitive or Apostolic Church Lay Presbyters did govern
Ecclesiastical affairs, I am content to recall all that I have written of
this present matter; if not, it is no great praise, nor good policy for them
to abuse the names and words of so many learned Fathers, to the utter
discredit of themselves and their cause in the end.

Since then the Church of Christ, in, and after the Apostles times was not
governed by Lay Presbyters, as this new discipline pretends; it rests that
we declare by whom both the Apostolic church and the Primitive after that were
directed and ruled; which I have not failed to perform in many chapters, as
far forth as the Scriptures do warrant, and the undoubted Stories of
Christ's Church do lead.

In the Apostles I observe four things, needful for the first founding and
erecting of the Church, though not so for the preserving and maintening
thereof; and four other points that must be perpetual in the Church of
Christ. The four extraordinary privileges of the Apostolic function were:
Their vocation immediate from Christ, not from men, nor by men; Their
commission extending over all the earth, not limited to any place; Their
direction infallible, the holy Ghost guiding them whether they wrate or spoke;
and Their operation wonderful, as well to convert and confirm believers, as to
chastise and revenge disobeyers. Without these things the Church could not
begin, as is easily perceived; but it may well continue without them. for now
God calls laborers into his harvest by others, not by himself; Pastors take
charge of those Churches that are already planted, they seek not places where
to plant new Churches. The Scriptures once written serve all ages for
instruction of faith; and the miracles then wrought witness the power and
truth of the Gospel unto the worlds end. Wherefore those things had their
necessary force and use to lay the first foundations of the gospel before
Christ was known; but the wisdom of God will not have his Church still
depend on those miraculous means, which serve rather to conquer incredulity
then to edify the faithful; 1. Corinthians. 14 verse 22.
signs being (as the Apostle says) not for such as believe, but for such as
do not believe.

The other four points of the Apostolic delegation, which must have their
permanence and perpetuity in the Church of Christ, are the Dispencing the
word, Administering the sacraments, Imposing of hands, and Guiding the keys to
shut or open the kingdom of heaven. The first two, by reason they be the
ordinary means and instruments by which the spirit of God works each man's
salvation, must be general to al Pastors and Presbyters of Christ's Church: the
other two, by which meet men are called to the ministry of the word, and
obstinate persons not only repelled from the society of the saints, but also
from the promise and hope of eternal life, respect rather the cleansing and
governing of Christ's Church, and therefore no cause they should be committed
to the power of every Presbyter, as the word and sacraments are. for as there
can be no order, but confusion in a common wealth where every man rules, so
would there be no peace, but a pestilent perturbation of all things in the
Church of Christ, if every Preshyter might impose hands, and use the keys at
his pleasure.

How the Apostles imposed hands, and delivered unto Satan, and who joined with
them in those actions I have handled in places appointed for that purpose;
whereby we shall perceive, that though the Presbyters of each Church had charge
of the word and Sacraments even in the Apostles times; yet might they not
impose hands, nor use the keys, without the Apostles, or such as the Apostles
departing or dying left to be their substitutes and successors in the Churches
which they had planted. At Samaria Philip Act. 8. verse 5. and 12.
preached and baptized; and albeit he dispensed the word and sacraments, yet
could he not impose hands on them, but Peter and John came from Jerusalem,
and Act. 8. ver. 17.
laid their hands on them, and (so) they received the holy Ghost. The
Churches of Act. 14. ver. 21
Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, were planted before, yet were Paul and Barnabas
at their return forced to increase the number of Presbyters in each of those
places by imposition of their hands: for so the word Act. 14. ve. 23
(...) signifies with all Greek Divines and Stories, as I have sufficiently
proved; and not to ordain by election of the people, as some men of late had
new framed the Text. The churches of Ephesus and Creete were erected by Paul
and had their Presbyteries, yet could they not create others, but Timothy and
Tite were left there to 1. Timoth. 5.
impose hands, and Tit. 1.
ordain Elders in every City as occasion required.

Herein who succeeded the Apostles, whether all Presbyters equally or certain
chief and chosen men, one in every Church and City trusted with the
government both of people and Presbyters, I have largely debated, and made it
plain, as well by the Scriptures, as by other ancient Writers past all
exception, that from the Apostles to the first Nicene Council, and so along to
this our age, there have always been selected some of greater gifts then the
residue, to succeed in the Apostles places, to whom it belonged, both to
moderate the Presbyters of each Church, and to take the special charge of
imposition of hands; and this their singularity in succeeding, and
superiority in ordaining, have been observed from the Apostles times, as the
peculiar and substantial marks of Episcopal power and calling.

I know some late Writers vehemently spurn at this; and hardly endure any
difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, unless it be by custom and consent
of men, but in no case by any order or institution of the Apostles; whose
opinions together with the authorities on which they build, I have according
to my small skill examined, and find them no way able to rebate the full and
sound evidence that is for the contrary. for what more pregnant probation can
be required, then that the same power and precepts, which Paul gave to
Timothy, when he had the charge of Ephesus, remained in all the Churches
throughout the world, to certain special and tried persons authorized by the
Apostles themselves, and from them derived to their after-commers by a general
and perpetual succession in every church and city without conference to
enlarge it, or Council to decree it; the continuing where of for three
discents the Apostles saw with their eyes, confirmed with their hands, and
Saint John amongst others witnessed with his pen, as an order of ruling the
Church approved by the express voice of the Son of God. When the original
proceeded from the Apostles mouth, and was observed in all the famous places
and Churches of Christendom, where the Apostles taught, and whiles they lived;
can any man doubt whether that course of governing the Church were Apostolic?
for my part, I confess I am neither so wise, as to ouer-reach it with policy;
nor so wayward as to withstand it with obstinacy.

Against so maine and clear proofs, as I dare undertake will content even a
contentious mind, when he reads them, are pretended two poor places, the
one of Ambrose, the other of Jerome: the first auouching, that in the beginning
the Episcopal prerogative went by Ambros. in Ephesians ad. 4.
order before it came by way of election unto desert; the other resolving that
Bishops are Hiero. mepistol. ad Titum.
greater then Presbyters rather by the custom of the Church, then by the
truth of the Lords disposition. Both these authorities I have thoroughly
discussed, and laid forth the right intent of those Fathers, not only by
comparison of other Writers, but even by their own confession, lest any
should think I draw them to a foreign sense besides their true meaning. for
when Jerome and Austen allege the use and custom of the Church, for the
distinction betwixt Bishops and Presbyters; if it be understood of the names
and August. epist. 19 secunaum honoru vocabula, quae tam acclesiaevsus obtinuit.
titles of honor, which at first were common to both, and after divided by the
August. epist. 19 secunaum honoru vocabula, quae tam acclesiaevsus obtinuit.
use of the Church, as Austen expresses; we can absolutely grant the places
without any prejudice to the cause. if it be applied to their power and
function in the church; it is most true, that Jerome says, Presbyters were
subject (in such fort as the Primitive Church observed) rather by custom then
by the truth of the Lords ordinance. For Presbyters in the Primitive Church,
as appears by Tertullian, Jerome, Possidonius and others, might neither
Tertul de Baptismo.

Hiero aduersus luciferianos.


baptize, Possidonius de vita Augustini. 4^ Leo epist 88.
preach, nor Council. Cartha ginens. 2. ca. 9.
administer the Lords supper without the Bishops leave, especially in his
presence; which indeed grew rather by custom for the preservation of order,
then by any rule or commandment of the Lord. By the word of God, a Bishop did
nothing, which a Presbyter might not do, save imposing of hands to ordain.
That is the only distinction in the Scriptures betwixt a Bishop and a
Presbyter, as Hicro. ad Euagr.
Jerome and Chrysostom, homil. ^1. in 1. ad Timotheum.
Chrysostom affirm; other differences which the church kept many, as to
impose hands on the baptized and converted; to reconcile penitents, and such
like, were rather peculiar to the Bishop for the honor of his calling, then
for any necessity of Gods Law.

If any man urge further out of Jerome, that there was no Bishop at all, nor
chief Ruler over the Church and Presbytery of each place in the Apostles
times; I answer him with the resolution of one of the greatest patrones of
their new discipline, De Ministrorum euangelii gradibus ca. 23.
Non ita desipuisse existimandus est, vt somniaretneminem illi coetui
praefuisse. Icrome is not to be thought to have been so unwise, as to dream
the Presbytery had no chief Ruler, or President. Ibid. m.
It is a perpetual and essential part of Gods ordinance, that in the
Presbytery one chief in place and dignity should govern each action or
meeting. And again; Ibidem ca. 21.
Tales Episcopos diuinitus, and quasi ipsius Christi voce constitutos absit vt
vnquam simus inficiati; that such Bishops (as were Pastors in every City,
and chief of their Presbyteries) were appointed from heaven, and as it were by
the voice of Christ himself, God forbid we should ever deny. This says
he on the behalf of the new Discipline. On the other side I say, God forbid
I should urge any other, but such as were Pastors over their Churches, and
Governors of the Presbyteries under them. If we thus far agree, what cause
then had those turbulent heads (I speak not of them all) which to ease their
stomachs, or to please their maintainers, iested and railed rather like
Stageplayers, then Divines, on those whom the wiser sort amongst them can not
deny were ordained by God, and appointed by the voice of Christ himself? If
their reasons be not the stronger and weightier, howsoever they flatter
themselves in fluaries, let them remember who said, Luc. 10.
he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me.

They will happily save themselves, for that our Bishops differ from the
Apostolic Bishops in many things; as namely theirs De Ministrorum euangelii
gradibus ca. 23. sol. 156.
succeeded in order, ours by election; the dignity was in the Apostles times
De Ministrorum euangelii gradibus ca. 23. sol. 156.
common to every Presbyter in his course, now it is proper to one; with them
it De Ministrorum euangelii gradibus ca. 23. sol. 156.
dured for a season, as a week or a month; with us for life, except by just
cause any deserve to be removed; lastly, they had but De Ministrorum
euangelii gradibus ca. 23. sol. 156.
prioritie of place and authority to moderate the meetings and consultings of
the rest; ours have a kind of imperie over their fellow-Presbyters. These be
precisely the points, wherein one of the best learned of that side contendeth
the ancient and Apostolic institution of Bishops was changed by process of
time into an other form established by custom, and confirmed by consent of
men: these be his own words, I have not altered or inuerted the sense or
sentence. If any of these differences were true, yet are they no causes to
discredit the custom of the Primitive Church in electing her Bishops to hold
their places, so long as they governed well. for the same writer pronounces of
these very things, (setting the last aside;) De Ministrorum euangelii gradibus
ca. 23. fol. 156. vt supra.
neque in istis quicquam est quod reprehendi possit, neither in these things is
there ought that can be misliked. but in deed there is not one of al these
diversities that can be justly proved either by Scripture or Father. They are
the conceits of some late Writers, that as touching the office and function of
Bishops would feign find a difference betwixt the Apostles times, and the next
ages ensuing, lest they should be convinced to have rejected the universal
order of the ancient and Primitive Church of Christ, without any good and
sufficient warrant. The consent of all ages and Churches is so strong against
them, that they are hard driven to hunt after every syllable that sounds any
thing that way, and yet can they light on no sure ground to build their late
devises on, or to weaken the general and perpetual course which the Church of
Christ has in all places kept inviolable even from the Apostles times.

A few words of Ambrose are set down to bear all this burden: but they are
so insufficient and impertinent to this purpose, that they bewray the
weakness of their new frame. for Ambrose speaks not one word either of
going by course, or of changing after a time; only he says, Bishops at first
were placed by order, and not by election, that is, the eldest or worthiest had
the place whiles he lived; and after him the next in order without any further
choice. for that order which he speaks of, (if any such were,) proceeded from
the first planters of the Churches, and went either by senioritie of time, or
prioritie of place allotted every man according to the gifts and graces which
he had received of the holy Ghost. This we may freely grant without any
repugnance, or annoyance to the vocation or function of Bishops; let the
Disciplinists confess there was a superior and distinct charge of the
President or chief from the rest of the Presbyters, as well in guiding the
keys as imposing hands; and whether they were taken to the office by election
or by order, to us it is all one; I hope the placing of the Presbyters in order
according to their gifts in the Churches where the Apostles preached, could not
be without the Apostles oversight and direction. and so long, whether they set
such in order as were fittest for the place; or whether they left it to the
discretion and election of the rest, we greatly force not. Howbeit the words
of Jerome are so express that Bishops were made by election even in the
Apostles times, that I see not how they should be reconciled with their
collection out of Ambrose. Hiero. in epist. ad Euagrium.
Alexandriae a Marco Euangelista, Presbyteri vnum semper ex se electum, in
celsiore gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant. At Alexandria, even from Mark
the Evangelist, the Presbyters always choosing one of themselves, and placing
him in an higher degree, called him a Bishop. Mark died six years before
Peter and Paul, as the Ecclesiastical story witnesses, and consequently the
first Bishop of Alexandria was elected in the Apostles times; yea that Church
(as Jerome says) did always elect, there never succeeded any by order.

For the manner of their succeeding whether by order or by choice, I make not
so great account, as for their continuance. The Patrones of the late Discipline
would make us believe, that in the Apostles times the Episcopal dignity or
regiment of the Presbytery went round by course to all the Presbyters, and
dured a week or some such time, (for ghesses must serve them when other
proofs fail them;) which assertion of theirs I know not whether I should
think it proceeded of too much ignorance, or too little conscience. If the men
were not well learned, I should suspect ignorance; if the case were not more
then clear, I would not challenge their conscience. But being as they are, and
the case so clear, that in my simple reading I never saw cleerer, nor
plainer, (excepting always the certainty of the sacred Scriptures) let the
Christian Reader judge, for I dare not pronounce, with what intent a manifest
truth is not only dissembled, but stoutly contradicted, and an evident
falshoode avouched and advanced to the height of an Apostolic and divine
ordinance, by the chiefest pillars of these new found Consistories.

It is lately delivered as an Oracle, that under the Apostles there were no
Governors of the Presbyteries, (whom they and we call Bishops) but such as
dured for a short time, and changed round by course; and this is called the
Apostolic and divine institution. How palpale an untruth this is, it is no
hard matter for mean scholars to discern. The first Bishop of Alexandria
after Mark was Anianus made the Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 24.
eightyeere of Neroes reign, and he continued Idem li. 3. ca. 13.
two and twenty years before Abilius succeeded him. Abilius sat Idem li. 3.
ca. 21.
thirteen years, and dying, left the place to Cerdo. These three succeeded
one an other, Saint John yet living; neither had Alexandria any more then two
Bishops in 35. years after the death of Mark. Eusebius. Chronicon. in anno 45.
Euodius made Bishop of Antioch five and twenty years before the death of
Peter and Paul, suruiued them one year; and after him succeeded Idem in anno 71
Ignatius, who outliued Saint John, and died in the Ibid. in an. 111.
eleventh year of Traiane, leaving the place to Heron, after he had kept it
forty years; so that in 66. years the Church of Antioch had but two
Bishops. At Jerusalem Ibidem in annis 33. and 63.
James called the Lords brother sat Bishop thirty years, and Ibidem in
annis 63. and 111.
Simeon that succeeded him kept the place eight and thirty years; the Church
of Jerusalem having in threescore and eight years but two Bishops. At Rome
whiles Saint John lived there were but three Bishops, Linus, Anacletus, and
Clemens, which three continued two and thirty years.

If this be not sufficient, let them take the example of Polycarpe, made Bishop
of Smyrna by the Apostles themselves, and continuing a long time Bishop of that
Church, and Iren. li. 3. ca. 3*
departing this life a very aged man, with a most glorious and most noble kind
of Martyrdom. The space he sat Bishop of Smyrna, if it were not Eusebius. li. 4.
ca. 15.
fourscore and six years, (for so long he had served Christ, as his answer
shows to the Proconsul of Asia,) yet it must needs be above threescore and
ten years. for he lived so many years after Saint John, whose scholar he
was, and by whom he was made Bishop of Smyrna; and died, as the whole Church
of Smyrna in their letters entitled him at the time of his death, (...) Bishop
of the Catholic Church at Smyrna. This one instance is able to mar the whole
plot of their supposed Apostolical and changeable regencie; for no part of
this Story can be doubted. Was he not made bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles?
Hiero. de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis in Polycarpo.
Ierom, Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 35.
Eusebius, Tertull. de praescript. aduers. haeretic^s.
Tertullian, and Iren. lib. 3. ca. 3.
Irenaeus that lived with him, and learned so much of him, affirm it. Lived he
not Bishop of Smyrna so long time? The whole Church of Smyrna gave him that
title at his death: their letters be yet extant in Eusebius. The Emperors
under whom he died were Eusebius. li. 4. ca. 1^.
Marcus Antoninus, and Lucius Aurelius Commodus (as Eusebius and Jerome do
witness) who began their reign Hiero. vt supra. in Polycarpo. Eusebius
Chronicon in anno 164.


64. after the death of Saint John, Polycarpe suffering the Ibid. in anno 170
seventh year of their Empire; and Irenaeus testifies that he came to Rome
under Iren. lib. 3. ca. 3.
Anicetus the tenth Bishop there, and declared the truth which he had received
from the Apostles. Did he through ambition retain the place to which the
Apostles called him longer then he should; and so altered the Apostolical
kind of government? I had rather challenge the Consistorians for mistaking
Ambrose; then Polycarpe for inuerting the Apostolic Discipline. The Church of
Smyrna called him Eusebius. lib 4* ca. 15.
(...), the Apostolical and Prophetical Teacher of their times. Irenaeus
says of him, Iren. lib. 3. ca. 3.
Hic docuit semper, quae ab Apostolis didicerat, quae and ecclesiae tradidit,
and sola sunt vera; he always taught those things which he learned of the
Apostles, which he delivered unto the Church, and they only are true.

And if he were not a man of far more authority, and certainer fidelity,
then any that contradict him, yet have we all the Churches of Christendom, and
their successions of Bishops from the Apostles, and all histories and monuments
of antiquity to concur with him, that Bishops living in the Apostles days,
and made by the Apostles hands, continued their places til they died, neither
is there any man living that is able to show one example to the contrary. Let
the Christian Reader then say, whether it be not a vain and false surmise
which some in our age so mightily maintain, that the Bishops which the
Apostles ordained to rule the Presbyteries, dured for some short space, and
changed by course, that superiority going round in order to every Presbyter;
and the election of Bishops to govern the Churches and Presbyters committed to
their charge, so long as they did it carefully, was man's invention, and no
Apostolic institution.

The domination of bishops will be their last refuge; otherwise, in elections of
Bishops to continue whiles they do their duties, the best learned of them
confess, there is nothing that can or should be reprehended, only they repine
that a Bishop should have jurisdiction over his Copresbyters. And here they
are plentiful with places of Scripture, as if we went about to make Bishops,
Lords and Masters over the Church, and all the rest to be their servants. They
allege the words of Christ; Math 20.
Great men exercise authority, you shall not do so; and of Peter, 1. Pet. 5.
Feed the flock, not as Lords (or commanders) over Gods inheritance; but to
what purpose, I see not. Mean they by these places to prove, that the
Apostles had no superiority nor authority in the Church of God, or that
Pastors have no power over their flocks? It were more then childish to
impugn one truth by another. They themselves do agnise that the Apostles had
superiority and De Ministrorum euangelii gradibus ca. 6. and 15.
authority by Christ's own commission, above and De Ministrorum euangelii
gradibus ca. 6. and 15.
over all other degrees to erect and order the Churches where they preached;
and they yield, Ibidem. ca. 20.
Pastors authority over their flocks to command in the name of the Lord.
Then, neither these places, nor any other in the Scriptures do bar Pastoral
power over the flock, nor distinction of degrees betwixt the Teachers.
Superior and inferior degrees, if Christ's words did exclude, no man might
admit them or defend them as lawful. If the Apostles to whom, and of whom
Christ there spoke, did not withstanding his speech, retain diversities of
degrees in the Church; it is evident our Savior did not forbid Superiority,
but Imperie; not Pastoral, but Regal authority; not Fatherly, but Masterly
preeminence; and that in respect as well of the people, as of the Presbyters;
Peter calling the people Gods heritage, and before and after naming them, the
Lords flock.

And how should it possibly be otherwise? for since the holy Ghost requires
the faithful to Hebr. 13.
obey their Leaders, and to be subject to them, no Scriptures do cross the
authority and inspection which the guiders of Christ's Church should have
over their flocks; and God by his eternal Law comprising Pastors under the
name of Fathers, and assigning them the honor due unto Parents, we may not by
color of any words bereave them of obedience and reverence, no more then of
maintenance, which are the parts and effects of Fatherly power and honor. So
long then as we give Bishops no charge but Pastoral, no power but paternall,
we are not in danger of violating either our Saviors, or his Apostles
precept; and consequently this kind of superiority, may not be called or
supposed to be Dominion nor Imperie; without wrong to the spirit of truth
that has confirmed it as needful and healthful for the house of God, even
from the first foundation of the world.

They will easily grant fatherly moderation and Pastoral power unto Bishops
over the people, but not over the Presbyters; on this they set up their rest,
that no Pastor should have power over others of the same calling, and hope
assuredly to have the victory. But they must first reconcile their own
contrarieties, they will triumph else before the conquest for each Presbytery,
as themselves confess, must have a President by Gods essential and perpetual
ordinance. I ask now, whether God give any man a bare title without any
truth, and a Regiment without all authority; or whether in Gods Law deeds
and words concur, and he be called (...), a President; that is appointed and
authorized by God to execute that office. The mouth of God intends not for
mockeries as man's does, and therefore the name never goes without the thing.
he is just in his speech, and will not utter the word that shall delude the
hearer. If then by Gods Law there must be Presidents over Presbyteries,
ineuitably there must be Governors and Superiors over them. If some must
moderate the meetings of Presbyters and execute their decrees, of force they
must have power and authority over Presbyters; and so it is mainly consequent
out of their own positions, which they most refuse.

Again, when Paul left Timothy at Ephesus to Timoth. 5.
impose hands, to Timoth. 5.
receive accusations against Presbyters, and Timoth. 5.
openly to rebuke such as sinned; did he not give him power over Presbyters;
and even the self same that is challenged at this day to belong to Bishops? if
it were lawful and needful at Ephesus for Timothy to have that right and
authority over the Presbyters, that were ioynt-Pastors with him, how comes it
now to be a tyrannical and Antichristian power in his successors?

Timothy, they will say was an Evangelist; and could have no successors. If
none could succeed him in that power, how come their Presbyteries to have it?
will they be Evangelists? what, Lay Elders and all? and shall the Presbyteries
of the whole world succeed Timothy in his charge at Ephesus? That were news
in deed. if this authority to impose hands, to receive accusations, and rebuke
sins must remain in the Church for ever, as it is evident it must; then was
it no Euangelisticall authority, but a general and perpetual function in the
Church of Christ; that might, and did admit others to succeed Timothy in the
same place and power; and the rest of the Apostolic Churches had the like
order, as appears by their successions of Bishops fet even from the Apostles
and their followers.

Of Timothies successors if any man doubt, the Council of Chalcedon will tell
him the number of them. Council. Chalcedonens. actio 11.
A sancto Timotheo vsque nunc 27. Episcopi facti, omnes in Epheso sunt
ordinati. from blessed Timothy unto this present, the 27. Bishops that have
bin made, have bin al ordained at Ephesus. Other Tertul. de praescriptio^bus
aduers haretic.
Apostolic Churches (as Tertullian says) had the like order of Bishops, so
derived by succession from the beginning, that the first Bishop had for his
Author and Antecessor one of the Apostles, or some Apostolic man, which had
continued with the Apostles. So the Bishops of Cyprus in the third general
Council of Ephesus did witness for their Island. Council. Ephesinum in
suggestione Episcoporism Cyprs.
Troylus, say they, Sabinus, Epiphanius, and the most holy Bishops that were
before them, and all that have been even from the Apostles, were ordained by
such as were of Cyprus.

If Timothies commission dip too deep for the Presbyters store (howbeital the
ancient fathers with one consent make that Epistle a very pattern for the
Episcopal power and calling;) yet the authority which so many thousand
learned and godly Bishops have had and used with the liking and allowance of
all Churches, Councils and Fathers even from the Apostles times, should to no
reasonable man seem intolerable or unlawful; except we think that the whole
church of Christ, from her first planting til this our age, lacked not only
religion but also understanding to distinguish betwixt Pastoral moderation and
tyrannical domination; to which humor if any man incline, I must rather detest
his arrogancy, then stand to refute so gross an absurdity. I will therefore
set down in a word or two the sum of that power which Bishops have had above
Presbyters ever since the Apostles times; if the Disciplinarians think it
repugnant to the word of God, I would gladly hear, not their opinions and
assertions, which I have often read and never believed, but some quick and
sure probations out of the sacred Scriptures, and those shall quiet the strife
betwixt us.

The Canons called Apostolic, alleged by themselves as ancient, say thus;
Cano. Apost. 38
The Presbyters and Deacons let them do nothing without the (knowledge or)
consent of the Bishop. He is the man that is trusted with the Lords people, and
that shall render account for their souls. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch almost
thirty years in the Apostles times, agrees fully with that Canon, and says;
Ignat. epist. 3. ad Magnesios.
Do you nothing, neither Presbyter, Deacon, nor Lay man without the Bishop,
neither let any thing seem (...) orderly (or reasonable) without his liking.
(...), for it is unlawful and displeasant to God. Ang again, Idem epist. 7.
ad Smyrnaeos.
(...), Without the Bishop let no man do anything that pertains to the
Church. The ancient councils of Council. Aneyraeni ca. 13.
Ancyra, Laodicenica. 56
Laodicea, Arelatens. 1. ca. 19.
Arle, Toletan. 1. ca. 20
Toledo, and others acknowledge the same rule to be Christian and lawful; yea,
no Council or father did ever attribute any such power to the Presbyters, as
by number of voices to overrule the Bishops in every thing, as our late
reformers have devised; rather to retriue the world to their pleasures, then to
imitate any former example of Christ's Church, or to reverence the rules that
are delivered in holy Writ.

If then we seek for right Apostolic Bishops; they were such as were left or
sent by the Apostles to be Pastors of the Churches, and Governors of the
Presbyteries in every City that believed, so long as they ruled well; and in
their stead, as their successors to receive charge of ordaining others for
the work of the Ministry, and guiding the keys with the advice and consent
of such as labored with them in the word and doctrine. These parts, if I be
not deceived, are fully proved in their convenient places; thither I remit the
Reader that is desirous to see more. It suffices me for this present, that no
part of this power can be justly challenged as tyrannical or intolerable by
the grounds of Divine or humane Laws; and therefore the obiecting of
domination, is a superfluous, if not an envious, quarrel of theirs, declaring
they either do not, or will not understand the matter for which we chiefly
contend.

Touching Synodall decrees, and Princes Laws for Ecclesiastical causes, since
they must of force be committed to the care and conscience of some that shall
execute them; I have examined who are the meetest men to be put in trust with
those matters; in whom there can be justly no suspicion nor occasion of
tyrannical dealing so long as Dioecesanes and Metropolitanes are limited by
written Laws in each case what they shall do, and every man that finds
himself grieved, permitted to appeal from them to Synodes or Princes; one of
the which must needs take place, howsoever the Church be either in persecution
or peace. I have like wise showed the necessity and antiquity of Dioeceses,
of Synodes, of Primates or Metropolitans; as also whether the people by Gods
Law must elect their Pastors before they can be rightly and duly called. Of
these things and many such questions pertaining to the government of Christ's
Church, I have made special and full discourses; not omitting any point that
was worth the searching. In all which as throughout the whole book, when I
object anything that is or may be said on their behalf that maintain these
new found Consistories, I have caused it to be printed in another letter, and
distinguished from the rest of the Tex^ with this ma^ke] as it were to enclose
it.

What I have performed, the Christian Reader shall best perceive; if he take
the pains to peruse it. All men's humors I do not hope, I do not seek to
satisfy. Such as are deceived with ignorance of the truth, may happily by this
be some what occasioned, if not directed to a further search; singular conceits
that are in love with their own devises, swelling spirits that endure no
superiors, covetous hearts that hunt after spoils, when all is said, will
have their dreams, if they can not have their wills; these diseases are so
desperate, they pass my skill, if it were a great deal more then it is.

My purpose was and is, the peace of Gods Church, so far as it may stand with
the truth of his word, and fellowship of his Saints, that have gone before us
with wonderful graces of his spirit, as well for the greatness of their
learning as holiness of their lives; and to that end have I so tempered and
delayed my style, that I might not justly offend such as are otherwise minded;
unless the refusing of their private fancies will provoke the heat of their
displeasures. I have always had before mine eyes, the most of them are
brethren for the trueths sake; howsoever some of them fall to open enmity for
this humor of Jewish Synedrions and Lay Presbyteries. Let them read; if they
bring better, I am willing to learn; but I like no selfe-set assertions, as if
all the world were bound to the very breath of our mouths or dash of our
pens, without any other Text or interpreter.

If I have said ought that is not allowed by the word, or not witnessed by the
continual and universal practice of Christ's Church, I desire not to be
believed; I look for the like measure, if any man reply; not to hear the
coniecturall and opinatiue ghesses of some that lived in our age, but such
effectual reasons and substantial authorities as may press the gainesayer,
and settle the consenter. God make us zealous for his, not for our wills; and so
guide our labors, that we may lessen the troubles, and not ripen the dangers
of Sion; seeking rather how to amend, then how to multiply the rendes and
breaches of Jerusalem.

Amen.
CHAP. I. The original and domestical Discipline of the Church before the
Law^. CHAP. II. The Leuiticall and National regiment of the Church under the
Law. CHAP. III. The personal and perpetual kingdom of Christ, after he t^^^e
flesh. CHAP. IIII. The Synedricall Jurisdiction, which some men th^nk^ ou^
Savior in the Gospel restored and recommended to his Church. CHAP. V. The
Apostolical preeminence and authority before and after Christ's scension.
CHAP. VI. What Dominion and titles Christ interdicted his Apostles. CHAP. VII.
Who joined with the Apostles in election of Elders, and imposition of hands.
CHAP. VIII. The Apostolic power in determining doubts of faith, and delivering
unto Satan. CHAP. IX. What parts of the Apostolic power and charge were to
remain in the Church after their decease, and to whom they were committed.
CHAP. X. What the Presbytery was which the Apostles mention in their
writings, and whether Lay Elders were of that number or no. CHAP. XI. What
Presbytery the Primitive Churches and Catholic Fathers did acknowledge, and
whether Lay Elders were any part thereof, or no. CHAP. XII. To whom the
Apostles departing or dying lest the government of the Church: whether equally
to al Presbyters, or chiefly to some: and how far the conceits of late
VVriters herein vary from the ancient Fathers, whose words they pretend to
follow. CHAP. XIII. That some chief ever since the Apostles times have been
severed from the rest of the Presbyters in every City by power of ordination
and right of succession, whom the Fathers before v^ did, and we after their
example do call Bishops. CHAP. XIIII. The fatherly power and Pastourall care
of Bishops over Presbyters and others in their Churches and Dioeceses. CHAP.
XV. To whom the elections of Bishops and Presbyters does rightly belong, and
whether by Gods Law the people must elect their Pastors, or no. CHAP. XVI.
The meetings of Bishops in Synodes, and who did call and moderate those
assemblies in the Primitive Church.
THE PERPETVAL GOVERNMENT OF CHRIST'S CHVRCH.
Chap. I. The original and domestical Discipline of the Church before the
Law.
WHat need there is of order and government, as in all assemblies of men that
will live together, so namely and chiefly in the Church of Christ; the
wisdom of God has many ways witnessed unto us, both by the proportion of
those natural and civil societies, to which the Church is compared; and by
the perfection of that fellowship, which the Saints have had amongst themselves
in all ages and places even from the foundation of the world, where the true
worship of God has prevailed. The first root of all humane consort and
communion, I mean private howses, has not the Lord distinguished by diverse
degrees and prerogatives of husband, parents, and master, above wife, children,
and servants; and yet linked them all together in mutual correspondence with
duties according? The branches that thence rise, as Cities, Countries and
kingdoms; have they not their Laws to prescribe, and Magistrates to execute
things needful for their common estate; God ordaining powers and delivering
the sword for the defense of the simple and innocent, and repressall of the
wicked and injurious? Were we willing or constant in that which is good;
Discipline were not so requisite: but because the corruption of our nature is
such, that we are soon deceived of our selves, sooner seduced by others, and
soonest of all auerted and perverted with fear and desire: to settle the
vnsted fastness of our hearts, and bridle the unruliness of our affections;
the Lord has provided for all societies the line of direction, and rod of
correction; as well to guide the tractable, as to repress the obstinate; least
disorder endured should breed confusion the forerunner of all ruin, Since then
the Church of Christ is 1. Tim. 3.
the house of God, the Hebr. 12.
City of the living God, and the Col. 1.
kingdom of his beloved son; shall we think that God is careful for
other(s) and careless for his own: or that confusion ought to be less
doubted and feared in heavenly then in earthly things? God is no (where author)
of 1. Cor. 14.
confusion but of peace, especially in his Church; in which he commands
Ibidem.
all things to be decently and orderly done. Where no man does govern, what
order can be kept: where no man does moderate, what peace can be had: yea
what greater dissipation can befall the Church of God, then for every man to
intrude where he list, and obtrude what he will, without restraint or
reproof: Wherefore God has appointed 1. Cor 4.
Stewards over his household, Hebr. 13.
watchmen and leader^ over his flock, Luc. 10.
Laborers in his harvest, 1. Cor. 3.
husbandmen in his tillage, 1. Cor. 12.
diverse administrations, as well for the Ephesians. 4.
preservation as edification of the Church, which is the body of Christ, and so
far forth answers the frame of man's body; that as there, so in the Church,
Basil. in Psalm. 33.
God has set some to be in stead of eyes, ears, tongue, and hands; that is,
to be principal members for the guiding and directing of the whole, which
without them is maimed and unable to provide for the safety and security of
it self.

Neither may we think that order and discipline is needful for the people in
Gods Church, and needelesse for the Pastors; that were to guard the feet, and
leave the head open to a more deadly wound: but rather as the more principal
the part, the more perilous the disease, so the more disordered the Pastors,
the likelier the people to perish by their dissentions. The house cannot stand,
which the builders subvert. The harvest is lost, where the laborers do rather
skatter, then gather. If the eye lack light, how dark is the body: If the
salt be unsavory, where withal shall the rest he seasoned: The folowers
cannot go right, where the guides go astray; and forces distracted, be they
never so great, are soon defeated. Discord and disorder in the Pastors rent
the Church in pieces; where as peace and agreement in the Teachers confirm and
establish the minds of the hearers. If they strive that sit at stern, the
ship of Christ cannot hold a straight and safe course in the te^^ests of this
world. Order then and discipline, the very nurse and mother of all peace and
quietness, as well in divine as in humane societies and assemblies, though it
be not the life or spirit that quickneth the Church; yet does it fa^en and
knit the members thereof, as ioints and si^e was do the parts of our bodies;
in so much that the Ephesians. 4.
unity of the spirit is not kept (as the Apostle notes) without the Ephesians. 4.
band of peace; and where there is dissension nourished, or confusion suffered,
no peace can be preserved, or expected.

Hence we must not frame what kind of regiment we list, for the ministers of
Christ's Church, but rather observe and mark what manner of external
government the Lord has best liked and allowed in his Church even from the
beginning. The external regiment of Pastors and Teachers among themselves,
and over their flocks, I distinguish from the internal, that God has by his
spirit and truethih the hearts of the faithful; which cannot be varied, and
is not questioned in the Church of England. That I acknowledge to he the true
kingdom of Christ; whereby he inwardly and effectually works in his Saints
the faith of his truth, and feeling of his grace according to the purpose of
his own will, for the praise of his glory; in which no earthly creature
concurreth or joins with him yet c^^se he has left the sound of his word and
seal of his Sa^r^ments as external means for us to be made partakers of his
heavenly graces; there must be sitpersons to teach the one, and dispense the
other; and a power in them to admit the worthy, and remove the unworthy,
least holy things be defiled, whiles they ^e Math. 7.
proiected to dogs and swine. Hence rises the necessity of external
government in the Church of God, which respects the appointing of meet men,
and repelling of unmeet to be trusted with these heavenly treasures, as also
the good using and right dividing of sopreciousie wels committed to their
charge.

What kind of external government God settled in his Church even at the first
beginning, will soon appear, if we consult the Scriptures, From Adam to
Jacob as the Church was contained in certain families mentioned by Moses, so
was the discipline of the Church Domestical, and the government Paternall; God
leaving the father to be teacher and ruler of his household and of spring, and
changing the children and their issues to honor with reverence and obedience,
their fathers delivering and prescribing unto them the true worship of God
agreeable to his will revealed to their fathers. The right and power the father
had over his children and household before the Law is expressed in these
words: Genesis 18.
I know (says God) that (Abraham) will command his sons and his house after
him to keep the way of the Lord; which no doubt all the Patriarchs that were
faithful even from Adam carefully performed, and the children that were
religious, reverently obeyed; the blessing of God passing by the fathers mouth
unto the children in reward of their submission, or curse in revenge of their
rebellion. So Noah Genesis 9.
blessed Sem for covering his nakedness; and by that blessing made him heir
of the promise; and cursed Cham for deriding the shame of his father and
insulting at it. So like wise Genesis 27.
Isaac and Jacob transmitted the blessing of God to their Genesis 49.
children and Genesis 48.
childrens children that were duetifull, and pronounced his heavy judgments
on their children that were wicked and obstinate.

As the Patriarchs were Prophets to declare to their children the promises and
menaces of God; so were they magistrates to rule their families with fatherly
coercion, such as God best allowed in the first world to govern his Saints.
And for that cause did God comprehend Princes under the name of Parents in the
Decalog^e of Moses; and every where in the old Testament chief men and
governors are called Fathers; and to this day by Gods law, Princes ought to
have the same care and respect of their subjects that fathers have of their
children, by reason the first fountain of princely power by Gods allowance was
fatherly regiment. Neither were the Patriarchs only Princes within their
tents and dwellings; but also Princes in the Church of God, God always
reserving the eldest and chiefest in those generations to serve him with
sacrifice and thanksgiving. To which end God did consecrate the first borne of
their family as holy to himself, to be Priests in his Church; and increased
their dignity with this princely prerogative, that they should be Lords over
their brethren, and honored of their mothers children; as succeeding their
fathers in the government and Priesthood, unless they were repelled from that
honor by Gods secret counsels or manifest judgments; and others named by God
himself to sustain that charge. Genesis 21.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called, said God to Abraham when he refused
Ismael. Genesis 25.
The elder shall serve the younger, said God to Rebecca when he preferred Jacob.
Genesis 49.
Ruben mine eldest son (said Jacob) the beginning of my strength, excelling
in dignity, excelling in power: thou shall not excel, because thou wentest up
to thy fathers bed. For otherwise this was the blessing due to the elder
brother in the Genesis 4. v. 7.
first world, and part of his birthright, as well before as after the flood,
which Isaac uttered to Jacob, when he took him for his eldest son; Genesis 27.
Be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers children honor thee. Which
privilege of the first horn God renewed and confirmed in the law of Moses
throughout the common wealth of Israel, that as they were eldest, so should
they be chiefest in their fathers houses, except their impiety provoked the
contrary.

This then was the regiment of Gods Church from Adam to Sem: the most ancient
was always the most excellent, both in priesthood and civil government in the
Church of God; and in his room deceasing, succeeded his eldest son, unless
he were rejected from it for his wickedness, as Cain was that killed Abel. And
to the first Patriarchs God gave so long life, that they might witness his
truth by word of mouth unto their children and childrens children, that would
hear and regard the will of God. for this precept expressed in the law, Deuteronomy.
4.
Teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons; was the perpetual charge of all
fathers as well before as after the deluge; and then most needful, when
children had no teachers nor governors, save fathers; as whiles the word was
yet not written, but the true worship of God was delivered by hand from the
father to the son. During which time, as each father that inherited the
promise was eldest, so was he chiefest in directing and commanding his offspring
that believed, of whom the Church then consisted.

Adam governed the Church 930. years, confirming to all posterity the
creation and fall of himself and all mankind with him; and likewise redemption
and victory by the promised seed that should come of the woman. Seth the
son of Adam assisted his father 500. years, and taught his children which
were then the Church Genesis 4.
to call on the name of the Lord; and continued that charge 112. years after
his fathers death. Enosh did the like to Seth, and all the heirs of the
promise before the flood to their fathers; God always stirring up the spirits
of some excellent men to preach in his Church, whiles their fathers yet lived
and guided the number of the faithful. So Enoch pleased God and prophesied in
his Church 300. years; first under Adam, and after under Seth, in whose time
he was translated. So Noah 2. Pet. 2.
preached righteousness and repentance to the old world, beginning under
Enoch the son of Seth, and holding on six descents, until the flood came, the
very same year that his grandfather Methusalem died. After whose death and the
drowning of the world, Noah governed the Church 350. years; and left the
regiment thereof, as also the inheritance of the blessing and promise to Sem
his eldest son, that was saved with him in the Arc from the waters, and
blessed by him.

Sem succeeding his father in the covenant of peace, confirmation of the
promise, and dignity of the first borne, governed the Church 350. years under
his father, and 152. years after him, cuen till Abraham was dead, Isaac
dinune, and Jacob 50. years old, and might well for his age, birthright and
blessing, be that Melchizedec, king of Salem in Canaan, that Hebr. 7.
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of his enemies, and blessed him that
had the promises. for he must be greater then Abraham, that blessed Abraham,
The diversities of opinions touching Melchizedck may be read in Hierome
epistola ad Euagrium, tom^ 3. fol. 38.
as the Apostle infers; and greater then Abraham could none be, but one that
had the same promises which Abraham had, and that before him. Now Noah was
dead 13. years before Abraham entered Canaan; and Sem ten ascents before
Abraham, inherited the same blessing and promise, that Abraham did. During
whose life, (and he over lived Abraham) none of his of spring could have the
honor of the kingdom and priesthood from him, much less could any stranger
excel him, or come near him in the dignity of his priesthood.

For first in his house was the Church, God vouchsafing to be called the Genesis
9.
God of Sem, as he was after the God of Abraham; and so blessing his Tents with
righteousness of faith and heavenly peace, that Noah foreseeing it in
spirit, besought God to Genesis 9.
persuade and incline Iapheth (his younger son) to dwell in the Tents of Sem.
Next in his seed was the promised blessing, (the true cause of Abraham's
greatness) and that 360. years before it was in Abraham; and from him God
lineally derived it unto Abraham by that blessing, as from the father both of
Christ and of Abraham. Thirdly, in his person was the prerogative of the first
borne to be chief over his brethren as well in religion as in civil
regiment, and consequently to be king and priest in the house of God.
Fourthlie, by the length of his life he well resembled the true Melchizedec, who
by his birthright is king and priest for ever over the sons of God: for he
came out of the Arc, as from an other world, no man living that knew his
beginning; and he dured more then 500. years, even twelve descents after the
flood; and so neither the beginning nor end of his days were known to the
heirs of promise. Lastly, successor on earth he left none, by reason Abraham,
whom God called from his Genesis 12.
country, kindred, and fathers house, to inherit the promise and blessing next
after Sem, and likewise Isaac and Jacob heirs of the same promise with him,
soiourned as strangers and peregrines first in the land of Canaan, (where Sem
yet lived, and by force of his birthright and blessing continued a king and
priest in his fathers house and city, which was then the Church of God) and
after in the land of Egypt, until the departure of Jacobs posterity thence:
amongst whose sons God divided the honors and dignities of Sem, appointing
the scepter and seed to Judah, the priesthood to Leui, the 1. Chro. 5.
birthright to Joseph; and never conjoined them after in any but in Christ
Jesus the only priest that ever succeeded according to the order of
Melchizedec, which far excelled the order of Aaron that had the kingdom and
birthright severed from it.

Whosoever Melchizedec was, this was the government of the Church so long as
Sem lived, which appeared in the person of Melchizedec: to wit, the father was
ruler over his children, and the first borne over his brethren, as well in
piety as in policy; and this privilege of the eldest brethren to be kings
and Priests in their fathers house, represented the choice that God made of his
Saints in Christ his son, to be 1. Pet. 2.
a royal Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto himself
by Jesus Christ.

From Jacob to Moses, as the number of Gods children increased, so the royal
priesthood utterly ceased, and the government of the Church was much obscured
by the perpetual pilgrimage of Jacob, and bondage of his offspring, till God by
Moses wrought their deliverance; the Church in the mean time being guided
first by Jacob, then by Joseph, after by the heads and fathers of the twelve
Tribes, Judah being always the chiefest both in Egypt and Canaan, and his Genesis
49.
fathers sons bowing unto him according to the tenor of Jacobs blessing. And
so from Adam to Moses we find a continual superiority of the father over his
children, and the first borne above his brethren, approved and established by
God himself in the regiment of his Church; and not any precept or precedent
for equality.

CHAP. II. The Leuiticall and National regiment of the Church under the Law.
WHen it pleased the goodness of God to extend the true knowledge of himself
to the whole seed of Jacob, and to bring a people out of Egypt to be his
peculiar, he severed from the rest the Tribe of Leui, to attend the Arc and
offerings which he commanded, and to teach their brethren the judgments and
statutes of their God. For the Church being enlarged and spread over the whole
nation; the domestical discipline that was before the law, could not so well
fit the government of a people, as of an household; and therefore out of twelve
Tribes God chose one to retain the priesthood and have the oversight of all
holy things, and execution of all sacred service. In which Tribe, according to
the number and order of the first fathers and families descended from Leui the
son of Jacob, God did proportion and establish diverse superiorities and
dignities as well in answering the sentence of the law to the people, as in
serving him at his altar; and those not only of Priests above Levites, but of
priests above priests, and of Levites among themselves.

The first distinction was of Priests above Levites; that is of Aaron and his
sons above the rest of y^ same Tribe: who were restrained from touching or
seeing the holy things committed to the priests charge; and ministered in the
Sanctuary at the appointment and commandment of the priests. Number. 3. v. 6.
Bring the Tribe of Leui (says God to Moses) and make them stand before Aaron
the priest, and they shall minister unto him. verse 9.
Thou shall give the Levites to Aaron and his sons; they are given him for a
gift from among the children of Israel; verse 10.
And Aaron and his sons shall thou (number or) appoint to execute the Priests
office, which is theirs. And where the families of the Levites derived from
Gershon, Kohath and Merari (the three sons of Leui) were allotted to certain
peculiar offices about the Tabernacle; they were all to be directed and
commanded by the sons of Aaron that were priests. Number. 4. v. 27.
At the mouth, (that is, at the word and commandment) of Aaron and his sons
shall all the service of the sons of Gershon be done, in all their charge,
and in all their service. And so for the sons of Kohath: verse 19.
Let Aaron and his sons come and appoint them every man to his office and to
his charge. And likewise for the sons of Merari: verse 33.
The service of the sons of Merari in all their service about the Tabernacle,
shall be under the hand (or appointment) of Ithamar the (second) son of Aaron
the priest. Yea the Levites might not touch or see y^ things committed to the
priests custody. verse 15.
When Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the Sanctuary and all
the instruments (thereof) the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it; but they
shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die; verse 20.
And let them not go in to see when the Sanctuary is folded up, lest they die.

The pre-eminence of priests above Levites, is often iterated by Gods own
mouth; and the murmuring against it, revenged in Korah the son of Kohath the
Leuite by that dreadful opening of the earth, and swalowing him up and his
confederates with all they had; for disdaining that degree, in which God had
placed him amongst the Levites, as Number. 6. v. 9.
a small thing, and and 10.
aspiring to the priests office.

Among the Levites were three chief and principal heads named by God
himself, of the lineage of the three sons of Leui; Number. 3. v. 24
Eliasaph for the Gershonites; 30.
Elizaphan for the Kohathites; and 35.
Zuriel for the Merarites. After these were other chief fathers of the Levites
that directed and governed the rest of their brethren in all the several
charges and courses allotted unto them by David, as appears, 1. Chron. 23.
24. 25. 26. some also were 1. Ch^. 26. v. 29.
Officers, Judges, and Rulers, as well amongst themselves, as and 30.
at large for Gods business and the kings; some were assessors and coadiutors
in the great Council of Jerusalem together with the 2. Chr. 19.
priests and princes of the twelve Tribes.

The Priests also were of sundry sorts amongst themselves. The first and
chiefest dignity belonged to the high Priest, who by Gods appointment was Number.
3. v. 32.
Prince of the princes of Leui; and 2. Chro. 19.
chief over the supreme Judges in Jerusalem, as well priests as others 2.
Chro. 19.
in all matters of the Lord. The which sovereignty was not given him in
respect he was a figure of Christ; but by reason God approved superior and
inferior callings in that common wealth as the best way to govern his Church.
Aarons priesthood, in approaching nearest unto God, and in entering the second
Tabernacle within the veil, whither none might come save the high priest
alone, figured and shadowed the person of Christ; but by no means Aaron, nor
none of his order did represent the royal and judicial power of Christ. For
then should Christ have been a priest after the order of Aaron, as well as of
Melchizedec; if Aaron had resembled both his kingdom and priesthood, as
Melchizedec did. But without all question the scepter was severed from the
Tribe of Leui, and given to Judah; wherefore the high priest by his judicial
dignity could not foreshew the kingly seat and throne of Christ, and that is
manifest by the different execution of his office. The high priest had the 70.
Elders as coassessours with him in the same Council, Christ has none: He with
the 70. received hard and doubtful matters by way of Appeal from inferior
Judges; all matters without exception pertain to Christ's tribunal
originally, and not by way of deuolution: the high priest had a superior to
control him and over rule him, even the law giver of Judah that held the
scepter; but Christ is far from any such subjection. Wherefore the high
priests superiority to direct and determine in Council such doubts as were
brought unto him, was no figure of the sovereign and princely power that
Christ has in his Church, and shall execute at the last day; but rather it was
the regiment and external discipline which God then embraced in guiding the
Church of Israel. And that appears by the sequence and coherence of other
degrees which accompanied the highest.

Next to the high priest (which for ever should have been of the line of
Eleazar and Number. 25.
Phinees) and as it were a Secondarie to him, was the chief of yt offspring of
Ithamar another of Aarons sons, under whose hand and appointment the Number. 4.
v. 28.
Gershonites and 33.
Merarites (two part of the Levites) were to do all their service about the
Tabernacle and Temple. These two are joined in the execution of the priests
office, and are often reckoned together as the chief fathers of the priests,
and are called the 1. Chro. 24.
Rulers (or Princes) of the Sanctuary, and the Princes of God, that is, of
things pertaining to the service of God.

Out of their posterity came the 1. Chro. 24.
24. that were heads and fathers, or chief fathers of the priests, amongst
whom the lots to serve in the Temple by course were divided by king David; and
as they were subject to the two former, so had they substitutes Nehe. 12.
under them, to supply their places being absent, and assist them being
present, and had also the oversight and directing of all such priests and
Levites as served in their course. These (though the number continued Nehe. 12.
not so certain, by reason of their captiuities and decay of their families)
are often called in the old Testament the Nehe. 12.
heads (or chief) of the Priests, and every where in the new Testament Math.
2. 16.
(...) the principal or chief priests.

And as within the Temple for the service of God there were diversities 21. 26.
27. Mar. 11. 14. Luc. 9. 20. 22.
of degrees amongst priests and Levites; so for the presentation of civil
right and peace, and execution of Moses law, some of the priests and Levites
not only were Judges and Elders in their own Cities which were allowed them
to the number of Joshua 21.
48. in the whole, but sat with the Elders of other cities, and were 1. Chr.
26.
Judges and officers over Israel. Yea many things by Gods law were wholly or
chiefly reserved to the knowledge and sentence of the priests, as Leu. 13.
leprosy, Number. 5.
jealousy, Deuteronomy. 21. and
inquisition for murder, 19.
false witness and such like, in which cases the people and Elders were to
consult the priests and take direction from them. Deuteronomy. 21.
The priests the sons of Leui (says God) shall come forth (out of the
Cities where they were placed in every Tribe) and by their word shall all
strife and plague be tried.

Remembering always that doubtful and weighty matters were referred to the
counsel of priests and Judges that sat in the place which the Lord did
choose for the Arc to rest in. Deuteronomy. 17.
If there come a matter too hard for thee (either by reason of the weight or
doubt thereof) in judgment between blood and blood, cause and cause, plague
and plague, of matters in question within thy gates, thou shall arise, and go
up to the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose; and shall repair to the
Priests of the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and
ask, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment. And thou shall do
according to that, which they of the place (which the Lord has chosen) show
thee, and shall observe to do according to all they inform thee. Thou shall
not decline from the thing, which they shall show thee, neither to the right
hand, nor to the left. And the man that will do presumptuously in not
hearkening unto the Priest, (that stands before the Lord thy God to minister
there) or unto the Judge; that man shall die. This Councillor Senate of Elders
residing at Jerusalem in Iehosaphats time, (who no doubt did not infringe, but
rather observe the tenor of the law) consisted of 2 Chro 19.
Levites, and of 2 Chro 19.
Priests, and of the 2 Chro 19.
heads of the families of Israel, and had 2 Chro 19.
Amariah the (high) priest chief over them in all matters of the Lord; and 2
Chro 19.
Zebediah a ruler of the house of Judah (chief) for all the kings affairs;
and was a continuance of the 70. Elders, which God adjoined unto Moses Number. 11.
to bear the burden of the people with him.

From these superior and inferior degrees amongst the priests and Levites
under Moses happily may no necessary consequent be drawn to force the same to
be observed in the Church of Christ. First, for that the tribe of Leui might
not be unguided without manifest confusion, and was not subjected to the
regiment of any other Tribe; but had the same manner of government, by her
Prince, Elders, Judges and Officers over 1000. 100. 50. and 10. which other
Tribes had in that common wealth. Next, the civil policy of the Jews being
contained and expressed in the books of Moses, the Judges and rulers of other
Tribes, were to be directed and assisted by th^se that were most expert and
skillful in the writings of Moses (such as the priests and Levites by their
profession and function were;) which in Christian kingdoms is not so requisite.
For the Gospel does not express the manner and fourine of civil regiment and
positive laws, as the books of Moses do; but leaves such things to the care
and conscience of the Magistrate, so long as their policy does not cross the
rules of piety and charity prescribed in the Gospel: and therefore the
Pastors and preachers of the new Testament must not challenge to sit Judges in
those cases, which the Priests and Levites under Moses did and might hear and
determine. Thirdly, this pre-eminence grew unto them according to their
families by inheritance and birthright; The father was chief of his offspring
whiles he lived, and after him his eldest son, which is no way imitable in
the Church of Christ. And though sometimes the father for good respect made the
younger the chiefer, as it is written of Shuri, one of the line of Merari, that
1. Chro. 26. verse 10.
though he were not the eldest, yet his father made him the chief, yet the
contrary was usually observed, and the privilege of the firstborn might not
be changed for Deuteronomy. 21.
affection without just cause. Lastly, the services about the Sanctuary and
Sacrifices (which none might do but Levites) were of diverse sorts, and
therefore not without great regard were there diverse degrees established
amongst them; though to serve God even in the least of them, was honorable.
Now in the Church of Christ, the word and Sacraments committed to the Pastors
and Ministers, have no different services, and so require for the discharge
thereof no discrepant offices.

Notwithstanding, for the better ordering, ouerseeing and containing such in
their duties as be called to be the guiders and leaders of Gods people, that
they may walk worthy their vocation without reproach of life, and be sound in
faith without all leaven of false doctrine; the wisdom of God in appointing
some amongst the priests and Levites to guide and govern the rest of their
Tribe as well in the ceremonial as judicial part of Moses law, is not
hastily to be refused, nor lightly to be neglected. For if government be
needful amongst them that will live in any society and avoid disorder,
whereof God is no way author; we cannot get, nor need not seek a fitter or
better pattern to follow (as far as the difference of states and persons will
permit) then that which God himself allowed and confirmed in the Church and
commonwealth of Israel. And though the certain form of their ecclesiastical
government be neither exactly known in every point, nor preciselie to be urged
in the Church of Christ by reason of many dissimilitudes betwixt us and them;
yet this is evident, that God appointed the Church of Israel to be guided, not
by a general equality of the priests and Levites, but by certain
superiorities among them in every calling; and that as well in their
conversation as administration; and their 70. Elders and supreme Council called
their (...), consisted not of all that were and would be present; but of
certain of the Number. 11. Deuteronomy. 1.
chiefest, who for their nobility and authority were preferred above the rest
and admitted to be of that number. So that the Leuiticall discipline under
Moses does clearly confirm a diversity of degrees amongst Pastors and
ministers in the Church to be more agreeable to the wisdom of God revealed in
his law, then a general equality or paritie.

CHAP. III. The personal and perpetual kingdom of Christ after he took flesh.
THe external regiment of the Church, the Lord declined whiles he lived here,
and relinquished to others as a thing meeter for the sons of men, then for
the son of God. No doubt he was, even then, the 1. Pet. 1.
chief corner stone, elect and precious, laid in Sion by God himself, the 1.
Pet. 5.
Archpastour over the whole flock, and Heb. 3.
high Priest over the house of God; the Prophets foretold, Esa. 9.
the government should be on his shoulders, and he should order the throne of
David with justice and judgment; the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.
he is (and then was) the head of his Church; yea the Col. 2.
head of all power and principality; he said of himself to his disciples,
Ioh. 13.
ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am; the Heb. 1.
Angels of God were to worship him when he was brought into the world, much
more the sons of men to be in Heb. 2.
subjection under his feet: but so wonderful was his patience and humility
at his first appearing in our flesh, that Math. 12.
a bruised reed he would not break, and smoking flax he would not quench,
yea no man heard his voice in the streets. for he Math. 20.
came to serve and not to be served; to suffer for the world that he might save
it, and not (as yet) Ioh. 20.
to judge the world. All power then in heaven and earth belonged unto him even
when he was conversant with men; but he neither declared, nor challenged so
much until he was risen from the dead: and in the days of his flesh, as he
was a Prophet to teach and instruct, a Priest to cleanse and sanctify his
Church; so was he a king to rule and govern the same, save that his Ioh. 18.
kingdom was not of this world: and therefore he would not reign in his Church
with the presence of his body as a man; but with the power of his spirit as
the son of God. The kingdom then and throne, which he reserved to himself,
far passes the directing and ordering of outward things in the Church, which
he has left to others.

To the true kingdom of Christ belong the manifold wisdom, might and mercies
of God showed on us for our salvation; I mean all the Power, Grace and Glory
that God vouchsafes to bestow on his Saints in this life, and keeps in
store for them until the next; so that whatsoever effects of his truth, gifts
of his spirit, and feeling of his promise we presently possess, or hope to
have at the hands of God through Christ our Lord, it proceeds from the
strength and favor of this king.

By the mightiness of his power, though he sit in heaven, we receive that
continual protection, help and deliverance, which we find in all our troubles
and adversities. And so we see his arm stretched out for the repressing,
scattering and revenging of our enemies; whose pride and rage he does so guide
and order, that it tends only to the trial of such as fear him, and the
confusion of their foes.

From the riches of his grace come all those heavenly gifts, fruits and
blessings of his spirit where with the Church and every member thereof is
furnished and adorned, as namely the lightning of our minds, softning of our
hearts, quenching of our lusts; the grounding us in faith, moring us in hope,
and rooting us in charity by the love of his truth, obedience of his will,
and resemblance of his virtues, that has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light. For 1. Cor. 4.
what have we, that we have not received? and whence James 1.
comes every good and perfect gift, but from above; even from him John 1.
of whose fullness we all have received?

From the steadfastness of his promise are derived that peace, joy and comfort
of the holy ghost, which the godly feel within them, and whereby they are
maintained and preserved against the day of Christ; and like wise that crown
of righteousness and glory which he will give to all that love his coming when
he shall appear in the clouds to bring eternal life and bliss with him for
all the children of God. Till then he must reign to subdue his enemies which
now resist, and to fill up the number of his Saints, which yet are wanting.
That judgment which finally rendereth to all flesh according to their works,
and eternally dureth without altering or ending, shall be the very close and
conclusion of his kingdom, which he man then ^. (...). (...).
deliver up to God his father when he has crowned his servants with honor and
immortality; and adjudged his enemies for their cursed sins to perpetual
torments.

This is the true kingdom of Christ; and in this effectual, spiritual and
celestial manner he does and shall govern his Church here on earth and every
member thereof, till all his enemies be under his feet. After that general
judgment, (sin, death, and hell being utterly conquered, as in himself long
ago, so then in all his members) the administration of his kingdom shall
cease (all his brethren being brought unto God;) but the fruition shall be
everlasting, even as the joys thereof are exceeding above all that we can
speak or think.

By the manner of his government, it is soon understood, that the prcheminence
of his kingdom is personal, belonging wholly and only to the son of God; in
so much that no earthly creature may claim without apparent blasphemy to be
lieutenant under him, or communicant with him in his royal dignity. Romans 11.
Unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways vnartaineable. Who knows the
mind of the Lord? or who was his counselor? Esa. 50.
His hand is not shortened that it cannot help. 1. Cor. 1.
The foolishness and weakness of God is wiser and stronger then men. And
therefore he will have neither partner, nor helper.

The outward face of the Church, where the good and bad, by the word and
Sacraments are gathered and mixed together, may be called the kingdom of heaven
and of Christ; but we must take heed that we wisely distinguish even in the
word and Sacraments the mighty power of God from the outward service of men.
The Gospel which saves, is 2. Cor. 3.
not written with ink, but with the spirit of the living God; not in tables
of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. The seed of the word may be
carefully cast by us; but it takes no root, nor bears fruit unless the
Lord prepare the ground. We are joint workmen with God in his husbandry, and
yet 1. Cor. 3.
neither he that planteth, nor he that waters is any thing, but God that
gives the increase. Circumcision, though it were the Romans 4.
Seal of the righteousness of faith, yet auailed it nothing so long as it was
Romans 2.
out ward in the flesh: but that is true circumcision which is in the spirit,
not in the letter, whose praise is of God, and not of men. The Preacher is the
2. Cor. 2.
savor of death unto death; until God lighten and open the heart; and 1. Cor.
1.
Christ crucified, even when he is preached, is a stumbling block to the
Jews; and foolishness to the Graecians; except God give repentance and
obedience of faith that they may believe and be saved. The Sacraments are dead
elements in our hands, and the word a deadly sound in our mouths without 2.
Cor. 3.
the spirit that quickneth. So that in them both it is no hard matter to
disseuer the outward signs from the inward graces, and the corporal actions
performed by men, from the spiritual operations effected by the holy Ghost,
which properly pertain to Christ's kingdom.

I stand some what the longer in separating the true kingdom of Christ from the
external order and discipline of the Church; for that in our times some more
zealous then wise, and too much devoted to their own fancies, have promoted
their Eldership and Presbytery to the height of Christ's scepter: and make
grievous outcries, as if the son of God were spoiled of half his kingdom,
because their Laie-elders are not suffered to sit Judges in every parish
together with the Pastor and Teacher of the place. I dispute not as yet
whether ever there were any such Elders (as they talk of) in the Church of
Christ from the preaching of our Savior to this present age; I reserve that to
a further inquiry: but though there were such suffered or settled by the
Apostles in the Primitive Church, yet were they no part of Christ's kingdom,
which is proper to his person and by many degrees excels all other
governments, for the divine force and grace that are eminent in the spiritual
fruits and effects of his kingdom.

I do not deny but God has ordained and established on earth many kinds of
external governments; as in spiritual causes, the Minister; in domestical;
the master of the family; and superior to them both the Magistrate; and what
is prescribed or exacted by any of those that God has set over us for a quiet,
honest, and Christian course of life in this world, according to his word and
their charge, he does ratify and confirm in heaven; accepting the
submission, and punishing the rebellion of all that disobey in each degree: but
neither Prince, Pastor, nor Parent can search or change the heart: much less
can they endue it with any heavenly grace and virtue; or settle it with
expertance of life to come. They moderate and direct the outward actions which
may be soon dissembled; further they neither see, nor judge: they have not to
do with the secret affections of the heart, with the sacred gifts of the
spirit, the steadfast trust of future glory; these always belong to the
kingdom of Christ and of God, which Ephesians. 1.
works all things after the connsell of his own will, unto the praise of his
glory.

Since then this king is Ephesians. 1.
set at the right hand (of God) in the heavens far above all principality,
and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not in this
world only, but also in the world to come; and all things are subjected under
his feet, and he appointed head over all unto the Church, which is his body;
even the fullness of him that fills all in all; and declares daily from
heaven what is the riches of his glorious inheritance in the Saints, and
exceeding greatness of his power toward us which believe; by lightening the
eyes of our understanding, and scaling us with the holy Spirit of promise: the
watchmen and leaders of his flock, though their service be needful and
fruitful in his Church, and they trusted with the keys and mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven; yet may they not arrogate any part of Christ's honor or
power as incident to their calling or function, but leave all entire and
untouched, to the son of God, whose right it is: much less may the several
or Synodall assemblies, proceedings, or censures of the supposed Presbytery be
reckoned the half deal of Christ's most righteous and glorious kingdom.

CHAP. III. The Synedricall jurisdiction, which some men think our Savior in
the Gospel restored and recommended to his Church.
AS I avouch that Christ reserved to himself the mighty force and heavenly
grace of his spiritual kingdom; so am I out of doubt he left the superuision
and moderation of external things and actions, which respect the peace, order
and comeliness of his Church, to such as he called to be the guiders of his
flock and stewards of his household, Who they were, is not so well agreed on.
Some men imagine, Christ did reinfuse the Jewish Synedrion, and thence
extracted the Laie-Presbyterie, that should govern his Church. Their proof
they take cut of these words: Mat. 18.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him between thee and him
alone: if he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother: if he hear thee not,
take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be confirmed. And if he will not vouch safe to hear them,
tell it unto the Church: if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be to thee
as an Ethnike and Publicane. Hence they collect; first, that our Savior spoke
to the Jews, by reason he said, let him be to thee as an Ethnike and
Publicane, whom the Jews and no people else abhorted and shunned: next, that he
preseribed no new, nor unknown form of Judicial proceeding, but referred
them rather to the usual and accuston^ed manner of their Country, then
generally received, and every where practiced amongst them; which was by the
Elders of every place to determine their matters; or else to transmit them unto
the Sanhedrin or council of Jerusalem, which was the highest court in that
common wealth.

Thus fame they seem to have some ground to support their opinion: but that
our Savior appointed the like order to take place for ever in his Church, I
see neither mention of it, nor reason for it in the Scriptures, and assure my
self it can never be proved. For if our Savior meant to transfer any kind
of regiment from the Church of the Jews to his own; it is certain he would
not choose out the corruptions of time, nor inventions of men; but ascend to
the original ordinance of God, and thence derive his platform. He would not
follow, much less authorize in his Church any breach of Gods law, grown by
deprauation and usurpation of wicked men that hated and pursued both him and
his truth; that were, with them to Mat. 15.
transgress the commandment of God for the traditions of men, from which he
was far: but if he purposed to deduce any form of government from the law
to the Gospel; it was the same that God by Moses erected and allowed. Now
that cannot be urged and used in the Church of Christ, without apparent
violence to the word of God, and evident injury to the Christia magistrate, as
by the view thereof we shall easily understand.

First therefore let us shortly see what kinds of gouernements were authorized
and established by Moses in the first erection of the common wealth and Church
of Israel; and consequently, what coherence or resemblance there may be
between those Councils and Synedrions of the Jews, and the Presbyteries in
every parish, which some men labor to impose on the Church of Christ, in every
christian kingdom and country.

The sorts of regiments settled amongst the Jews by Gods law were these. Under
Moses the chief magistrate by the counsel of Iethro, consent of the people,
and allowance of God were y^ Deuteronomy. 1. Exodus 18.
known and wise men of every tribe set to be rulers and captains over
thousands, over hundreds, over fifties and over tens; and they judged the
people at all seasons; and brought the hard matters unto Moses; and judged all
small causes themselves. When matters of importance grew many, and wearied
Moses; God willed him to Number. 11.
bring seventy men whom he knew to be Elders and governors of the people; and
they should bear the burden of the people with him, and assist him in hearing
and ordering all matters of weight and difficulty. Besides these God named
twelve princes (of every Tribe one) for oftener meeting and quicker dispatch to
be always present with Aaron and Moses, that is, with the high Priest and the
Magistrate. Thus had every Tribe their Judges and officers, Elders and Princes,
to direct and rule the rest of the multitude.

The same order was by Moses prescribed against they should recover and enter
the land of promise, and was likewise there observed. Deuteronomy. 16.
Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy cities throughout thy
Tribes, and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment. And Deuteronomy. 17.
if there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment within thy gates, thou
shall arise and go up to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose; where
the seventy Elders were to abide and attend such matters as were of greatest
moment both civil and sacred; and their sentence by Gods law no man might
refuse without punishment of death. This manner of government Iehosaphat
restored together with religion, when he 2. Chro. 19.
set Judges in the land throughout all the strong cities of Judah, city by
city. Moreover in Jerusalem he placed of the Levites, and of the Priests, and
of the chief of the families of Israel, for the judgment and cause of the
Lord, and said, Behold Amariah the priest is chief over you in all matter of
the Lord; and Zebediah the son of Ishmael, a ruler of the house of Judah, for
all the kings affairs; and the Levites (are) officers in your presence.
Josephus repeateth the sum of these laws of Moses in this sort. Joseph.
Antiquit. Iuda^ca, li. 4. cap 8.
In every City let there be seven rulers, men chiefly regarding virtue and the
love of justice. To every Magist^acie let there be allotted two of the Tribe
of Leui for assistance. If (these) Judges cannot pronounce of any matter
brought before them; let the whole cause be sent to the holy City, and the
high Priest, the Prophet and the Senate (or council of Elders) assembling,
determine what they think right. The Jewish Thalmud varieth from Josephus in
the number of their Judges, and says, that on small and pecuniarie matters in
every city sat three Judges; on criminal and capital, three and twenty; on
the highest affairs of the common wealth, and causes sent from other Cities
sat at Jerusalem the lxxi. Elders and rulers of the people. The book of Ruth
witnesses that Ruth. 4.
ten of the Elders of the city sat with Boaz in the gate, when the matter was
ended betwixt him and his kinsman for the inheritance of Elimelech, and marrage
of Ruth. The Princes and Elders of Judge. 8.
Succoth, even of one City, were 77. whose flesh Gede on did tear with
thorns for refusing to relieve his wearied soldiers.

The jar in the number of the Judges, I labor not to reconcile; they may
speak of diverse times and places without repugnance of each to other; this I
observe, that Moses appointed neither Judges nor Elders in City or Synedrion,
but they were magistrates to execute the judgments of the law, and had the
sword to chastise the body, and punish with death. The supreme Synedrion of
Jerusalem heard and decided matters pertaining to God and the king, and the man
that presumptuouslie disobeied them, was by Gods law to die. Under Esdras the
punishment of him that neglected their commandment, was the Es^. 10.
forfeiture of all his goods and separation from the people of God. The Elders
of their Cities were to Deuteronomy. 21.
inquire and swear for unknown murder; to Deuteronomy. 19.
deliver the wilful murderer unto the hand of the auenger of blood; to Deuteronomy.
21.
adiudge to death disobedient children, to Deuteronomy. 22.
a merce and chastise the slanderer of his wives virginity, and to stone the
adulteress to death, and in like manner to perform all the punishments and
penalties of Moses law. By which it is evident that their Elders in every
City were the Magistrates and rulers of the people, and might inflict both
loss of limme and life, and determine all causes, save such as for distinction
of holy and unholy were peculiar to the Priest, or for weight and difficulty
were reserved to the council of Jerusalem.

In the days of our Savior, though many things were corrupted, and altered
from Moses law; and the power of their Elders and Sanhedrin much decreased,
first by the kingdom of Herod, then by the Roman Presidents; who not
regarding Moses laws, could not endure the sovereign authority of the high
Priest and Elders so near their noses: yet for the better containing the
people in obedience to their country rites and laws, without which they would
in no wise be governed or quieted; the Elders of each place were suffered to
retain some show of their former power; as to hear and redress the private
wrongs and injuries of their brethren; and the Council of Jerusalem had
authority left them to imprison and chastise with rods the contemners and
disturbers of their religion, as appears by their Mat. 26.
binding and Mat. 26.
buffe^ing of Christ, and Act. 5.
beating his Apostles, as also by Paul's letters from the Act. 22.
high Priests and Elders to prison and beat in every Synagogue such as
believed. Mat. 10.
I send you (says Christ to his disciples) as sheep among wolves; they will
deliver you up to Councils, and scourge you in their Synagogues. Yea by showing
themselves zealous for Caesar and by false suggesting that the Apostles under
color of religion labored to Act. 24.
stir sedition among the Jews, as Theudas and Judas not long before had
done, the Elders so prevailed with the Roman^s, that not only the Presidents
themselves persecuted the faithful to content and gratify the people, but
suffered the Synedrion at Jerusalem to have power of life and death when they
same cause, and to exercise the same in cases of defection from their law, or
rebellion against their law.

Our Savior says of the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair; Mat.
23.
Fulfill ye the measure of your fathers. Behold, I send unto you Prophets and
wise men; and some of them shall you kill and crucify, and some shall you
scourge in your Synagogues, and pursue from City to City. Paul confessing how
hot he was against the Christians in the time of his ignorance, says, Act.
22.
I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and imprisoning both men and
women. And Act. 22.
when the blood of Steven the Martyr was shed, (he) stood by and consented
unto his death, and Act. 7.
kept the clothes (of the witnesses) that slew him. Act. 8.
At that time also (when Steven was stoned) there was a great persecution
against the Church, which was at Jerusalem, and Saul entered into every house,
and drew out both men and women, and put them in prison; Act. 9.
breathing out threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord and
making havoc of his Church.

The stoning of Steven some men suppose was done in a tumult without all
lawful authority; because the chief Priests not long before said to Pilate;
John 18.
It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. Tumultuous it was by reason
of their immo^erate rage showed in the end of their judgment: yet so, that
the witnesses were produced though false, the party suffered to answer for a
season, Saul trusted to see execution done, and the witnesses as by the law
they were bound, the first that cast stones on Steven. And when the tumult was
ceased, the persecution increased; and Saul (afterward Paul) appointed by
Commission from the high Priest and Elders, to be a chief Actor for the
slaughter of Christ's Saints both there and else where. Their words to
Pilate, It is not lawful for us to kill any man, might be spoken either in
regard of the present time which was so sacred unto them that they would not
that day Ioh. 18. v. 28.
go into the judgment hall where Pilate sat; or in respect of the crime they
accused him of, which was Luc. 23. v. 2^.
affectation of the kingdom; and so no where determinable but in Caesar's
court; or lastly, by reason of Pilates presence, without whose assent being
there in person they could not proceed on life and death. Whatsoever power the
Romans limited or enlarged to the Elders of the Jews after they were lords
over them, I greatly force not: this is evident, they were Magistrates by Moses
law, and had the sword from God to execute his judicial ordinances, as I
showed before.

(...) more might the Deuteronomy. 23. v. 3.
Ammonites or Moabites; the children of the Verse 8.
Edomites and Egyptians were received in the third generation. Altens were not
admitted to be of the number of the Lords people; and any uncleanness of the
flesh did separate for a season the Jews themselves from approaching near to
the Congregation or Tabernacle of God; but neither of these is excommunication.
The strangers which were not yet admitted, could not be eiected; the natural
weakness and uncleanness of the body, as leprosy, pollution of feed, touching
of the dead and such like, are no just causes of excommunication, but rather
remembrances of our corruption. For greater sins committed, if they could be
proved, God by his law appointed corporal punishments: for wrongs he required
recompense: for smaller matters he accepted sacrifices of confession and
repentance: Other censuring in Moses I read none commanded.

This phrase, He shall be cut off from the mids of his people, so much used in
the law, seems to some men to express a kind of excommunication and
Anathematization from the people of God; but they must pardon me if I believe
it not, until I see it proved by the Scriptures. The Rabbis write many
things touching the traditions and customs of later times; but what Moses
ordained or intended by this speech, I look for proofs out of Moses himself,
and not out of Rabbis. And long we shall not need to search; the places are
so often and evident. In the 18. of Leuiticus, God threatening, incest,
adultery, Sodomitrie, buggarie, and offering of children unto Molech,
concludes; Leu. 18. v. 29.
Whosoever shall commit any of these abominatio^s, the persons that do so,
shall be cut off from among their people. Whereby God means; they shall die the
death (as is expressed in the 20. of Leuiticus in the very same sins;) and also
that if man spare such and leave them unpunished, God himself from heaven by
his dreadful judgments will root them and theirs out of the earth. Leuit.
20. v. 2.
Whosoever shall give his children unto Molech he shall die the death, the
people of the land shall stone him to death. Verse 3.
And I will set my face against that man and cut him off from among his people.
Verse 4.
And if the people of the land do hide their eyes, and wincke at that man,
and kill him not, then will I set my face against that man and his family, and
cut him off. So for incest; Ibidem v. 17
They shall be (says God) cut off in the sight of their people (that is
openly put to death.) And likewise for any wilful breach of Gods law; Nomb. 15.
The person that does presumptuously, the same blasphemeth the Lord,
therefore shall he be cut off from among his people (or) suffer death. for when
this speech is referred to the Magistrate, execution is enjoined, and such
malefactors must be cut off from the earth by the loss of their lives: but
when it is referred to God, it is a commination denounced, that he will plague
them with violent and hasty destruction, and root out themselves and their
posterities, and even their remembrances from the people of God. Hereof are
every where examples. Nahum 3.
The sword shall cut thee off; Ierem. 11.
Let us cut him off from the land of the living, and destroy the tree with the
fruit, that his name may be no more in memory. Ezech. 14.
I will set my face (says God) against that man, and make him an example and a
proverb, and will cut him off from the midst of my people. So again,
Ezech. 21.
I will come against thee and draw my sword out of his sheathe, and cut off
from thee both the righteous and wicked. This signification is every where
occurrent, but no where excommunication.

In Esdras after the return of y^ people from Babylon, I find a separation
from the Congregation threatened to the disobedient; and in Nehemias a chasing
away of some that married strange wives; but either of these proceeded from the
magistrate, and so neither serves for y^ ministers of Christ's Church. The
separation in Esdras is joined with the Esdr. 10.
forfeiture of al their substance, which offended; (for so we read;) and is
rather an exiling and banishing from the country, then barring from the
Temple. In Nehemias the curse of Gods law coucurred with the Magistrates power,
which no Pastor may imitate. Nehem. 13.
I reproved them, says he, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and
pulled off their hair, and took an oath of them by God, not to commit the
like: one of the hie priests nephews that married the daughter of Sanballat the
Horonite, Ibidem v. 28.
I chased him from me. This seazing of their goods, smiting of their bodies,
separating them from the people, and chasing them from the place, show the
civil use of the sword in the Princes hand; not the spiritual force of the word
in the Priests mouth: And therefore the one is no president for the other.

The casting of men out of their synagogues, first devised by the Pharisees to
serve their proud and aspiring humor, for that ye chiefest power of the sword
was transiated unto stranger^, and the Joseph. A^tiq. Iuda^^. 18. ca. 20.
highest dig^ities remained unto the Sadduces; and not only devised, but
sharply pursued by them against our Savior and his disciples, was no spiritual
curse, but rather a temporal loss of all such honor, office, privilege and
freedom as the parties had in the Country, City or Synagogue where they
lived; and a plain thraldom to prisoning, whipping and such other chastising
as their Synedrion by their Laws might inflict. Saint John's report is, that
John 19.
Joseph of Arimathea was Christ's Disciple, but secretly for fear of the
Jews, and that John 12.
many of the chief Rulers believed in him: but because of the Pharisees, they
did not confess him, lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue. Now no
man believing in Christ in who^ al Nations should be blessed, could fear the
spiritual curse and excommunication of the Pharisees. They knew the promise of
God to Abraham. Genes. 12.
I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee: and were
acquainted with Balaams confession; Numb. 23.
How shall I curse where the Lord has not cursed? yea Numb. 24.
cursed is he that curses thee: what then did they fear but the loss of
their earthly honors and dignities, from which they were dismissed and
deprived, when they were thrust out of the Synagogue, and subjected to the
lusts and spites of eger and cruel enemies. John 12.
They loved says Saint John, the glory of men more then the glory of God.
Wherefore this casting them out of the Synagogue was intermixed with the civil
regiment, and the terror thereof wholly proceeded from the power of the sword
confirmed by God to the Councels and Elders of that common wealth; which the
Pastors and Leaders of Christ's Church may not usurp nor challenge in whole or
in part, unless the policy concur with them, and authorize their doings.

Since then the imagined Presbyteries in every parish have no better
concordance nor agreeance with the Councels and Synedrions of the Jews; let us
weigh the words of Christ, which they think conclude their purpose.

Matthew. 18.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone; if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother; if he hear thee
not, take yet with thee one or two. If he hear not them, tell it to the
Church. The party grieved must be man, not God; our selves, not others. If thy
brother trespass against thee (not against God) reprove him. The first
admonition must be secret betwixt thee and him alone; now in grievous or
notorious sins against God or his Church the reproof must be open. 1. Tim. 5.
Those that sin, rebuke openly; that the rest may fear. Again if the wrong
doer repent himself, the sufferer must forgive him. Luke 17.
If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; if he repent, forgive him.
yea though he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again to thee and say, It repents me, thou shall forgive him; and not
seven times only, but Matthew. 18.
seventy times seven. We may and must forgive the sins that are committed
against our selves. So the Lords prayer teaches us; Matthew. 6.
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; but to
remit other men's wrongs and harms, we have neither power nor leave; much less
to acquit and pardon the sins and injuries offered unto God, Thirdly, if he
repent not, we must yet give him a second admonition with one or two witnesses
before we publish him to the Church; and if he then relent, we must forgive,
and go no further. These be no rules for open and known sins, dishonouring
God and scandalizing his Church; but for private trespasses and offenses betwixt
man and man; this is no Judicial proceeding in the Consistory but a charitable
warning in secrecy by him alone that is oppressed and grieved with wrong or
reproach.

So Peter conceived the speech of our Savior when he straightwaye asked; Matthew.
18.
How often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? seven times? So
the Lord opened his own meaning, when for answer he proposed the parable of
the two detters; one that owed his master Matthew. 18.
ten thousand talents; and the other that owed his fellow an hundred pence.
where he makes two sorts of sins; the greater against God; the lesser
against our brethren, and adds; Ibidem.
so will mine heavenly father do unto you, except you forgive from your hearts
each one to his brother their trespasses. This is agenerall duty binding
every Christian, and not a special authority reserved to Pastors and Elders.
which Jerome well observed upon this place. Hiero. lib. 3. in Matthew. ca. 18.
If our brother hurt us in any thing, we may forgive him, yea we must, being
commanded to forgive our debtors their trespasses. But if a man sin against
God, it is not in our power. for the divine Scripture says, if a man sin
against man, the Priest shall pray for him: but if he sin against God, who
shall entreat for him? And Chrysostom Chrysostom. homil. 61. in Matthew.
Why does (Christ) charge him that has suffered the wrong, and none other to
reprove? A man will not take it in so good part to be reproved at any man's
hands, as at his that has suffered wrong and been vexed with reproach,
specially if he do it alone. Likewise Ambrose. (Christ) Ambros. lib. 8. in
Luc. ca. 17.
said well, if thy brother trespass against thee. for the rule is not like
when we trespass against God, as when (we trespass) against men. And Austen.
August. de verbis Domini sermo. 16.
Go and be reconciled to thy brother (that is) ask pardon of him whom thou
have offended, whom thou have harmed. This ought he to do, which offers
wrong. But he that suffers wrong what must he do? that which we hear this
day (read.) If thy brother trespass against thee, reprove him between thee
and him alone. If thou neglect, thou art worse then he, he does wrong, and by
doing it grievously wounds himself; thou regardest not the wound of thy
brother, thou feast him perish, and carest not for it. Our Savior then in this
place speaks of private offenses and greeuances, which he only that is
oppressed, and no man else may reprove and forgive: of public sins he
speaks not; the doers whereof must not be reproved in secret; nor twice
admonished, before they be censured by the Church. The incestuous Corinthian
had neither private, nor double warning given him, before he was delivered to
Satan by Paul, and we must not think the Apostle would so soon forget, or so
flatly cross his masters meaning, if Christ had spoken this of open wickedness
hateful to God, and heinous in the e^es of men.

Some hold opinion, that these words (against thee) do not concern private
injuries, but distinguish between secret and manifest sins. Be the sin then
never so heinous that is committed, no man must tell it to the Church so long as
the doer seems willing to repent. How this constructio^ should stand with the
circumstances and consequence of the Text, I yet perceive not. For put the case
in idolatry, blasphemy, heresy, perjury, murder, adultery, and such like
grievous crimes; must the parties keep counsel that know any such offenders,
so as they will say they repent y^ fact* Is that the tenor of Gods law, or duty
of a Christian man? I trow not. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thine
own son, daughter, Deuteronomy. 13.
or wife that is in thy bosom, or friend which is as thine own soul, entice
thee secretly, saying; Let us go and serve other gods: thou shall not consent
unto him, nor hear him, thine eye shall not pity him, nor show mercy, nor
keep him secret; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
then the hands of all the people. And so for all enormous sins against God
and our neighbor, a concealer is a consenter and partaker of the wickedness
committed. It is no piety, it is no charity, to be secret to malefactors and
keep their counsel, when they dishonor God, or damnifie their brethren,
although repentance follow. That may save the soul, if it be unfeigned; but
that may not stay the just execution of Gods or man's Laws. Agame, what power
have we to remit the wrongs that are offered to others? Our own injuries, if
withal they be not public crimes against the Laws of God, and the land where
we live, we may forgive; other men's harms we may neither suffer, nor
smoother. Since then Christ speaks of such trespasses as each man must remit
unto his brother upon repentance; it is evident he speaks not of sins
against God and our neighbors, hid from the multitude, and known to a few;
but of such injuries, as he that feels, best knows; and may release,
because they touch him alone, and no man else. When we desire of God to be
forgiven our debts, as we forgive our debtors; mean we the sins against others
that we be privy to; or the sins against our selves that we be parties unto? Is
it silence that God requires of us in this prayer, or patience? secrecy, or
mercy? In secret sins we are but witnesses, in which case it is a sin to
be silent: in private wrongs we be sufferers; under which burden it is a virtue
to be patient. Lastly, this exposition overthrows it self. For if thy
brother trespass against thee in that sort, which they interpret; that is, if
his sin be known only to thee, and do not repent, how caust thou tell it the
Church? without proof the church must not believe nor regard thy speech; and
proof thou have none. One and the same person can not be both accusant and
deponent; and at the mouth of one witness though his testimony were received,
yet may no man be condemned. So that if the sin be secret to thee, how can it
be told and justified to the Church? If it may be proved to the Church, how
is it secret to thee alone: Our Savior then had no such meaning that each man
should conceal and forgive the sins that are done against God and his
neighbor, so long as they be not notorious and public, but known only to
some private persons; he rather enioyneth all men to remeate the same measure
unto others, that God meateth unto them; and to forgive smaller injuries
offered against them, as they are forgiven greater committed against God. For
that is thankes-worthie with God, not to be liberal in remitting other men's
wrongs, nor to keep counsel with malefactors, but to pardon our brother that
offends us; as we are pardoned when we offend our heavenly Father. This is it
that Christ prescribes in this place, that the Scriptures so often iterate;
and all the fathers with one consent subscribe unto.

But 1. Pet. 4.
charity covers the multitude of sins, even as envy does blaze them
abroad. Charity covers all the sins that are committed against our selves,
by forgiving them; and refraineth the obiecting and insulting at other men's
sins after punishment or repentance; and hides all the infirmities and
ouersights of our brethren, which our duty to God and our neighbor may
endure: but it neither betrayeth the truth with silence, nor dispenses with
other men's harms, nor generally cloaketh, favors or dissembleth any sin,
be it never so secret, whereby the name of God is blasphemed, or the state of
our neighbor endangered.

Matthew. 18.
If he hear not (two admonitions) tell it the Church. if he hear not the
Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane. What is meant by the
Church, whether the Church of Christ, or the Churches and assemblies of the
Jews, that God ordained in that common wealth to govern his people and
determine their quarrels; this breeds some question amongst divines: howbeit
the reasons are many and weighty that move me to think the Church of Christ
is not comprised in these words. First, this was a direction to the Jews
serving them for their present state and time; and then had Christ no Church in
Iewrie to which they might complain for he John 18.
ever preached in their Synagogues and Temple, whither all that would resorted,
and in secret said he nothing; much less did he gather and assemble Churches
apart from the rest of the Jews to receive and consider the complaints of
their brethren. Next, the matters of which they must complain, were such; as
the Church of Christ might not challenge to hear and determine. Private wrongs
and offenses betwixt man and man must be directed by laws and reformed by
judgments; and consequently belong to the Magistrate; the Church of Christ
has no warrant to make laws or give judgment in civil and private
trespasses. The Lord himself, when he was desired to make peace and end a
strife about parting an inheritance, answered, Luke 12.
man, who made me a Judge or diuider over you? What he refused as no part of
his calling, the Pastors and Elders of his Church must not challenge as annexed
to their vocation. Luc. 6.
The Scholar is not above his master; as his John 20.
father sent him, so sent he them, but not with a further or larger commission.
Thirdly, that Church is here spoken of, which abhorred Ethnikes as unclean
persons; and shunned al society with Publicanes: but neither Christ, nor his
Church did ever so; wherefore the Church of Christ, is not expressed by these
words; Let him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane; for they never refused
nor declined to converse with either.

Luc. 3.
To the baptism of John came the Publicanes, and were received of him, and not
willed by him to leave their calling, but to walk uprightly in it. Our Savior
accepted them to his company, and did not only eat with them but was counted
a Matthew. 11.
friend to Publicanes. Matthew the Apostle was chosen Matthew. 9.
sitting at the receipt of custom; Zacheus a chief Publicane was the Luke. 19.
child of Abraham; and the Publicane that prayed in the Temple was Luke 18.
justified before the Pharisee. Yeathe Lord says of them, Matthew. 21.
Publicans shall go into the kingdom of heaven before (the Scribes and Elders
that despised them.) The Publicanes then were members of Christ's Church and
inheritours of his kingdom; and therefore by flying and forsaking the
fellowship of Publicanes, the Church of Christ could not be described.

The Jews, you will say, to whom Christ spoke, made that account of them; and
as they were cast out of the Jews Synanogues, so does Christ will disobedient
and impenitent sinners to be used in his Church; that is, to be separated and
excluded from the number of the faithful. What account soever the perfidious
and presumptuous Pharisees made of them, Christ and his disciples which were
also Jews, had as great regard of them as of the rest; yea so far was he
from allowing it in the Jews and proposing it to his Church, that by his life
and doctrine, as I have showed, he openly disliked and dissuaded the contempt
which the Priests and people had of the Publicanes.

As for Ethnikes and Gentiles, though they were strangers to the common wealth
of Israel, when as yet they knew no God; yet never were they persons
excommunicate; and since the appearing of our Savior in flesh, through his
mercy vouchsafed to be partakers of his promises, and the true members of his
Catholic church. So that this can be no rule for Christ's Church to measure
persons excommunicate by Gentiles and Publicanes; since amongst the Jews,
Publicans believed and entered the kingdom of God, and after the reiection of
that Nation, the Church of Christ consisted chiefly, if not wholly, of Gentiles
and Ethnikes. This then can not be the true intent and purpose of our Savior
in that place, to authorize his Church upon private quarrels between man and
man to excommunicate, if her verdict be not obeyed. Where there is a Christian
Magistrate, the Church may not claim or presume to decide such matters, by
public audience and sentence, without encroching on the Princes sword and
scepter, whose right and charge it is to Esaias 1. Psalm. 82.
relieve the oppressed, to judge the fatherles and defend the widow, and to
execute judgment and justice, as well in private wrongs and injuries, as in
public crimes and enormities.

But Paul reproves some of Corinth, for 1. Corinthians. 6.
going to law under the unjust (Magistrates) and not rather under the Saints
(though private persons?) Paul did not debar the Magistrates that were
Infidels, of their jurisdiction; nor create new Judges for civil offenses in
the Church; it was beyond his calling and commission to do either of them: but
perceiving that Christians pursued each other for private quarrels before
unbelievers to the shame of the Church and slander of the Gospel; he says they
were better suffer wrong and loss in earthly things, the^ expose the doctrine
of Christ to be derided of his and their enemies. And to appease their brabbles
and end their strifes if they were so contentious, he wills them to choose,
if not the wisest, yet the woorst and least esteemed in the Church to arbitrate
their causes, rather then to lay themselves and their whole profession open to
the mockes and taunts of heathen and profane Judges. To preserve peace and love
in the Church, the godly might then, and may now mediate between brethren, as
friends and welwillers to both parties; and likewise debate and conclude their
cases, as Arbiters chosen by consent of either side: but they may not interpose
themselves as Judges authorized by Christ to excommunicate all that will not
hear them in private griefs and civil suites: that were, to take the sword,
which is not given them, and to thrust themselves by this pretense into Princes
places; which neither Christ prescribed, nor Paul imagined, nor the Church
assumed.

And yet was here given unto Paul a just occasion to repeat and renew that
order, if Christ had ordained any such in his Church. For the Christians
trespassed one an other; and Paul by no means permitted them to pursue their
brethren at the Tribunals of Infidels. What says he then: does he will them
to tell the Church; and if the wrong doer hear not the Church, to account him
as an Ethnike and Publicane? If Christ provided this as a reoresse for private
wrongs and offenses in his Church; shall we think the Apostle durst alter his
masters order, and abrogate the course, that Christ laid down to pacify
contentions in his Church. No doubt he would rather have recalled them toit,
then auerted them from it. What does he now: 1. Corinthians. 6.
If ye have judgments (says he) for things touching this life, (tell the
Pastor and Presbytery? No, but) set up (or choose out) the worst in the
Church, and make them Judges of your causes and quarrels. Then certainly our
Savior never meant, the faithful should for private trespasses complain to
the Pastor and Elders of every parish, and they should have power sufficient,
to hear and determine all such matters as were so offered unto them, and to
excommunicate those that would not stand to their sentence and judgment.

What then is the meaning of our Saviors words: what ever it be, this it can
not be, to authorize the Church to intermeddle with matters pertaining to the
Magistrate; and to exclude them a^ from the society and communion of the
Sacraments and Saints, that obey not her resolution in civil and private
trespasses. Yetlest I should return a Text without any interpretation, though
the sense seem hard to hit, by reason the ^^ate of the Jewish Church is not so
well known in our days as when our Savior spoke the words. I will not
refuse to set down what I think, if any bring better, I am ready to learn.

We must first conceive that in the time of our Savior and a little before his
birth, the Romans had taken the Scepter and Sovereignty from the Jews, as
Jacob Genes. 49.
prophesied should come to pass in the days of the Messiah; leaving them in
private suites between man and man, and in smaller cases of correction, that
kind of regiment and form of Laws which God by Moses ordained; and excepting
from their Laws and Tribunals al strangers, that were amongst them, or had any
thing to do with them, (whom the Jews called Ethnikes and abhorred as profane
persons;) and like wise Publicanes, that is, such of the Jews, as did any
service to the Romans in collecting and answering the tributes, taxes and
toles due to the Roman Empire, whom the Jews pursued with greater dislike
and despite then they did strangers, for keeping company with the heathen, and
serving their turns against their own Nation. Both these sorts of men, as
well Publicanes as strangers, for the detestation and hatred the Jews had of
them, were exempted from the Laws and Judgments of the Jews; and if any man
had ought against them, he must convent them before the Roman President, and
not in any Court of the Jews, nor before any Magistrate of the Jewish
profession. The like liberty was left to any Jew that would appeal to the
Roman Governor or impeach and molest his brother in any of the Roman
Consistories. For though the Jews in many things were left to their Country
Laws: yet were the Roman Courts amongst them so privileged, that who would,
might have recourse thither, and there recover his right, or redress the wrong
offered him.

In this confusion of the Jews estate lately begun and every day increasing,
our Lord and Master living, directs the people what way they shall take,
neither to break the law of God which Moses gave them, nor to impugn the
Roman Empire which then governed them. In their private quarrelles and actions
therefore he proposes three degrees of proceeding; First, the rule of
charity; Next, the order of Moses policy; Lastly, the help of the Roman
Sovereignty. If thy brother trespass thee, tell him privately of the wrong
offered thee; If he regard not thy voice, take one or two with thee, that may
be men indifferent betwixt you. This the rule of charity requires, in secret
and friendly manner; yea by the mediation of wel-willers and neighbors to
compose all private quarrels as much as in us lies. If this take not place,
tell it unto the Church; that is, unto the assembly and governors that are in
thy City. For every City by Gods Law was to have her Judges and Magistrates,
there to Deuteronomy. 16.
judge the people with righteous judgment. And their manner was to sit in the
gates of their cities, whither the whole multitude did assemble unto the^; not
only to hear and see what they did, but in weighty matters to join with
them and give their consents. Our Savior then means, that if charitable and
brotherly admonitions be neglected; they should seek their remedy from the
Judges and Elders of their Cities, as by Gods law the Jews were directed and
permitted to do.

Tell it unto the Church then, is as much as tell it, (not unto the Church of
Christ, which as yet was not severed from the Jews, nor assembled together;
and therefore had then neither places nor persons specified or authorized for
that purpose) but unto that Council of Magistrates, which God by Moses
commanded to have the hearing and ending of those causes. For Christ by this
precept does not establish new Judges, nor erect new Consistories; but
refers the people to Gods ordinance expressed in the law of Moses, and
already received and used in that common wealth: thereby meaning, that if the
doers of wrong to their brethren would not be reformed by private and friendly
admonition and intercession, the parties grieved might with good conscience
ask the aid and assistance of those Magistrates, whom God had appointed over
them to compel and force the trespassers to surcease their injurious dealings.

If it seem strange to any man that the word Ecclesia should be taken here
not for the Church of Christ, as we commonly use it, but for the assembly of
any place or city, where the Rulers and Commons, be they Christians or
Infidels, are gathered together to consult or determine as well of civil
causes, as of religion: besides that the Septuagint do often use the word (...)
for any kind of meeting, as (...) Psalm. 25.
I have hated the assembly of the wicked. and again, Prouer. 5.
I was almost overwhelmed with all evil (...), in the mids of the Church and
Synagogue; S. Luke in the 19. of the Acts uses the word in that sort Prou. 5.
v. 32, 39, 40.
thrice in one chapter. Beza a man of great learning, and one whom none can
mistrust as not addicted enough unto discipline, writing on this place, says;
Annotat in Matthew. 18.
We must note, they are foully deceived, which would conclude out of this
place, that the hearing of al matters must be referred to the assembly of the
whole multitude. The name of the Church say they, is never otherwise used;
which even out of this place is proved to be false. For surely it appears,
that this is spoken as it were of the Jews, by that which is added, Let him be
to thee as an Ethnicke and Publicane. Now, that judgments amongst the Jews
were exercised by the Elders, and that their manner was not ever to assemble
the whole multitude, all the writers of those matters do witness. And truly
unless Christ had fitted all this speech unto the use that was in his time,
who could have understood him what he said? It is lastly to be observed,
that in this one place of all the new Testament the name of the Church is
spoken of the Jews.

The words which follow, if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an
Ethnike and Publicane; must import either the punishing his obstinacy which
obeyed not the Judgment of the Rulers and Magistrates that were of the Jews;
or a further pursuing him before others y^ had more power to repress such
insolency. If they express any punishment for his wilfulnes; that must
proceed either publicly from the Judges, or privately from the plaintiff. The
punishment of him y^ disobeied the Magistrate, by Gods Law was Deuteronomy. 17.
death: that Christ would not alter. For he came not to change the civil
government, or qualify the iudicall punishments of Moses Law; but to lead
them the way to the celestial and eternal kingdom of God. The chief Rulers
and Governors of the Jews, being his capital adversaries, and not
acknowledging his authority, would never respect his counsel nor
commandment. The words themselves have reference to a particular person, Let
him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane. Christ therefore in these words
decreed no public punishment.

As for private revenge, he was far from liking it, and further from teaching
it. Matthew. 7.
False Prophets we must beware; and with notorious wicked persons we must not
keep company: but private injuries we must rather suffer with patience, then
resist with violence, or requite with disdain. Matthew. 5.
Resist not evil says Christ to all his disciples; but whosoeeer shall smite
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also; and if any will sue thee
at the law to take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. Then may we
not reject and detest our brother that does us wrong, as the Jews did an
Ethnike and Publicane. The mind that must quietly bear wrong once, twice, and
oftener, if need be; must not abhor and shun the person of his brother that
wrongeth him, as profane. It rests then, that our Savior in these words did
permit the party oppressed, to seek further remedy, when neither charity
nor equity could prevail with the oppressor; And that was to do as they did
to strangers and Publicanes; which was to convent him before y^ Roman
Magistrate, who had power to force him that did wrong, to abide the judgment
that should be given. And so I suppose ye words may be taken, Let him be to
thee as an Ethnike and Publicane, that is, pursue him in those Courts where
thou would a Pagan and Publicane that should do thee wrong.

If any man like not to understand those words of a further pursuit before the
Magistrate; he may refer them to a private forsaking of all company with the
wrong-doer until he reform himself. Let him be to thee as an Ethnicke and
Publicane, that is, shun such wilful oppressors as much as thou do
Pagans and Publicanes; but without bitterness of mind or breach of patience.
And so S. Augustine sometimes expounds them. If he hear not the Church, let
him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane:) August. de verbis Domini sermo 16.
that is, account him no longer in the number of thy brethren, and yet neglect
not his salvation. So the Lord warns, when he by and by adds, Verily I say
unto you, whatsoever you bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Thou
beginnest to account thy brother as a Publicane, thou do bind him on earth.
When thou do correct and make agreement with thy brother, thou have loosed
him on earth; and when thou loosest him on earth, he shall be loosed in
heaven. Which of these twain be preferred I force not, so the first be not
impugned as disagreeing from the Text.

Some think our Savior would not prescribe how the Jews should proceed in
their private suits and quarrels; that care belonging rather to Counselors at
the law, then to Preachers of y^ word.

(...) I conclude then; there can be no proportion nor imitation neither of the
higher nor of the meaner Synedrion amongst the Jews expected or admitted in
the Church of Christ: and as for the words of Christ in the 18. of Matthew,
whereon some new writers build the foundation of their laie-Presbyterie; they
be free and far from any such construction or conclusion; and the Catholic
fathers expounding that place, be further from the mention or motion of any
such regiment.

CHAP. V. The Apostolical pre-eminence and authority before and after
Christ's ascension.
ALbeit the son of God assembled no Churches whiles he lived on earth, nor
settled the Jews Synedrion to remain amongst the faithful, for ought that we
find by the sacred Scriptures: yet least the house of God should be unfinished,
and his harvest ungathered, in his own person whiles he walked here, he called
and authorized from and above the rest certain workmen and stewards to take
the chief charge, care, and oversight, after his departure, of Gods building
and husbandry. for which cause he made, when as yet he was conuerfant with
men, a plain distinction betwixt his disciples; choosing Luc. 6.
Twelve of them to be his Apostles, and appointing Luc. 10.
other 70. to go before him into every City and place, whither he should
come, and to preach the kingdom of God; giving those Twelve larger Commission,
perfecter instruction, higher authority, and greater gifts of his holy
spirit, then the rest of his disciples; which he made laborers also in his
harvest and messengers of his kingdom.

The Twelve, not the 70. were the continual and domestical hearers of all his
sermons, and beholders of all his wonders; as chosen to witness his doctrine,
doings, and sufferings to the world; the Twelve, and no more, were present when
he did institute his last supper, and they alone heard and had those heavenly
prayers and promises which then he made. To the Mat. 28. v. 16.
Eleven apart from the rest was given in mount Oliuet the Commission to Mat.
28. v. 19.
teach all Nations; and look how God sent his son, so sent he them as
Apostles, that is, Ambassadors from his side, not only to preach the truth,
and plant the Church throughout the world, but in his name to command those
that believed in all cases of faith and good manners; to set an order amongst
them in all things needful for the government, continuance, peace, and unity
of the Church; sharply to rebuke, and reject from the society of the faithful
such as resisted or disobeied; to commit the Churches to sound and sincere
Teachers and overseers; to stop the mouths of those that taught things they
should not, for filthy lucres sake; and to deliver them to Satan that
persisted in their impieties or blasphemies.

As for the gifts of Gods spirit, they were so great in his Apostles, that
they both preaching and writing, delivered infallible truth to the Churches of
God, and that in Act. 2.
all languages of the world, and even the Act. 5.
shadows and the 19.
napkins that had touched their bodies did heal the sick, and cast out
devils; and these miraculous workings of the holy Ghost not only themselves
had in greater measure, then any others, but they gave them unto others by
laying their hands on them. When Philip had converted and baptized the people
of Samaria in the name of the Lord Jesus; yet none of them received the gifts
of the holy Ghost, until two of the Apostles Act. 8.
came down to them, prayed for them, and laid hands on them; and then was the
holy Ghost given them through laying on of the Apostles hands. Philip, though
he preached and baptized the believers as well as the Apostles did; yet could
he not bestow on them the gifts of the holy Ghost: that was reserved to the
Apostles, as to persons of an higher calling in the Church of Christ, then
Philip was; and yet was he one of the seven deacons, and also an Act. 21.
Evangelist, as S. Luke witnesses; and well appears by his dispensing the
word and Sacraments. When Paul laid his hands on the 12. disciples at Ephesus,
they straight way Act. 19.
spoke with (diverse) tongues and prophesied.

So that our Savior as well living on earth, as ascending on high, kept a
difference betwixt his Apostles, and the rest of his disciples (that were
preachers) both in having them always with him, the better to acquaint them
with the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; and in leaving unto them at his
departure the converting and instructing of all nations; and in pouring on them
after his ascension a greater abundance of his holy spirit, then on the rest,
for the better execution of the charge committed unto them.

For the plainer proof whereof, we may remember, that when our Lord and Master
elected 12. Apostles to be with him, and other 70. disciples to go before him
at the first gathering of his Church, he did imitate the choice which God made
in the wilderness of Number. 1.
twelve chief Princes, and Number. 11.
seventy Elders, to guide and govern the people of Israel; by their two
several numbers distinguishing their two several degrees; and when Judas by
transgression fell from his Apostleship; an other was taken out of the 70. to
supply his room; which needed not, if the 70. had had before equal place and
calling with the Apostles. Jerome says, Hiero. in epistola ad Oceanum.
Qui prouehitur, de minore ad mai^s prouehitur; he that is promoted, is
promoted from the less to the greater. Now that Judas successor was taken out
of the 70. and not out of the Laity, appears by this, that every Apostle was
to have his calling from Christ as the 70. had, and not from men; and on
Matthias the Apostles imposed no hands; which argued that he was called before
by Christ himself amongst the 70. And so says Jerome. De scripto. eccles. in
Matthew.
Matthias being one of the 70. was chosen into the order of the eleven, in the
place of Judas the traitor. And Epiphanius. In fine com. 1. contra haereses.
Christ sent 72. to preach; of whose number was Matthias which in Judas place
was numbered amongst the Apostles. Eusebius also confirms the same report;
that Eusebius. li. 1. ca. 12. and li. 2. ca. 1.
Matthias which was chosen to be an Apostle in the place of Judas the traitor,
had (before that) the calling of one of the 70.

Paul numbering the diversities of gifts and administrations in the Church,
says, 1. Cor. 12.
God has ordained in the Church, first Apostles, next Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, then those that do miracles, after that, the gifts of healing,
helping, governing etc. reckoning the Apostles first, not in order only, but
in excellency also, as appears by his similitude of man's body, whose parts
are some Ibid. verse. 22. and 23.
comelier, some Ibid. verse. 22. and 23.
feebler; and his comparison of spiritual gifts, whereof some be verse. 31.
more excellent, and some of less regard and account in the Church of Christ.
And so Chrysostom well observes. Chryso. hom. 32. in 1. Cor.
Because some did mightily swell with the gift of tongues, he places that last
of all. for first and second, are not used here fortales sake, but he notes
what is higher in degree, and what is lower. Wherefore he set the Apostles
before, as those that were endewed with all sorts of gifts. He says not,
God has placed some to be Apostles, some to be Prophets; but he says in the
first place, in the second, in the third. And Ambrose. Ambros. ca. 12. 1. ad
Cor.
The chief in the Church he places the Apostles which are Christ's
Ambassadors. Hierome writing of the 12. fountains, and 70. palm trees that
the Israelites found in Elim, says, Hiero. de 42. Mansio: man's. 6.
There is no doubt but the 12. Apostles are hereby meant, from whose fountains
the streams running along do water the dryness of the whole world. Near to
these springs grew 70. palm trees, whom we understand to be the teachers of
the second order, Luke the Evangelist witnessing, that there were 12. Apostles,
and 70. Disciples of a lower degree, whom the Lord sent two and two before him.
And Augustine. August. in Psalm. 35.
As when the sun rises, it first shines on the hills, and thence the light
descends to the lowest places of the earth; so when Christ Jesus our Lord
came, he first spread his beams on the height of the Apostles, he first
lightened the mountains, and so his light went down to the valleis of the
earth. Theophil. in Luc. ca. 10.
The palm trees, says Theophilact (alluding as Hierome does to the twelve
fountains and seventy palm trees in Elim) are these (70. disciples) which
are to be nourished and taught by the Apostles. for though Christ also choose
those (70) yet were they inferior to the twelve, and afterward their scholars
and followers. Which we may the rather believe, because Eusebius and Clemens
long before testified that Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 1.
Christ delivered the (full) knowledge of himself to the Apostles, and the
Apostles afterward to the 70. Disciples.

And that the Apostles had a superior vocation above Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, and whomsoever in the Church of God, and even the
government and oversight of them; will soon appear, if we consider what Paul
the Apostle writes of himself, and unto them, directing, appointing, and
limiting as well Prophets as Evangelists, (and therefore much more Pastors and
Teachers) what to do, and how to be conversant in the Church of God; what to
refrain in themselves, and what to repress in others; in which cases we must
not dare say, or think, the Apostle presumed above his calling, or had a
several Commission from the rest of the Apostles to do that he did; but in
his doings and writings, we may perceive the height and strength of Apostolic
authority, so guided and tempered with the spirit of wisdom and humility,
that it grieved or displeased none in the Church, but such as did either swell
with pride, diuerted to fables, or troubled the Church with their contentions.

From an Apostolic spirit and power proceeded these speeches that follow, and
many such that may every where be observed in his epistles. 2. These. 3.
We charge you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves from every brother which walks unorderly, and not after
the rule (or direction) which he received of us. 2. These. 3.
We are persuaded of you in the Lord, that you do and will do those things
which we charge you. 1. Cor. 11.
Brethren I commend you that you remember all mine, and hold fast the
ordinances as I delivered them to you. 1. Cor. 11.
Other things when I come, I will set in order. 1. Cor. 16.
Concerning the gathering for Saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of
Galatia, so do you. And redressing abuses both in Pastors and Prophets, he
faieth: 1. Cor. 14.
If any speak with tongues (let it be) by two or three at most; and let one
interpret; if there be none to interpret, let him keep silence in the
Church. The Prophets, let them speak, two or three, and the rest judge. Your
women, let them keep silence in the Churches; and if they will learn any
thing, let them ask their husbands at home. If any seem to be a Prophet, or
to have the spirit, let him agnise the things that I write, to be the
commandments of the Lord.

And hearing of the 2. Cor. 12.
strife, envy, contentions, back bitings, whisperings, swellings, discords,
and sundry other enormities that were at Corinth, not in the people alone, but
even in such as 2. Cor. 11.
came to preach the Gospel amongst them, and undermined the Apostles credit
and authority with them, he says, 2. Cor. 10.
The weapons of our warrefare are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast
down fortes, and all height that lifts it self against the knowledge of God;
and having in readiness wherewith to revenge all disobediece, when your obedience
is fulfilled. If I should boast some what more of our authority which the Lord
has given me for your edification and not subversion, I should not be ashamed.
2. Cor. 13.
I write now being absent to the^ which heretofore have sinned, and to all
others, y^ if I come again, I will not spare, for so much as you seek
experience of Christ y^ speaks in me. I write these things being absent, lest
when I am present, I should use sharpnes according to ye power which ye Lord
has given me to edificatio^, and not to destruction.

Directing Timothy how to guide the Church of Ephesus, he gives him this
instruction and this commission. 1. Tim. 1.
As I prayed thee to stay at Ephesus when I went to Macedonia that thou
might command certain not to preach any (strange or) other doctrine, and
that they intend not to fables; (so) this charge I commit to thee son
Timotheus. Ibidem.
Hymeneus and Alexander I have delivered unto Satan, that they may be taught
not to blaspheme. And expressing at large in the third chapter, how the bishops
and deacons ought to be qualified before they be admitted, he adds; 1. Tim.
3.
These things I write to thee, that if I ^arie long, thou may know how to
behave thy self in the house of God. 1. Tim. 5.
Refuse the younger widows, I will that they marry and govern (their)
household. Let not a widow be chosen under the age of 60. 1. Tim. 5.
Receive no accusation against an Elder, but under two or three witnesses;
those that sin, rebuke openly that the rest may fear. Lay hands hastily on
no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. And having delivered diverse
and sundry points of wholesome doctrine, godly life, and seemly government,
too long to be here inserted, he authoriseth and requires Timothy to see them
performed in this sort. 1. Tim. 6.
These things command and teach; Let no man desp^se thy youth. 1. Tim. 5.
I require thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and his elect Angels, that
thou observe these things without prejudice or parcialitie. And in the very
close of his epistle; 1. Tim. 6.
I charge thee before God and Jesus Christ, that thou keep these precepts
without spot or reproof.

In like manner to Titus an other of his helpers and coadiutors in the Gospel:
Tit. 1.
For this cause I left thee in Crete to supply those things yt want
(orrectifie those things which remain) and to ordain Elders in every city as I
appointed thee. There are many vain talkers and deceivers of minds, whose
mouths must be stopped, that subvert whole houses for filthy lucres sake.
Rebuke (y^ Cretians) sharply, that they may be sound in faith, and not take
heed to Jewish fables and commandments of me^. Tit. 2.
These things speak and exhort, and reprove with all authority. Let no man
despise thee. Tit. 3.
Reject him that is an here^ike, after the first and second admonition. By
these and the like precepts she wing himself every where to speak as Christ's
ambassador; and in matters of faith, good behavior, and needfu^l discipline,
to be the Apostle and Teacher of the Gentiles. for in all these things not
only the people that were believers, but even the godly Pastors, Prophets,
and Evangelists perceiving his sincerity, and reuerencing his authority,
obeyed the Apostles voice, as 1. Cor. 7.
having the spirit of Christ given him for the perfect directing and guiding
of the Church amongst the Gentiles.

Much more might be said to this effect; but by this it is evident that the
Apostles function and calling was superior to all other degrees and offices of
the Church of Christ, were they Deacons, Doctors and Pastors, Prophets or
Evangelists, or of the 70. Disciples; and this their superiority was given
them by Christ himself, whiles he lived on earth and confirmed unto them by
the mighty gifts and power of his holy spirit after his ascending into the
heavens, and acknowled^ed and honored by all the faithful; so long as the
Apostles lived, none spurning at it, or contradicting it, but such as drew
disciples after them to reign over their brethren, or seduced the simple to
serve their own bellies.

S. John notes Diotrephes for not acknowledging his Apostleship, in this wise.
Epistola Iohan^is 3.
I wrote to the Church, but Diotrephes that loves to be chiefest among them,
receives us not: wherefore when I come, I will declare his works which he
does, prating against us with lewd words. Far otherwise were the godly
Pastors and Teachers minded in the Church of Christ, yielding with all
submission unto the Apostles, as unto the express messengers of Gods will, and
disposers of his mysteries, and putting a great difference betwixt the
Apostolic function and theirs, as Ignatius confesses in his epistle to the
Romans; Ignat. ad Rom^n^s.
(...). I prescribe (or enjoin) nothing unto you as Peter and Paul did; they
were the Apostles of Jesus Christ: but I the least. And again, Idem ad
Tralian^s.
(...); I command not as an Apostle, but keep my self within my measure.
Whereof we need no further nor surer proof then this; that the whole Church
then, and ever since, did, and does hold all the precepts, rules, orders, and
admonitions of the Apostles contained in their epistles for authentical
oracles of the holy Ghost, and parts of the Canonical Scripture; and they no
doubt had the same authority speaking, which they had writing; and
consequently no Pastor or Teacher might then more resist or refuse the
Apostles doctrine, decrees, or doings, then we may now their letters, sermons,
or epistles.

This Prerogative, to be best acquainted with the will and meaning of our
Savior, and to have their mouths and pens directed and guided by the holy
Ghost into all truth, as well of doctrine as discipline, was so proper to the
Apostles; that no Evangelist nor Prophet in the new Testament came near it:
and therefore the stories written by Mark and Luke were not admitted to be
Canonical in respect of the writers; but for that they were taken from the
Apostles mouths, and by the Apostles perused and confirmed as true and
sincere. So says Luke of his own Gospel. Luc. 1.
As they delivered unto us; which from the beginning were eye witnesses and
ministers of the word; as soon as I searched out perfectly from the first all
things, it seemed good to me in order to write them. And those his writings S.
Paul says, were ratified and received in all Churches. 2. Cor 8.
I have sent the brother, whose praise is in the gospel throughout all the
Churches; which could not have so generally been accepted with good liking, but
that the Apostles, who then governed and directed the Churches, had first
viewed and approved the same; else neither would the faithful have so esteemed
it, nor S. Paul so commended it. The Gospel of Mark had the like approbation
from Peter, as Jerome and Iero. in Marc.
others do testify. Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 1^.
Mark the disciple and interpreter of Peter, according as he had heard Peter
make relation, wrote a short gospel, being thereto desired by the brethren at
Rome. The which Gospel when Peter heard, he allowed it, and by his authority
published it, to be read of ye church, as Clemens in his first book
Hypotyposeog writes. Can any man doubt reading the words of S. Paul, which I
have cited; but the Apostles had in the Church of Christ right to require and
command, power to rebuke and revenge, authority to dispose and ordain in all
such cases as touched the soundness of faith, syncerenesse of life, or
seemlinesse of order amongst the faithful; and that in so doing they did not
usurp upon their brethren, nor tyrannize over them; but were guided by Gods
spirit, and obeyed as Christ's messengers and Legates in every place where the
truth was admitted: Neither did Paul resolve and conclude in such cases by
number of voices, or assent of the Presbytery; but as himself speaks, 1.
Cor. 7.
so I teach in all Churches, Gal. ^.
if an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, hold him accursed, 1. Cor 4.
some are puffed up as if I would not come to you: but I will come to you
shortly by Gods leave, and know, not the words, but the power of those that
swell thus; 2. These. 3.
if any man obey not our sayings, note him by a letter, and keep no company
with him.

Under the Apostles were a number of their disciples whom the Apostles carried
with them as companions of their iourneis, and helpers of their labors: and
whom, when they had perfectly trained, and thoroughly tried, they left any where
behind them at their departure, or sent any whither in their absence to finish
things imperfect, to redress things amiss, to withstand or prevent false
prophets and seducers, to survey the state of the Churches; and to keep the^ in
that course which was first desiuered by the Apostles. These men, for their
better instruction served with the Apostles, as children with their fathers. So
Paul says of Timothy, Phil. 2.
Ye know the proof of him that as a son with his father he has served with
me in the Gospel. Touching these the Churches had Col. 4.
commandment if they came to receive the^; that is, to believe them and trust
them as men sincerely minded and sent from the Apostles; yea to Phil. 2.
admit them with all gladness, and highly to esteem of them.

From their mouths (as perfectly understanding the Apostles doctrine, doings
and meaning, by reason of their continual society with them) were other
Pastors of the Church to be directed and instructed. 2. Tim. 3.
Persist thou (says Paul to Timothy) in those things which thou have learned
and are committed to thee, knowing of whom thou have learned them. And 2. Tim.
2.
what things thou have heard of me in the presence of many witnesses, the same
deliver to faithful men, that they may be able to teach others. And again, 1.
Cor. 4.
I have sent unto you Timotheus which is my beloved son and faithful in the
Lord, who shall put you in remembrance of my ways. as I teach every where in
every Church. These were charged by Paul to 1. Tim. 1.
require and command the Pastors and Preachers to refrain from false
doctrine, and to Tit. 1.
stop their mouths or Tit. 3.
reject them that did otherwise, to Tit. 1.
ordain Elders according to the necessity of the places, and Tit. 1.
receive accusations against them, and 1. Tim. 5.
sharply and 1. Tim. 5.
openly to rebuke them if they sinned, and that Tit. 2.
with all authority. These things the Apostle earnestly requires, and before
Christ and his elect Angels, charge Timothy and Tite to do. It is then
evident they might so do. for how vain and frivolous were all those
protestations made by S. Paul, if Timothy and Tite had only voices amongst
the rest, and nothing to do but as the rest. How far was the Apostle
ouerseene to adjure them, and not the whole Presbytery, to keep his
prescriptions inviolable, if the Elders might every hour countermaund them and
overrule them by number of voices?

Since then they were willed and consequently warranted by the Apostles to
ordain, examine, rebuke and reject Pastors and Elders, as just occasion
served, and equal over equal has no power nor pre-eminence; It is certain
that as well the Apostles authorizing, as their disciples authorized so to do,
were superiors in the Church of Christ to Pastors and Elders; and likewise
that they might, and did perform and execute the Apostles rules and
prescriptions, without expecting the consent of Pastors or Presbyteries; and
the Churches of Christ knew they were bound to obey and be subject to them in
those cases guided by the Apostles mouths or letters, as well as if the
Apostles had been present; and that to resist them, was to resist the order
which the holy Ghost had approved in governing the Church.

CHAP. VI. What dominion and titles Christ interdicted his Apostles.
THe power and prerogative of the Apostles above Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors, Doctors, and all others in the Church, would the sooner be granted,
were it not that certain places in holy Scripture, seem repugnant to it; as
where Christ forbade his Apostles all Luc. 22. Mat 20.
dominion over their brethren; and the Apostles in Act. 6.
electing to offices, Act. 15.
assembling in council to determine of faith, 1. Tim. 4.
imposing of hands, and 1. Cor. 5.
putting the wicked out of the Church, seemed not to challenge all to
themselves, but to associate others with them, as if the right thereof
appertained so well to the Church and Presbytery, as to the Apostles; which
particular actions cause many men to think, that alone the Apostles could not
execute these things, but jointly with others. It shall therefore not be amiss
to consider the places.

In the contention amongst the disciples for superiority; we must observe the
occasion of their strife; and the affection of the striuers. The occasion was
ministered by James and John the sons of Zebedee, who by their mother
importuned Christ, that in his kingdom her sons might be the chiefest men
about him, and sit, the one at his Mat. 10.
right hand, the other at his left. These two dreamed, as the rest of the
Jews, and also the other Apostles did (whiles they were weak, until they
were endued with the power of the holy Ghost from heaven) that the Messiah
should Act. 1.
restore the (temporal) kingdom to Israel; and sit as an earthly prince in
great glory on the throne of David his father, and rule all nations with a rod
of iron; receiving of them subtection, service, and tribute as other Princes
used; and whatsoever the Prophets foretold of the wonderful plenty,
tranquillity and excellency of the kingdom of Christ, these two Mat. 16.
not sauouring (as yet) the things that were Gods, nor Luc. 18.
understanding any thing of the spiritual kingdom of Christ; applied to fit
their earthly desires; and hoped for great promotions by serving their master,
and looked to bear rule and to be chief men about him, when he came to his
glory. The other ten being deceived with the same error, and carried with the
like hope, though not expressed in so ambitious manner, Mat. 10.
disdained the two brethren, and the nearer their master drew toward his
death, y^ sharper grew the strife amongst them, who should be greatest and
chiefest about him, when he came to his kingdom; which they supposed should be
earthly.

This vain expectation and contention of his disciples the Lord utterly
suppresseth at his last supper, (for there the Luc. 22.
strife revived,) by assuring them, that his kingdom was no worldly kingdom;
and therefore they might not look to be great Commanders and Rulers over
others; for so his words import, Mat. 20.
Princes of the Gentiles bear rule (over them) and great States exercise
authority on them; with you it shall not be so. that is, you shall not have
any such rule or dominion, as they have. He does not say, you shall have no
prerogative nor pre-eminence above others; but you shall have no such, or it
shall not be so with you, as it is with them. By this all civil jurisdiction,
and power of the sword to command, compel, and punish by loss of life,
li^^^e, or liberty, is secluded from the ministers function, and reserved to
the Magistrates; but Christ never meant by those words to bar all degrees and
diversities of gifts and administrations in his Church; he rather expresses
the coutrarie even in the same place. Luc. 22.
Ye are they (says he to his Apostles) which have continued with me in my
tentations; and I (for recompense) appoint you a kingdom, as my father has
appointed to me; that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and
sit upon thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

And not depriving them of that honor which he had, or would bestow on them to
be chief in his kingdom; but instructing them how to use it without offending
God, or grieuing their brethren, he adds; Luc. 22.
He that is greatest amongst you, let him be as the least; and he that is
chiefest, as he that serves. In which words the Lord notes amanifest
distinction amongst his; of some greater, some less, some chiefer, some lower;
and charge his Apostles to use that greatness and authority which they had,
in such sort; that thereby they should serve even the meanest of their brethren
to do them good, and 1. Cor. 9.
become all things to all men that they might win some. This he caught them
that very time, not in words only, but by deeds also, for having washed their
feet, and wiped them drte, he says unto them: John 13.
Understand you what I have done to you? you call me Master and Lord; and you
say well, for I am so. Then if I your Lord and Master have washed your feet,
you ought to wash one an others feet. I have given you an example, that as I
have done to you, you should also do the liked They should be so far from
striving who should be greatest, that even the greatest and chiefest should
strive to prevent the lowest and meanest with honor and service after the
example of their Master.

These texts then con^^^^e two special doctrines unto us. The (...); that
Apostles and Preachers may not challenge by virtue of their office, any
compulsiue dominion or violent jurisdiction over their brethren, but leave that
to Princes. The next, the greater our calling is in Christ's Church, the
readier we should te to make our selves even with those of the lowest degree,
to gain them thereby: but that Christ intended in those places to give all
sorts of Minister and helpers in his Church equal power and authority with
his Apostles, I am not persuaded, and that for these causes. What Christ had
already given, or after meant to give to his Apostles he would never cross
with any speech of his. The son of God cannot repent his fact, or alter his
mind; but the same I. uc. 22.
kingdom that was appointed to him, he appointed to them, and as his Ioh. 20.
father sent him, so sent he them into all the world with a larger warrant from
his mouth, and greater power and wisdom of his holy spirit to teach all
nations what he commanded them, and to open all the counsel of God unto them,
then was given to other teachers and helpers in the Church. He therefore never
recalled nor rebated any part of their Apostolic preh^^nnence above others;
but only taught them to use it to Gods glory, and the edifying of his Church.

Again, what Christ had prohibited, no Apostle guided by his spirit would
ever have used or challenged; but Paul in his writings has chalengeth and uses
an Apostolical power and pre-eminence above other Pastors and Teachers in the
Church, as is already declared; It was therefore never intended by our Savior
to make all others equal with his Apostles in the direction and regiment of
his Church. Lastly, if those places did conclude any thing for an equality;
that must be referred to the Apostles amongst themselves, to whom Christ gave
equal power and honor as Cyprian notes of them. Cypr. de vnitate ecclesiae.
The Apostles were endued with like fellowship of honor and power. And Jerome,
Li. 1. aduers. Iouintanum.
All (the Apostles) received the keys of the kingdom of heaven and the
strength of the Church is equally grounded on them.

But Paul speaking of himself, says; 2. Cor. 1.
not that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: and
Peter admonishes all Pastors to 1. Peter 5.
feed the flock of God, not as if they were lords over (Christ's)
inheritance, but as examples to the flock. Origin. in Esaiam, hom. 6.
Qui vocatur ad Episcopatum, faieth Origene, non ad Principatum vocatur, sedad
seruitutem totius Ecclesiae. He that is called to be a Bishop, is called not
to the sovereignty, but to the service of the whole Church. Hiero. ad
Nepotianum devita Clericorum.
Episcopi sacerdotes se esse nouerinst, non Dominos, says Jerome. Let the
Bishops understand they are Priests, not Lords (or Masters.) And Bernard.
Bernard. de considerat. li. 20.
Forma Apostolica haec est: Dominatio interdioitur, indicitur ministratio; The
pattern for the Apostles themselves is this; dominion is interdicted, a
ministration is enit^ned.]

These and such like speeches in the Scriptures and fathers, do neither prove
all ministers to have equal power and honor with the Apostles; nor impugn
the regiment which the Pastors have over their flocks; but as we (...) before
by the words of our Savior, they distinguish between pastoral and princely
regiment, and direct both Apostles and Pastors how they shall govern. The
thing so much prohibited by Christ and his Apostles; whose words the ancient
fathers do follow, is that Preachers and Pastors should (...) behave or
think themselves to be lords and masters over their brethren. What word is
opposed to (...) in the Scriptures, and wherein consists the relation betwixt
them, if we call to mind; we shall not be deceived in the right sense of these
words. Christ says, Mat. 10.
(...). The servant is not above his lord (or Master): and Mat. 6. Luc. 16.
(...), no servant can serve two masters. The power of lords and masters over
their servants, is likewise expressed by our Savior. Luc. 12.
The servant that knows his masters will, and does not according to his
will, shall be beaten with many stripes. And again, Luc. 7.
I say to my servant, do this, and he does it. Ephesians. 6. Col. 3
Ye servants, faieth Paul; obey the masters of your flesh in all things for
Romans 6.
know ye not that his servant you are, whom you obey? whereby, as by
infinite other places it is evident, that opposite to lord and master, are
neither children nor brethren, but servants; and he is a servant, that is under
the yoke, and bound to obey his masters will, even as he is a lord or master,
that may command his servant to execute his will, or thereto compel him with
stripes: for that is the right of a lord and master, to command and punish his
servant that disobeieth.

What marvel then, if Christ forbade his Apostles to be lords and masters
over their brethren that is, to command them and compel them a^ their
vassals; since the believers are no servaunts but brethren; and the Pastors no
lords over Gods inheritance, but fathers unto the faithful: Whereby the
honor (...) (...) the (...) of Christ's flock is not diminished, but
augmented; and the people not licenced the sooner to (...) the^ but thereby
required the rather to regard them for (...) honor due to master or father and
who loves most: a servant or a son: Hi^^^^y. ad ^^potia^^^.
Amare filiorum, timere seruorum est. A son does love, a servant does
fear. which God expresses by his Prophet, when he ^aith; Malach. 1.
If I be a father, where is mine honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear?
Wherefore to increase the love of his sheep toward their shepeheards, Christ
would not have his Apostles to be feared as masters, but to be honored as
fathers; and consequently Pastors, not to force, but to feed; not to chase,
but to lead the flock committed to their charge; neither toughly to entreat
them as servants, but gently to persuade them as coheires of the same kingdom.
If at any time they require and command, they do it in Gods name, as
messengers sent to declare his will; who only and rightly may command in such
cases, and as fellow servants set over their masters household to divide them
meat in due season, and to put the rest in mind of their masters pleasure.
For which cause their office is rather a service, then a sovereignty in the
Church of Christ, as Origene notes, and as Jerome says. Si quis 3 Hiero.
Oceano.
Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat; opus, non dignitatem; laborem,
non delitias; opus per quod humilitate decrescat, non intume scat fastigio. If
any man desire the office of a bishop, he desires a good work; (if he desire)
the work, not the dignity; the pains, not the case; the labor whereby he
should wax low with humility, not swell with arrogancy. August. de ciuitate
De^, li. 19. ca. 19.
Nomen est operis, non honoris, vt intelligat se non esse Episcopum, qui
praeesse dilexerit, non prodesse. The office of a bishop (says Austen) is a
name of labor, not of honor; to let him understand, that he is no bishop
which loves the preferring of himself, not the profiting of others. So
Bernard. Bernard. de considerat. li. 2.
Specula est, sonans tibi Episcopi nomine non dominium, sed officium. It is a
watch, sounding unto thee in the name of a bishop, not an imperie, but a
ministry.

If any man think I debase the office of a Bishop more then needs, in that I
say he must rather serve then rule in the Church of Christ, let him remember
the son of God, though he were heir and lord of all, Mar. 10.
came to serve and not to be served; to whose John 13.
example, all his disciples must conform themselves, by his express
commandment: and the elect Angels 2. Pet. 2.
though greater in power and excellency then we, yet are they al Hebr. 1.
ministering spirits for ou^ sakes that shall be heirs of salvation; yea Kings
and Princes are not approved of God, if their Deuteronomy. 17.
hearts be lifted up above their brethren, but rather in all societies of the
righteous and faithful, as Austen observes, August de ciuitate Dei lib. 19.
ca. 14.
Qui imperant, seruiunt ijs quibus videntur imperare. Non enim dominandi
cupiditate imperant, sed officio consulendi, nec principandi superbia, sed
prouidendi misericordia: They that rule, serve those whom they seem to rule.
for they rule not with a desire to master them, but with a purpose to advise
the^; neither with pride to be chief over them, but with merciful care to
provide for them. It is no shame then for a Christian Bishop to say with the
Apostle; 2. Corinthians. 4.
We preach not our selves, but Jesus Christ (to be) the Lord; and our selves
(to be) your servants for Jesus sake. August. contrae Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 11.
We are not Bishops for our selves, says Augustine, but for their sakes, to
whom we minister the word and Sacraments of the Lord. If Chrysostom. homil. ^oan
1. ad Timot.
therefore any man desire the office of a Bishop says Chrysostom, non
principatus ac dominationis fastu, verum cura regiminis and charitatis affectu,
non improbo; bonum quippe opus desiderat; not for pride to be chief and bear
rule; but for care to govern and charitable desire to do good, I mislike it
not; he desires a good work.

Our Savior, you will say, forbids his disciples, not only the power, but
the very name of Lord, in saying; Luc. 22.
They that bear rule, are called gracious Lords, but you shall not be so. I
hear the Translator, but I find no such Text. (...) which word S. Luke uses,
is a benefactor, or a bountiful man; it sounds nothing near neither Grace,
nor Lord. The simple may so be deceived, the learned cannot so be deluded; but
they must find it is a gloze besides the text. If so small a title be denied
them, it is clear, you think, that higher styles (as Gracious Lords) can not
be allowed them. That is an illation out of the words, no translation of the
words. Besides, it is more clear that the name of matter is forbidden them;
Christ says in precise words, Math. 23.
Nolite vocari Rabbi, Be not called Master; and yet I ween the meanest
Presbyter will look sowerly, if he be not vouchsafed that name. If we were
disposed to quarrel, as some are, we could say, no man may be called father;
for Christ says; Mat. 23.
Call no man father on earth; there is but one, even your father which is in
heaven; no creature, man nor Angel may be called lord; 1. Cor. 8.
Nobis vn^s est Dominus Jesus Christus; To us there is but one Lord Jesus
Christ. The truth is, if we attend either the right or force of the creator,
or the worthier p^rte of the creature, which is the soul; no man on earth can
justly be called, Master, Father, or Lord; for none does effectually fashion,
teach, and govern man, specially the soul of man, save only God who works
all in all: but if we respect the proportion and resemblance derived from God,
and approved by God in his word; then those that beget, or govern our bodies
as Gods instruments and substitutes on earth, may be called Masters, Lords and
Fathers; yea for submission or reverence, strangers unknown, and known
superiors, either spiritual or temporal, may be called by those names; which
as well the custom of the Scriptures, as the consent of all Nations will
confirm unto us.

The French have no higher word for Lord, then Seigneur, which they attribute
to Christ and God himself, as Le Seigneur Jesus, The Lord Jesus, Le Seigneur
Dieu, The Lord God; and yet they call every one by that name, which is of any
credit or reputation with them. With us every mean man is Lord of his own,
and Tenants have no name for the owner of the land or house, which they
inhabit, but their Lord; yea every poor woman that has either maid or
apprentise is called Dame; and yet Dame is as much as Domina, and used to
Ladies of greatest account, as Dame Isabel, and Madame. In Latin Dominus
sounds more then Master, and yet the boys in the Grammar school do know how
common the style of Dominus is, and usually given to every man, that has any
taste of learning, show of calling, or stay of living, (...) is the chiefest
word the Grecians have for Lord, either on earth or in heaven; and yet S. Peter
wills every christian woman, after Sarahs example, to call her husband,
whatsoever he be, 1. Pet. 3.
(...). Marie Magdalene supposing she had spoken to the keeper of the garden,
where Christ was buried, said, (...), (which is, Lord) John 20.
if thou have taken him hence, tell me where thou have laid him. The Greeks
that were desirous to see Christ, came to Philip the Apostle and said, John 12.
(...), (Lord) we would see Jesus. The Hebrewe word Adoni (my Lord,) which
otherwise the Jews did attribute to Kings and Princes, and even to God
himself, was for honor and reverence yielded to any superior or stranger. When
Loath prayed the two strangers, (whom he then did not think to be Angels) to
lodge with him that night, he said, Genes. 19.
See my Lords, I pray you turn into your servants house. Rebecca, when
Abraham's servant, not known to her, prayed he might drink a little water of
her pitcher, answered; Genes. 24.
Drink my Lord.

The places of John, as also that of Peter, you suppose may be better
translated, Sir, which is more familiar with us then Lord. The word in Greek
is (...), the self same, that the Scriptures every where give to God himself,
when they call him Lord; and Sarahs words alleged by Peter cannot be
translated Sir. For thus they stand in Moses: Gens. 18.
After I am old, and my Lord also, shall I lust? where to say, and my Sir
also, were some what strange to Englisheares. Besides, the Hebrew word is
Adoni, the very same that servants and subjects in the Scriptures always give
to their Lords and Princes. Lastly, the self same Translatours retain the
name of Lord in Moses, howsoever afterward they changed it in Peter. And
touching the signification of Sir, by which they interpret the Greek word
(...), though the honor thereof be some what decayed by reason it is now grown
common; yet anciently it was, and originally it is as much as Lord. Sir, is
the only style we have at this present to distinguish a knight from lower
degrees; yea the French to this day call their king Sir; and in former ages it
was no disgrace with us to say Sir King. and no marvel. For if it come from
the French Sire, which is all one in sound with Cyre, C. being changed into S;
then it is a contractio^ of the Greek word for Lord, as Cyre for Cyrie. If we
fetch it from Seigneur by shortning it into Sieur, as in Monsieur for
Monseigneur, My Lord; yet so is it equivalent with the French word for Lord.
If, with the Germans and Italians, we derive it from (...) as first Her, then
Sere; Heroes is he that for his valor and virtue comes nearest to divine
perfection and honor. But with titles and terms the Church of Christ should
not be troubled; only this I say, that (if Sir be not as much as Lord) in all
tongues save ours, the name of Lord is as common as Sin with us; and given to
far meaner men then Bishops both of the Clergy and Lai^e; and for the
Hebrew tongue the Scriptures themselves do witness no less.

The Prophets of God, did both give and receive this title of honor without
blemish to their calling. 3. Reg. 18.
Are not thou my Lord Elias? said Obediah the Governor of Achabs house when
he fell on his face before the Prophet, and said further 4 Reg. 2.
I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth; has not my Lord heard, how I hid
an hundred prophets in a cave, when Iesabel would have stain them? and fed
them with bread and water? The children of the Prophets both at Bethel and
Jericho, said to Eliseus, when Elias should be taken from him: 4. Reg 2.
Know thou not, that God will take thy Lord from thine head this day? And
when Elias was taken up by a whirle wind, the children of the prophets met
him, and fell to the ground before him, and said, 4 Reg. 2.
Behold, there are with thy servants fifty strong men, Let them we pray thee
go, and seek thy Lord. The inhabitants of Jericho misliking the barennes of
the soil, said likewise to Eliseus; 4. Reg. 2.
The situation of the City is good, as thou, my Lord, feast; but the water is
naught, and the ground barren. 4. Reg. 4.
O my Lord delude not thine handmaid, said the godly Shunnamite, when Eliseus
first told her she should have a son. And when the child was dead, she fell
at his feet and said, Ibidem.
Did I desire a son of my Lord? The children of the Prophets intending to
make them a larger place to dwell in, said to Eliseus, 4. Reg. 6.
Vouchsafe to go with thy servants. And as one of them was felling a tree by
the rivers side, the head of his are fell into Jorden: and he cried to Eliseus,
Ibidem.
Alas my Lord, it was borrowed. Hazael the great Commander of Syria under
Benhadad, when Eliseus wept, foreseeing the evil that he should do to the
children of Israel, said, 4. Reg 8.
Why weepeth my Lord? And when Elizeus lay sick on his death bed, Ioash the
king of Israel said unto him; 4. Reg. 13.
O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and horsemen (or safeguard) of
the same.

Why then does our Savior debar his Apostles from all such titles, by
saying, You shall not be so?] He does not forbid his Apostles to admit that
honor which God has commanded and allowed to their calling; the Scriptures
should so be contrary to themselves; Ecclesiast 7
Fear God (says the Wiseman) and honor his Priests. 1. Timoth. 5.
They that govern well, are worthy of double honor, says Paul; and again
Philip. 2.
(...) have such in (great estimation or) honor. Yea the Lord himself says.
Mark. 6.
A Prophet is not without honor but in his own Country. If honor by Gods
law must be yielded unto Prophets and Pastors; honor by Gods law may be
received by them: but to admit titles of honor about and against their
calling, or to expect and affect that honor which is due unto them; this is
it, that Christ forbids. John. 5.
How can you believe (says he to the Pharisees) when ye receive honor one of
another (he means greedely or gladly) and seek not the honor which is of
God alone, Luc. 20.
Beware of the Scribes (says he to his disciples) which desire to go in long
robes, and love salutations in the markets, and the chiefest seats in the
Synagogues, and the highest rooms at feasts. The desire and love of these
things is ambition and vanity, as Christ notes in the Pharisees: the
accepting them when they are by others forced on us, or in respect of our place
appertain unto us, so as we neither seek after them, long for them, or swell
with them; is not against the rule of christian modesty and humility.

Though Pastors by Gods Law must be honored with reverence and maintenance,
yet titles and appellations of honor, you think, are not incident to their
calling.] Whom we must honor in heart and deed, why not in words? Can the
lips neglect whom the heart regards? Is not the mouth made to express as
well the reverence as Luc. 6.
abundance of the heart? Would God the contempt of the truth did not so fast
follow the contempt of the persons, as we find by too much experience of our
times. The Clergy should, you say, be honored for their virtues. and what for
their profession and function? Is learning, wisdom and religion become so
servile in a Christian commonwealth, that they deserve not the name of honor?
Paul commended the Galathians for receiving him with such submission and
reverence, as if he had been an Galat. 4.
Angel of God. The Lord himself in the Revelation speaking of the Bishops of
the seven Churches in Asia, calls them Revel.
the Stars and Angels of the seven Churches. In the Gospel he names his
Apostles, Matthew. 5.
The Salt of the earth, and Light of the world. The Scripture, which cannot be
broken, John 10.
calls them Gods, to whom the word of God came. Romans 10.
How beautiful are the feet of them, says Paul, which bring glad tidings of
peace? Our Galat. 4.
eyes, if it were possible, are not too dear for them. We Philem. v. 19
owe them not only honor, but even our selves. And to speak uprightly, if
every man on earth be measured by the degree of his master, and dignity of his
service; I see no cause, why 2. Cor. 5.
Christ's Ambassadors, and the 1. Cor. 4.
Stewards and Mat. 24.
Rulers of Gods household, should be contemptible, in the eyes of their fellow
servants, that should Heb. 13.
obey them, and be subject to them, as unto their spiritual Leaders, Teachers
and Fathers.

Is this assertion strange or new in the Church of Christ: Hiero. ad Nepotianum.
Esto subiectus Pontifici tuo, and quasi Parentem animae suspice. Be subject
says Jerome, to thy Bishop, and reverence him as the father of thy soul.
Chrysostom. de sacerdot. lib. 3.
For good cause ought we, says Chrysostom, not only to stand in more awe of
Priests, then of Kings and Princes; but also to give them more honor, then our
natural Parents. The king says Austen, bears the Aug. question. ex veteri
Testament. 35.
Image of God, even as the Bishop does of Christ. As long then as he holds
that office, he is to be honored, if not for himself, yet for (his) order.
And Ambrose, Ambros. de dignitate sacerdot. ca. 2.
Honor and sublimitas Episcopalis nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari. The
honor and height of a Bishops (function) can be matched by no comparison: (the
sheep) that are committed to Priests (or Pastors) are truly said to be under
their Leaders; (the Gospel determining that) the Scholar is not above his
Master. And again, Ibidem ca. 3.
Haec cuncta etc. vt ostenderemus nihil esse in hoc seculo excellentius
Sacerdotibus, nihil sublimius Episcopis reperiri: All this to show, that no
(condition) in this world can be found more excellent then a Priests, no
(calling) higher then a Bishop. Ibidem ca. 2.
If you compare it to the brightness of Kings or diadems of Princes, that is
more inferior to it, says Ambrose, then lead unto gold; yea, Chrysostom. de
sacerdot. lib. 3.
they have that power given them, says Chrysostom, which God would not give to
Angels, nor Archangels. Cypr. lib. 3. epistola 9.
Jesus Christ, says Cyprian, our King, Judge, and God even unto the day of his
death, yielded honor unto the Priests and Bishops (of the Jews) though they
retained neither the fear of God, nor knowledge of Christ; teaching (us)
lawfully and fully to honor true Priests by his behavior unto false Priests.

These Fathers in your judgment do not mean, that external and civil honor
should be yielded to the persons of Teachers and Bishops; but spiritual and
inward reverence to be due to their calling. Much less do they mean that
contempt and reproach should be requited them for their pains. If we stick at
titles, Christ himself calls them Stars, Angels and Gods; if we doubt of
their power or honor, they have more power then the Angels, as Chrysostom
says; and must have more honor then the Fathers of our flesh. If any like
not the conclusion, let him read Chrysostomes probation more at large in the
place before cited. As for the distinction of outward or inward honor due to
their persons or professions, if the men be good; it is superfluous, we must
honor both: if the men be badde, their vocation must be honored though
their vices be condenmed, and that honor as I said before must appear in
heart, word and deed. For if one of these fail, it is not honor, but
neglect and contempt, which God will revenge. 1. Sam. 8.
Non te reiecerunt sed me, They have not rejected thee but me, is an ancient
verdict of Gods own giving. Luc. 10.
He that despises you (in heart, word, or deed) despises me. Exodus 20.
Honourthy father, binds the whole man, not this, or that part of man, and
duty to Parents and superiors is violated even with words and looks. But
godly Teachers must look for reward and honor at Gods hands, and not from
men.] I know it well; the world shall use them, as it used their Master; yet
does not that excuse the neglecters and contemners of them; yea rather it is
an evident sign, he loves not God, that despises his Prophets, and
reprocheth Christ, that dishonors his Ministers.

God is my witness, I smoothe no man's pride, I seek no man's favor: I wade as
sincerely as my simple learning will suffer me: and by that as I find Christ
for bids his Disciples all affectation of honor, and desire of
superiority, and requires the greatest after his example to serve the lowest:
so I see no reason why it should grieve any godly mind to hear a Bishop
called by that name, with which Saint Peter wills every woman to houour her
husband. For to me it is strange, it should be a proud and Antichristian
Title in a Pastor, which may be given to every Artisant with duty and
humility. Howbeit what external appellation or honor, is meet or unmeet
for the Pastors and Fathers of Christ's Church, I leave it wholly to the
wisdom and consideration of the State, who are fit Judges therefore; and not
every curious head, or covetous heart, to order the Clergy at their
pleasures.

With truth and sobriety I may affirm this, that the first Christian Princes
and Emperors, to cause religion the more to flourish, did what they could to
make the people honor and reverence their Bishops; permitting them to hear
and determine all quarrels and strifes between man and man, for debts, goods,
or lands; and confirming the judgments of the Bishops even in such cases by
public Laws; and by their own example teaching all men to submit their heads
under the Bishops hands. Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Place you such a one in the Episcopal seat, (says Valentinian to the Synod
assembled for the choice of a Bishop of millan) to whom we our selves, the
Rulers of the Empire, may sincerely (or willingly) submit our heads; and whose
reproves, we may receive as an wholesome medicine. Ambros. de dignitate
sacerdot. ca. 2.
Thou may see, says Ambrose, the necks of Kings and Princes bowed down to
the Priests knees, and kissing the right hands (of Priests) think themselves
guarded with their prayers. Chrysostom. de verbis Esaiae vidi Dominum homil. 4.
To a King, says Chrysostom, are bodies committed; to a Priest, Souls: the
one has sensible armor; the other spiritual: he fights against the
Barbarians; I against Devils. This is the greater sovereignty; therefore the
King submits his head to the Priests hands. Constantine the great by his
Laws Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 9.
gave leave, that those which would decline the civil Magistrates, might
appeal to the judgment of their. Bishops, and commanded the sentence of the
Bishops to take place before the sentence of other Judges, as if it had been
pronounced by the Emperor himself, and to be put in execution by the
Presidents and their officers. And lest we should think this Law reached
only to spiritual things, Saint Augustine shows in his time with what
matters they were troubled. August. epistola 147.
Men, says he, desiring to finish their secular causes by our judgment, call
us holy and the servants of God, about gold and silver, lands and chattels;
quotidie submisso capite salutamur, we are every day saluted with low bowing
the head: to determine the strifes of men.

I allege not these things to have them revived: too much honor inflameth
ambition; as too little engenders contempt: I only observe in the best ages
how careful good Princes were in their own persons to honor the Bishops of
Christ's Church, and by their Laws to make them acceptable to the people;
where as in our days some wayward spirits think it a great point of piety
by despising and reproching their state and calling, as unchristian and
ungodly, to make them contemptible and odious to the meanest of the multitude.
A better way to reform the faults of Bishops is that admonition, which Ambrose
gave them when he said, Ambros. de diznitate sacerdot. lib ca 3.
Ne sit honor sublimis and vita deformis. Ne sit Deifica professio, and
illicita actio. Ne sit gradus excelsus, and deformis excessus. Nam quanto prae
caeteris gradus Episcopalis altior est, tanto si per negligentiam dilabatur,
ruina grauior est. Magna sublimitas, magnam debet habere cautelam; honor
grandis, grandiori debet solicitudine circumuallari. Let not the honor (of
Bishops) be lofty, and their life loathsome; their profession divine, and
their action unlawful; their state high, and their excess shameful. For the
higher a Bishops degree is above the rest, the greeuouser is his fall, if he
slide by negligence. Great dignity ought to have great wariness. Much honor
should be kept with much carfulness. To whom more is committed, of him more
shall be required. He impeacheth not the honor of their calling, but assures
them their judgment shall be increased, and punishment aggrauated, if their
care and diligence do not answer that honor and reverence, which they have in
the Church of God above their brethren. Then as they that Chrysostom. in Act.
homil. 3.
affect this dignity because they would be honored before men, are condemned
before God; so this Idem hom^l. 2. in epistola 2. ad ad Timoth.
is the cause of all evil, says Chrysostom, that the authority of
(ecclesiastical) Rulers is decayed, and no reverence, no honor, no fear is
yielded to them. He that is religiously affected to the Priest, will with
greater piety reverence God; and he that despises the Priest, comes by
degrees to this at last, that he waxes contumelious against God him self.

The sum of all is; first, that our Savior interdicted his Apostles, and
consequently the Pastors of his Church by virtue of their Ministry to claim
any civil dominion to command and compel; which is the power that Princes
and Lords use over their subjects and servants. Next, they must neither desire
nor delight any titles of honor and praise from men, but expect the coming of
the Arch-pastour, when every one shall have praise from God. Thirdly, how
great soever they be, they must serve the lowest of their brethren to do them
good, and watch over them for the saving of their souls; yet this nothing
hinders the rule and government that pastors have over their flocks by the
word of God, neither does it bar them or deprive them of that honor and
obedience which in heart, word and deed is due to the 1. Corinthians. 4.
Fathers of our faith, the Ambassadors of Christ, and Stewards of Gods
household.

CHAP. VII. Who joined with the Apostles in election of Presbyters and
imposition of hands.
IN choosing of Elders and Deacons, and laying hands on them, many think the
whole Church, or at least the Presbytery joined with the Apostles; and to that
end sundry Precedents are alleged; as namely the choice of Matthias, of the
seven Deacons, of the Elders of Lystra, Iconium and other Churches in the 14.
of the Acts, and of Timothy; all which seem to prove, the Apostles did
nothing of themselves, but with the consent and concurrence of others. To come
by thetrueth what the Scriptures resolve in these two points, the best way will
be to examine the places in order, as they lie.

In the choice of Matthias it is not expressed that the Church intermedled.
Peter acquainted all the Disciples, that one must supply y^ room of Judas;
but who named those two that were appointed, whether the Apostles, or all the
Disciples, it is not decided in the Text; the force and coherence of the words
convince neither. For thus they stand: Act. 1.
And they appointed two; and they prayed, saying, and they cast lottes. If
prayers and lottes were performed by the Apostles, as by the principal
directors of that action, and thereto led by the instinct of Gods spirit;
consequently it was their deed to present them both to God, that he might
them, which of the^ he had chosen. Besides, an Apostle might not be chosen by
men, much less by the people; and therefore no question, the spirit of God
made this election, and the Disciples afterward acknowledged it for Gods doing,
and accounted Matthias with the eleven.

But Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. homil. 3. in Act. Ibid.
Non ipse ^os statuit, sed omnes (Peter) himself did not appoint those (two)
but all (did it.) Yea he says further, Considera quam Petrus agit omnia ex
communi Discipulorum sententia, nihil authoritate sua, nihil cum imperio. Mark
how Peter does al things by the common consent of the Disciples, nothing by his
own authority, nothing by commandment. He says so in deed, but the Text
says not so; only the verb is the plural number, which may be referred to the
Apostles as well as to the rest of the Disciples: yet the reason why Peter did it
not, was not for that it was not lawful for him without the multitude to do
it, but as Chrysostom notes, lest he should seem to gratify the one, and
not the other, as also that, as yet, he had not received the holy Ghost.
Ibidem.
An non licebat ipsi eligere? Licebat, and quidem maxim: verum id non facit,
ne cui videretur gratificari. Quanquam alioqui nondum erat particeps spiritus.
Might not Peter have chosen him? He might most lawfully. but he did it not,
lest he should seem to gratify either part. Aibeit as yet he was not
partaker of the holy Ghost. And for that cause as Chrysostom thinks they
cast lottes. Ibidem.
Quontam non-erat spiritus, sortibus rem peragunt; Because the holy ghost was
not yet powered on them, therefore they determine the matter by lottes.

The choice of the seven Deacons was referred to the multitude, the
approbation of them reserved to the twelve, and that not without cause. For by
this choice, the Deacons (as they say) received not charge of the word and
sacraments, but a care to see the Saints provided for, and the collections and
contributions of the faithful sincerely and uprightly employed, according to
the necessities of the persons. Now that the people should very well like, and
fully trust such as should be Stewards of their goods, and dispensers of
their substance, had evident reason; and the Apostles in so doing stayed the
murmuring of the Disciples, and freed themselves from al suspicion of
neglecting their widows, (which was the cause of their dislike) by praying
them to choose out of themselves such as they best trusted, to care for their
tables and distribute their store. By the circumstance of the Text it seems
that where the Act. 2.
believers lived in one place and had al things in common, and Act. 4.
selling their lands, possessions and goods, they brought the price thereof and
laid it down at the Apostles feet to be distributed to every man according
as he had need; the Apostles had put some in trust to bestow the Churches
treasure, I mean the Disciples goods, who of like being Jews, regarded the
widows that were Jews, more then the Grecians widows. And hence arose the
grudging of the Grecians, that their widows were neglected. The Apostles then
excused themselves, for that they might not leave the preaching of the word,
and attend for tables, to see their widows indifferently used, and willed the
Act. 6.
whole multitude to look out from amongst themselves such as were replenished
with the holy ghost and with wisdom and best reported of, (for fidelity and
industry) to take the oversight of that business. This is all that can be
pressed out of this story. For answer hereof, first by your own doctrine,
the parties there chosen received not power to preach and baptize; but to
dispense the goods of the Church for the daily provision of the Saints, who
then lived together, and yielded all their ability to be used in common, at
the discretion of these parties appointed by themselves. And though Philip did
preach and baptize at Samaria, and did the like to the Eunuch of Ethiopia; yet
you avouch he did that, not as a Deacon, but as an Evangelist; both which
titles indeed Saint Luke gives him in the one and twentieth Chapter of the
Acts. Next, if it be true that Epiphanius writes of them, these seven were
Epiphan. contra ^ares. lib. 1. tom. 1. in fine.
all of the number of those seventy Disciples, which Christ himself called
while she lived on earth and sent to preach, as well as Matthias and Barnabas,
that were named to succeed in the room of Judas the traitor, and then by this
election they had no ordinary function in the Church, but an extraordinary
charge to provide for the widows; since none of the 70. Disciples could
begin again at the lowest degree and become Deacons. Chrysostom reasoning
what office they had by this imposition of hands, says, Chrysostom. homil. 14.
in Act.
(...). What dignity these (seven) had, and what manner of imposition of hands
they received, it shall not be amiss to learn. Was it the office of Deacons?
This (now) is not the Churches; but this charge (to look to widows) belongs
to Presbyters: and as yet there was no bishop, but the Apostles only.
Wherefore I think it was neither the name of Deacons nor Presbyters expressly
and plainly, which these seven received. If these seven were expressly neither
Deacons nor Presbyters, as Chrysostom thinks they were not and the Council
in Trullo Council. Constan. in Trullo sub Iustiniano ca. 16.
joins with him in the same opinion: then can their election be no proof,
that others joined with the Apostles in the choice of Presbyters or Bishops.

If with Ignat. ad Heronem.
Ignatius, Cypr. lib. 3. epistola. 9.
Cyprian, Iero. aduers. Luciferia^os.
Jerome, and others we take these seven for Deacons, such as served in the
Church, and attended on the Lords table when the mysteries of Christ were
dispensed; yet the Apostles made this no perpetual rule for all elections;
otherwise neither Paul, nor any other Apostle could have imposed hands but on
such as the people named and elected, which is evidently repugnant to the
Scriptures, as in place convenient shall appear. Again, this singular example
concludes no more for electing by voices, then the choice of Matthias does for
retaining of lots. For since two sorts of elections were used by the Apostles
presently the one upon the other; who can determine which of those twain was
prescribed to the Church as of necessity to be continued: Lastly, examples are
noprecepts; and the reasons that moved the Apostles to refer the choice of
those seven to the liking of the multitude, admit infinite varieties and
circumstances, which being altered, the effect must needs alter according to
the cause. And therefore no general rule can be drawn from a particular fact
without a strong reason to maintain the coherence; much less may you leap
from the choice of Deacons in the Apostles time, to conclude the like of the
election of Presbyters and Bishops which then did, and now do greatly differ
both in gifts and calling from the Deacons.

That the Ministers and Elders of Lystra and Iconium, and of the Churches
confining were ordained by Paul and Barnabas, can be no question: the Text does
clearly a^ouehit; only the signification of the Greek word (...) there used
is forced by some to prove that those Elders were chosen by the consent of
others, besides Paul and Barnabas; because (...), (say they) is to choose by
lifting up of hands, which was the use amongst the Grecians for the people to
do in their elections.

The advantage taken upon the word (...) is not so sound as they suppose. For
first, if that were the right Etymology of the word; yet as most words in
Greek and Hebrew, besides the external action and circumstance, which they
first importe, do signify the effects and consequents depending on that action
and circumstance; and are by translation generally and usually applied to other
things: so this word does signify to elect and appoint, though no hands be
held up; because electing and appointing was the effect and consequent of
lifting up the hands. To prove this, we need go no further then the tenth
chapter of this very Book; where Saint Luke without all contradiction uses
the word in such sort and sense, as I mention. Act. 10.
This Jesus of Nazareth God raised up the third day, and showed him openly not
to all the people, (...), but to us witnesses chosen (or appointed) beforehand
of God. It were more then absurd to imagine, that God did choose the Apostles
to be witnesses of his sons resurrection by lifting up of hands; God has
not hands to lift up; the Apostles neither were, nor could be chosen by the
peoples hands; wherefore (...), does signify simply to choose and appoint,
though it ^e not done with holding up of hands, nor by the people.

Again, were the word in the 14. of the Acts used in that signification which
they urge, as namely to consent or elect with holding up the hands; yet the
Text does manifestly restrain it to Paul and Barnabas; that they did elect and
appoint by stretching out their hands, such Elders as the Churches then needed.
For (...) is for a man to hold up, or stretch out his own hand, and not other
men's hands; and no example will ever be brought that (...) is to gather voices,
or take the consents of others; but for men to give voices themselves, and
signify their own consents by stretching forth their hands. And so howsoever
the word be pressed, it cannot prove, that others concurred with Paul and
Barnabas in that action.

But to speak some what more of the signification of the word (...), not as
the profane orators amongst the Grecians applied it, but as the Church stories
and ancient Councels in Greek ever used it; (...) is properly (...), that is,
to stretch or exte^d the hand, as welforth-right as upward; and for that cause
with Ecclesiastical writers it imports as much as (...), that is, to lay
hands an another man's head. For the hands must first be stretched forth, which
is (...), before they can be laid on, which is (...), and then (...) Act. 14.
is nothing else but imposing of hands; even as Paul did Act. 19. on the 12.
disciples, who^ he found at Ephesus.

If my affirmation for the use of the word be not trusted, let the places
following be considered. Eusebius reporting Cornelius words, how Nouatus gate
to be an Elder or Minister in the church by the immoderate favor of the Bishop
that made him, says, Eusebius. lib. ^. ca. 43.
(...). The Bishop, being prohibited by all the Clergy and many of the Laity;
desired he might be suffered to impose hands on him only: (...) in this place
cannot be to gather voices; for the whole Clergy, and a great number of the
Laity were against the making of Nouatus priest, as a thing repugnant to the
Canons; It does therefore signify imposition of hands; which the bishop gave
though the Clergy and people dissented.

The great Council of Nice, as Socrates writes, was content that the
Ministers and Priests made by Miletius the schismatike, Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 9.
(...), being admitted and ordained by a more sacred imposition of hands, (then
that they received of Miletius) should retain the honor of their place and
office. The holding up of the peoples hands to signify their consents, is no
way mystical or sacred; but the laying on of hands by the Bishop is a mystical
and sacred action derived from the Apostles, and ever since continued in the
Church of Christ. The same Author like wise affirms, that the Homousians or
true Christians in Constantinople after the death of Eudoxius the Arrian,
Socrat. lib. 4. ca. 14.
(...), named, or elected one Euagrius, and Eustathius, (once Bishop of Antioch
lying secretly in Constantinople) imposed hands on him. Eustathius did not the
second time elect Euagrius; he was chosen before by the people; but he gave him
imposition of hands, which there is expressed by (...); and Valens the
Emperor, when he heard it, commanded Idem lib. 4. ca. 15.
(...), the party that imposed hands, and the party that received imposition of
hands, to be banished each of the^ to a several place. The Electors were not
banished; for their y^ whole number; that named him, must have gone into exile;
but he y^ imposed hands and created E^^grius B. of Constantinople, he alone,
and Euagrius, were thrown into banishment. (...) therefore i^ for a Bishop to
confirm and consummate the nomination and election before made with laying his
hands on the party elected. And that the same writer most manifestly
expresses in the choice both of Ambrose and Chrysostom.

When Auxentius the Arrian, Bishop of Millaine, was dead; the people were
ready to go together by the ears about the choice of a new Bishop. To
repress which sedition, Ambrose then Lieutenant of the Province came into the
Church amongst the people; and as with many good persuasions he endeavored to
stay the rage of the people, Socrat. libr. 4. ca. 30.
suddenly there was a general consent of them all; and they cried out that he
was worthy of the place; (...), and they all desired he might be created,
or receive imposition of hands. The Emperor, when he heard this, wondering
at the sudaine consent and agreement of the people, and perceiving it to be
Gods doing, willed the Bishops Ibidem.
(...), to yield their service unto God (as it were) bidding (them) to impose
hands. The people, after they had with one consent chosen Ambrose, desired to
have him, not elected again, (that was already finished,) but confirmed with
imposition of hands; which is there signified by (...): and the Emperor being
advertised, that the people had elected him, required the Bishops Ibidem.
to yield their service unto God; which is there expressed by (...) is
therefore a stretching forth of the hands belonging to the Bishops after
the peoples choice is made, which can be nothing else by the Canons of the
Primitive Church, but imposition of hands; whereby the party chosen is allowed
and authorized to execute his function.

The like will appear in the choice of Chrysostom. After the death of
Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, Chrysostom one of the Priests or
Ministers of Antioch was sent for by Arcadius the Emperor, to succeed in the
room of Nectarius. This the Emperor did, Socrat. lib. 6. ca. 12.
(...): by the (general consent or) common decree of all joining together, as
well of the Clergy as Laity. And when by the Emperors commandment many other
Bishops were come to Constantinople, and amongst them Theophilus Archb of
Alexandria, to consecrate y^ bishop newly chosen; Theophilus, for the desire he
had to promote a priest of his own to the place, refused to give Chrysostom.
imposition of hands. Upon which refusal, Theophilus was detected to the
bishops then assembled, of many crimes and sundry complaints were offered
against him. And Eutropius high chamberlain to the Emperor, taking the bills
of complaint, showed them to Theophilus, and bad him make his choice, (...),
either to impose hands on Chrysostom; or to answer the things objected
against him. Theophilus fearing the accusations, (...), gave Chrysostom
imposition of hands. The election was fully made by the general consent of the
Prince, people, and Clergy, and a Synod of bishops called to consecrate or
lay hands on him that was chosen. The Archbishop therefore of Alexandria meddled
not with the choice of Chrysostom, which was before concluded; but withheld
imposition of hands; which by the prerogative of his place and dignity of his
sea appertained to him, and so (...), most manifestly by the ecclesiastical
writers is used for imposition of hands; which no way belonged to the people,
but was always reserved to the Apostles and their successors.

And so much Chrysostom himself will witness unto us; who entreating of the
choice of the seven Deacons made in the 6. of the Acts, upon the words, (...),
and (the Apostles) praying, laid hands on them, writes thus; Chrysostom. hom.
14. in Acta Apost.
(...). Hands were laid on them with prayer. This is (that which the Grecians
call) (...), the hand of man is laid on; but God works all, and his hand it
is, that touches the head of him that receives imposition of hands, if they
be laid on as they ought. Where, (...), they laid hands on them, stands
for the Active to (...), they received imposition of hands, and equivalent with
both is (...), which is expounded by these two circumstances, (...), the hand
of man is laid on; and (...), the hand (of God) touches the head of him that
is ordered. Again, debating the words of S. Paul to Timothy, Neglect not the
gift, which was given thee by prophecy, (...), with the imposition of hands
of the Presbytery; he says, (Paul) Idem hom. 13. in 1. ad Timoth. ca. 4.
speaks nothere of Elders but of bishops, (...) (...). For Elders laid not
hands on a Bishop, which Timothy was. Where (...) is used by Chrysostom to
import and express these words of S. Paul, (...), impositio^ of hands.

The very same exposition of the word (...) is often used in the
ecclesiastical history. When Moses was to be made bishop of the Saracens,
before the Roman Emperor could have peace with them; and was brought to
Lucius an Arrian and bloody persecuter, then bishop of Alexandria, to be
consecrated by him; Socrat. li. 4. ca. 36.
(...): he refused imposition of hands with these words to Lucius. I think my
self unworthy for the place of a bishop; but if the state of the common
wealth so require; (...) Lucius shall lay no hands on me, for his right hand
is full of blood; and so his friends led him to the mountains, there to
receive, (...), imposition of hands of those that were banished (for the
truth.) Likewise when Sabbatius the Jew, that was made priest by Marcianus a
bishop of the Nouatians, began to trouble the Church with observing and urging
the Passover after the Jewish manner, Marcianus Socrat. li. 5. ca. 21.
misliking his own error, (...), for imposing hands on him, said; It had
been better for him, (...), to have laid his hands on thorns, then on such
priests. And so Basil expressing the words of S. Paul to Timothy, Lay hands
hastily on no man, says; Basil. definit. 70.
(...). We must not be easy (or over ready) to impose hands.

There can then be no question, but as amongst the profane Grecians (...) did
signify to lift up the hand in token of liking, because that was their manner
in yielding their consents: so amongst all ecclesiastical writers, (...) is to
lay hands on an other man's head, which the Church of Christ used in calling
and approouing her bishops and Presbyters, to whom she committed the cure of
souls.

And in this sense shall we find the word every where occurrent in the Greek
Canons of the ancient Councils; as by five hundred examples more might be
showed, if these were not enough which I have produced. Whose liking and
laisure serves him to make trial hereof, let him read the Councils and
Fathers here quoted, though not discussed for breuities sake, least in a matter
more then plain, I should be tedious, and spend both pains and time more
then sufficient. The Canons called the Apostles (which I allege not as theirs;
but as agreeing in many things with the ancient rules and orders of the
Primitive Church) the 1. 2. 29. 35. 68. The Council of Ancyra. ca. 10. 13. The
Council of Neocaesaria. ca. 9. 11. The great Council of Nice. ca. 4. 16. 19.
The Council of Antioch. ca. 9. 10. 18. 19. 22. The Council of Laodicea. ca.
5. The general Council of Constantinople. ca. 2. 4. The great Council of
Chalcedon. ca. 2. 6. 15. 24. The Council of Africa. ca. 13. 18. 50. 51. 56.
90. 95. Basili. epist. 74. 76. Nazianz. in epitaph. patris. Chrysostom. de
sacerdotio. li. 2. and 4. Epipha. haeres. 75. Gregorius in vita Nazianz. and so
the Greek historiographers. Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 20. Socrat. li. 1. ca. 15. li.
2. ca. 6. 12. 13. 24. 26. 35. 44. li. 3. ca. 9. li. 4. ca. 29. li. 5. ca. 5. 8.
15. li. 6. ca. 12. 14. 15. 17. li. 7. a. 12. 26. 28. 36. 37. Theodoret. li. 4.
ca. 7. 13. li. 5. ca. 23. Sozome. li. 3. ca. 3. 4. 6. li. 4. ca. 8. 12. 20. 22.
24. li. 5. ca. 12. 13. li. 6. ca. 8. 13. 23. 24. 38. li. 7. ca. 3. 8. 9. 10.
18. li. 8. ca. 2. Euagrius, li. 2. ca. 5. 8. 10. li. 3. ca. 7. All which
places, and infinite others prove the word (...) to be taken amongst ye
Greek Divines, as I have said, for imposition of hands, and to be an act
proper to the bishops, not common to the people; and therefore by no means to
import a collecting of the peoples voices, or gathering their consents,
although I deny not, but sometimes it signifies simply to choose, by whom
soever it be done, one or many.

S. Paul so uses the word, commending Luke unto the Corinthians; 2. Cor. 8.
We have sent the brother whose praise is in the Gospel, (...), not only so,
but also he is chosen of the Churches to be a companion with us in our
journey, (or to go with us) to carry this grace or contribution which is
ministered by us. In collecting and conueying the liberality of the Gentiles
unto the Saints at Jerusalem, S. Paul would not entermeddle alone, least any
should distrust him, or misreport him, as couetously detaining, or fraudulently
diuerting any part of that which was sent; but he took such to go with him,
and to he privy to his doings, as the Churches that were contributers liked
and allowed; those he calls Ibidem.
(...), ye messengers of the Churches, and they were chosen by the churches
themselves, not by the Apostle, because he would avoid all suspicion and blame
in this service, and Ibidem.
provide for the sincere report and opinion of his doings Ignat. ad
Philadelphios epist. 6. and ad Poly. car pum epist. 8.
even with men. I find the word likewise used once or Hier^. in 1. Timoth. 4.
twice in epistles that are attributed to Ignatius; where Council. Africa. ca.
136.
(...), is to choose some Bishop that should be sent as a Legate to Antioch in
Syria to procure and confirm the peace of that Church; and not to choose one
that should be Bishop of Antioch. For as yet Ignatius their Bishop was living,
who wrote that Epistle; and what had the Churches of Philadelphia and Smyrnato
do with the choosing of a new^ Bishop for the Church of Antioch? But as other
Churches used in any contention or unquietness of their neighbors to send,
some their Bishop, some an Elder or Deacon to appease the strife; and reduce
the Church to concord: so Ignatius prayed them in his absence, being now
Christ's prisoner, to send some sufficient Legate to heal the breach that was
made, and quench the flame that was kindled in his Church at Antioch.

For the signification and etimologie of the word (...) this may suffice: by
which it is evident, no proof can be made from the fact of Paul and Barnabas
in the foureteenth Chapter of the Acts, that the people or Presbytery
concurred with them in the election of Elders, or imposition of hands; yea
rather, since (...) with all Greek Councels, Fathers and Stories, is to,
ordain by laying on of hands; both the general use of the word amongst all
Greek Divines, and the coherence of the Text do enforce, that Paul and
Barnabas without assistance or consent of others, (for any thing that is
expressed) imposed hands on meet Pastors in every place and Church that was
destitute. And this translation of the word has far better warrant then that
which is lately crept into some English Bibles; they ordained Elders by
election.

The place, 1. Tim. 4. is left, whereas some think, Saint Paul confesses,
that others joined with him in the calling of Timothy; But what if the word
(...) signify there not the College of Elders, but rather the degree and
office of an Elder; how can we thence infer that others joined with Paul in
laying hands on Timothy? The Commentaries under Ieroms name do so expound it.
Hier^. in 1. Timoth. 4.
Prophetiae gratiam habebat cumor dinatione Episcopatus. He received the grace
of Prophecy, together with the order (or cabling) of a Bishop. And so
Primasius, Haymo and others understand it. Yea Lyra himself could find, that
Lyra in 1. Tim. 4.
Presbyterium est dignitas vel officium Presbyteri (the word) Presbyterium (in
this place of S. Paul) is the dignity or office of an Elder, and he speaks
nothing amiss; for the Greek word has that signification as usual as the
other.

In the 2. Canon of the great Nicene Council, the fathers misliked that some
were promoted Council. Niceni ca. 2.
(...), together with their baptism unto the office or dignity of a Bishop,
or of an Elder; that is, unto a Bishoprike or an Eldership. The Council of
Antioch, the 18. Canon, takes order, that such as were appointed to be
bishops, and could not be received in the places to which they were named,
should return to the Churches where they were before, and retain their former
degree and calling of an Elder: but if they troubled or disquieted the bishops
already settled Council. Antioch. ca. 18.
(...), even the (degree and) honor of the Eldership (which they had) should
be taken from them. The Council of Africa in their epistle to Bonifacius
bishop of Rome, aduertising him what they had done with Apiarius for whom he
had written unto them, says in this wise; Council. Africa. ca. 136.
We thought good, that Apiarius the Priest should be removed from the Church
of Sica, but retain the honor of his degree, and receiving our letters of
testimony, (...), might (in any other Church) where he would and could execute
the office of his Priesthood.

Eusebius uses the word in that sense very often. The bishops (says he) of
Cesaria and Jerusalem, judging Origene to be worthy of the highest degree,
Eus^bius, li. 60 ca. 8.
(...), laid hands on him for an Eldership; or to make him an Elder. Again,
the bishops of Cesaria prayed him to expound the Scriptures unto the whole
Congregation, Idem lib. 6. cap. 20.
(...), when as yet he had not received imposition of hands of an Eldership, or
of Priesthood. Not long after being sent into Palestine upon some urgent
ecclesiastical affairs, Idem. lib. 6. cap. 23.
(...), received imposition of hands of Priesthood by the bishops of those
parts. And Cornelius speaking of Nouatus, says; he gate his Priesthood or
Eldership by the favor of the bishop, Idem, lib. 6. cap. 43.
(...), that laid hands on him for the lot or office of an Eldership. Socrates
telling how Proclus rose to the bishop of Constantinople, says that Atticus
first placed him, Socrates lib. 7. ca 41.
(...), in the order of Deaconship; after he was thought worthy (...), and by
Sisinnius preferred Socrates lib. 7. ca 41.
(...), to the bishoprike of Cyzicum; where (...), stand in order for the
degree and place of a Deacon, Elder, and Bishop. And surely either the Greek
tongue wants a word to express the office and calling of an Elder derived
from (...), which were absurd; or else the two words (...) and (...) must
signify as well the office and degree of every Elder, as the whole number and
assembly of Elders.

If any man think this exposition to be frivolous or curious, let him read
what Calum confesses of it; Caluinus in 1. Tim. 4.
They which think the word Presbyterium, to be here a nowne Collectiue, and
put for the College of Elders, think well in my judgment. Tametsi omnibus
expensis, diuersum sensum non male quadrare fateor, vt sit nome^ officis;
Though all things weighed, Ico^fesse the other sense agrees well (with the
words) that it should be a name of office. Then does this place make no
forcible proof that the Presbytery did concur with Paul in laying hands on
Timothy. That Paul laid hands on Timothy, cannot be doubted; the words of
Paul unto him are plain: 2. Tim. 1.
Stir up the grace of God, that is in thee, by the imposition of my hands.
That the Presbytery joined with him in that action is supposed out of the words
of Paul, 1. Tim. 4. but can not thence be concluded; as we see by the diverse
signification of the word (...), and by the confession of old and new writers.

But Calvin, you say, affirms the other exposition to be the better; and so
do Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodorete, Theophilact and others. Nay, what if
Calvin reject the other exposition as contrary to Paul's own words else where
uttered: Look his institutions; his words be these. Caluinus Institutio. li.
4. ca. 3.
Paulus ipse alibi se, non alios complures, Timotheo manus imposuisse
commemorat. Admoneo te, (inquit) vt gratiam suscites, quae in te est per
impositionem manuum mearum. Nam quod in altera epistolade impositione manuum
Presbyterij dicitur, non it a accipio, quasi Paulus de Seniorum Collegio
loquatur; sed hoc nomine ordinationem ipsam intelligo; quasi diceret, fac vt
gratia, quam per manuum impositionem recepisti, quum te Presbyterum crearem,
non sit irrita. Paul himself says, that he, and not others more, laid hands
on Timothy. Stir up the grace, says he, that is in thee by the laying on
of my hands. for that which is written in the other epistle of imposition of
hands of the Eldership, I do not so take it, as if Paul spoke of the College
of Elders, but by that word I understand the very ordering (of Timothy;) as if
Paul had said, Look that the grace be not in vain, which thou receiuedst by
imposition of hands when I created (or made) thee an Elder.

If seposing a little the names of men, we eramine the grounds of both
interpretations, or remember but your own positions, we shall soon perceive,
which is the likelier. That the Presbytery wined with Paul in laying hands on
Timothy, no reason euicteth; only the ambiguitie of the word, which has
those two significations, leads some writers to that surmise on the other
side, that Paul himself laid hands on Timothy without others to conioine with
him; besides the words of Paul, which are plain enough for that purpose, the
excellency of Timothies function, were he Evangelist or Bishop, and
sufficiency of Paul's hands do strongly enduce. Your selves say, Timothy was
an Evangelist, that is one which attended and helped the Apostle in his travels
for the Gospel; and to appoint who should follow the Apostle in his voiages,
pertained not to the Presbytery of any one Church, but lay wholly in the
Apostles own choice and liking; as appears by his refusing Mark, and taking
Silas, when Barnabas departed from him, because he Act. 15.
would not take Mark into his company. Again, the power and gifts of an
Evangelist or Bishop, so far exceeded the degree of Presbyters, that they
could not be derived from them, but from the Apostles. As therefore Timothy
could not have the calling neither of an Evangelist, nor of a Bishop, from the
Presbytery, but from the Apostle; so was he to receive imposition of hands,
(the sign and seal of his calling,) from the Apostle and not from the
Presbytery. Lastly, since Paul says, his hands were laid on Timothy, what
needed the help of other men's hands: Were not Paul's hands sufficient, without
assistance to give him the grace either of aprophet, Evangelist, bishop or
pastor: The first prophets and Pastors to whom the Apostle committed the
churches of the Gentiles; from whose hands did they receive their gifts: notfrom
Paul's? The^ if Paul's hands were able to make the Pastors and prophets, when as
yet there was no Presbytery, had he now lost his Apostolic power, that he
could not do the like to Timothy?

But Chrysostom and others affirm, that more besides. Paul l^i^d hands on
Timothy.] Chrysostom clean excludes the Preshyterie by saying; Chrysostom.
hom. 13. in 1. ad Timoth.
The Presbyters could not impose hands on a bishop; those are his words before
alleged. Theodoret says, Theodor in 4. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Presbyteriu^ hic vocat eos, qui Apostolica^ gratiam acceperunt. Paul here
calls them the Presbytery, which had Apostolic grace, that is, episcopal
as himself expounds it. Theophilact follows Chrysostom, and takes the
Presbytery for the bishops, saying; Theophil. in 4. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Aduerte quantum valiant Pontificum manu^ impositae: Mark what force the
imposing of hands by bishops has. Ambrose inclines to one, rather then to
many; his words are, Ambros. in 4. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Gratiamtamen dari ordinatoris significat perprophetiam and manuum
impositionem. That the grace of the ordainer was given, he signifies by
prophecy and imposition of hands.

As yet then we have no proof by the Scriptures, that in elections of Elders
the people concurred with the Apostles; nor that in imposing hands the
Presbytery joined with them: the places cited to that intent, prove no such
thing. Matthias was chosen by lots; the seven Deacons your selves say, had no
charge of the word and Sacraments: at Lystra and Iconium, Paul and Barnabas
laid hands on such as they found meet to be Elders; and Timothy being
superior to Presbyters, was offorce to have the gifts and grace of his
calling, not from them, but from the Apostles hands. I have not racked nor
wrested the places from their natural sense, nor the words from their proper
significance. (...), with ecclesiastical writers to him that will not
purposely shut his eyes against the truth is to impose hands; (...) is the
office and calling of an Elder, as well as the number of Elders; and that sense
Calvin not only confesses to Calvin in 1. ad Tim. 4.
agree well with the text, but resolutely vpholdeth it in his institutions, as
the right meaning of S. Paul's words; the Presbytery must go seek for some
other hold for the imposition of their hands. The fathers Greek and Latin,
repel that as an oversight or conceit, in our late writers.

How then were elections made, and imposition of hands given in the Apostles
time: I confess I had rather read other men's judgments herein, then write
mine own, so as they take the pains soberly to prove that they say, and not
peremptorily to avouch what they like; the which, if it might be observed in
the Church of Christ, would a great deal the sooner appease and decrease the
^^rifes that now afflict the minds, and quenth the zoales of most men, not
knowing where to rest, or what to believe: yet least our silence should animate
others to fall further in love with their fancies, I will not be grieved to
express what I suppose was the authentical and Apostolical manner of
electing Elders, and imposing hands. and first of imposing of hands; whence it
was derived, and to what end it was used.

The laying of handson another head, was an ancient rite amongst the Jews;
used in making their prayers for any, and beating witness, with, or against
any, confirmed and ratified by God himself. Genesis 48.
Jacob, when he blessed the children of Joseph, laid his hands on their heads.
Moses was willed by God Number. 27.
to put his hands upon Joshua, before all the Congregation, and in their sight
to give him his charge, that he might be ruler of the Lords people. Every man
by the law of Moses, was to Leuit. 13. 4.
lay his hand on the head of his sacrifice, that he presented unto God. The two
Elders that falsely accused Susanna, Hist. Susanna.
laid their hands on her head, whiles they gave evidence against her. The
some of God when he came in flesh, did not re^ect that ceremony, but did
rather strengthen it. When little children were brought unto him, Math. 19.
Mark. 10.
he laid his hands on them and blessed them. Mark 6.
The sick and such as were Luc. 13.
possessed with devils, were healed by the laying on of his hands; and to the
faithful he gave that power, that they Mark. 16.
should lay their hands on the sick and recover them.

The Apostles receiving it from their master, not only used it in curing of
diseases, and in their public blessings, prayers and supplications for any man
that his labor might succeed to the glory of God, and good of others; but
also retained it in the calling and confirming of such as the spirit of grace
would make meet for these uice of Christ's Church, and in conferring the gifts
of the holy Ghost on them. Paul Act. 28.
laid hands on the father of Publius; when he cured him of his fever and
bloody flux. Ananias Act. 9.
laid hands on Paul, when as yet he was not baptized, that he might receive
his eyesight. When the holy Ghost commanded to separate and dismiss Paul
and Barnabas, that they might attend the work, whereto he had appointed them;
Simeon, Lucius, and Manahen, that prophesied and preached at Antioch together
with them, Act. 13.
fasted, prayed, and laid their hands on them and let them go. When the
seven were chosen to see the whole assembly provided for, and the goods of the
faithful well distributed; the Apostles Act. 6.
prayed for them and laid their hands (...) (...) Here first appear^th the or
(...) of (...) in whose election for the traill of their uprightness,
discretion and diligence to dispose the goods and alms of the Church, the
people were consulted, as for ma^^ers not exceeding their reach and
appertaining to their (...) but on the seu^^, the Apostles, and none else laid
ha^^es; though the senentie disciples and Elders were then in place with the^^
No^^ though the multitude were meet Judges of those things which were then
required in the Deacous, yet could they no more judge of the gifts and
habilities of Pastors and Prophets, then blind men of colors. Knowledge
directs, ignorance (...) and disableth a Judge. In the word and Sacraments
the people are to follow their leaders; not to judge of their talents. Of
manners, you think, they may judge, and in that respect their consent needful
to the choosing of Elders. Thereof hereafter in place more oportune; we now
speak of the gifts and graces that were requisite to the function of Pastors
and Prophets; and those I say the multitude neither could, neither can discern
or examine. Howbeit this is not out question who could best judge of every man's
gifts, but who then could give them. for at the first planting of the faith,
the Apostles were to make men fi^te, whom they found unfit; and not to
discern the gifts of such as were fit; and to that end had they power with
imposition of hands to give the holy Ghost, to such as otherwise without those
gifts, and before those gifts were most unfit.

An example will make it plain. When the people of Samaria believed the
preaching of Philip and were baptized in the name of Christ, Act. ^.
The holy Ghost came on none of them till Peter and John came down and prayed
for them, and laid their hands on them; and so by laying on of the Apostles
hands, the holy Ghost was given (them.) The miraculous gifts of the spirit,
to speak with strange tongues, to heal all diseases, but specially to preach,
pray and prophersie by revelation without all humane learning or labor, it
pleased God at the first spreading of the Gospel, to bestow on many for Ephesians.
4.
the edifying of and Church and work of the ministry. for so the Apostle
writes; that 1. Cor. 12.
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit (the
Church) withal. These gifts the Apostles gave with laying on of hands, not
to all that believed, or desired them, but to those persons, whom the spirit
pointed out, and prepared for the spreading of the truth, and guiding of the
Church, and in such measure as the spirit pleased, to 1. Cor. 14.
comfort, exhort and edify the Church withal. In Samaria Peter and John found
no meet men to undertake the charge of the Church after their departure, (for
they were lately converted, and skant yet trained in the mysteries of
Christian religion; much less acquainted with the Scriptures, by which their
do^teine should be directed, and they enabled to 2. Tim. 3.
teach, convince and instruct in righteousness) but by imposition of hands
they did furnish such as the holy Ghost named unto them, with all things
needful for their calling, making some of them Prophets, some Pastors, some
otherwise; and enduing every one of them with graces answerable to their
functions. In which case we may not be so foolish as to think the people did
elect, on whom Peter and John should impose hands; but contrariwise the holy
Ghost did name by voice or by prophecy, on whom he would bestow his gifts;
and on those the Apostles laid hands.

The like did Paul at Ephesus to the Twelve disciples, that never heard of the
gifts of the holy Ghost before. He Act. 19.
laid his hands on them, and the holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with
congues and prophesied; that is, they were endued with gifts and graces meet
Ephesians. 4.
for the gathering of the Saints together, and work of the ministry. Beza
Annotationes in Actor. ca. 19.
We must confess, faieth Beza, that in this place is described the first
founding of the Ephesine Church, whereas before this, there were no orderly
assemblies of the godly there; and therefore the Apostle asks them concerning
those gifts, with which God used specially to furnish such as were admitted to
the government of the Churches; to wit, whether hands were laid on them, or
they end^^d with those gifts of the holy Ghost, by which it might be gathered
they were called by God to the sacred ministry, as namely the gift of tongues
and of prophecy. The judgment of Beza I take to be very sound and good in
this place, and thence if I be not deceived, I rightly conclude; that Paul
called these Twelve, and laid hands on them to make them Prophets and Teachers
in the Church of Ephesus, when as yet there was neither assembly to elect
them, nor Presbytery to join with him; and consequently the imposition of
Paul's hands alone without the Presbytery was most sufficient to make
Evangelists, Prophets and Teachers in the Church of Christ.

Yea, what if the Presbytery might not join with Paul in that action; but to
give the gifts of the holy Ghost with imposing hands was the peculiar sign
and honor of his Apostleship? At Samaria was Philip, and even there he Act. ^.
converted and baptized the city, and yet Philip there present might not join
with Peter and John in laying on of hands, but they two did it without Philip.
Paul never traveled alone; and at this time Acts 19. v. 22.
Timothy and others did minister unto him, and yet he alone laid hands on
these Twelve to make them Prophets. That which he says to the Romans, I
know, Romans 19.
when I come, I shall come unto you with the abundance of the blessing of the
Gospel of Christ; may very well bear this sense, that he should come unto
them with the plentiful gifts of Gods spirit to be powered on them by his
hands. That which he says to the Corinthians, can have no other meaning; ^.
Cor. 12.
The signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, with signs, wonders, and
powers; for what is it, wherein you were inferior to other Churches? proouing
himself to be an Apostle by the gifts and graces that God bestowed on them by
his hands. Thus much and more is confessed by Beza, a man of no small account,
who grounding his opinion on the promise of Christ made only to the Twelve,
and accordingly performed, says; Beza, de ministrorum euange^, c^. 5.
All the Twelve assembled on the day of Pentecost, expecting the promise made,
for the good of the whole Church, but not unto the whole Church, nor to all the
Disciples, but properly and peculiarly to these (twelve.) Luke 24. 49. Math.
28, 16. and 19. Marc. 16, 14. and 15. Act. 1, 2. and 4. In the process of the
Story, they are all said to be of Galilee, neither is Peter said to stand
forth with any other Colleagues then with these eleven; Act. 2, 7. and 14. and
37. so that it evidently appears this solemn sending of the holy Ghost
pertained to none other, then to those twelve appointed with a special
abundance of the holy spirit, to plant Churches throughout the world; by
whose ministry (or hands) afterward the gifts of the holy Ghost might be
given to such others, as should be their helpers.

That none besides the Twelve received the holy Ghost, when they did, or that
all the rest received the same by the Apostles hands, and not immediately from
God, I dare not affirm. S. Austen says, August. in epist. Johan. tractat. ^.
The holy Ghost came from heaven, and filled an hundred and twenty (of them)
sitting in one place. The seven Deacons were full of the holy Ghost before the
Apostles hands were laid on them. And Peter testifies the same of the
Gentiles that heard him preach in Cornelius house. Act. 11. v. 15.
As I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, even as upon us at the
beginning. So that God gave the power of his spirit as well to others, as to
the Apostles, and that without the Apostles hands: but I verily believe, that
at the first none gave the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost by imposing
hands, save only the Apostles. And so says Chrysostom. Chrysostom. hom. 18.
in Act. ca. 8.
Philip baptising gave not the holy Ghost; and in deed he could not; Hoc enim
donum solorum Apostolorum erat; for the giving thereof belonged only to the
Apostles. And again, Ibidem.
Others received power to do signs, but not to give the holy Ghost. Igitur
hoc erat in Apostolis singular; this was peculiar to the Apostles. So that not
only the Apostles might impose hands on such as should be Prophets and
Pastors in the Church, to make them fit for their callings, by the power and
gifts of Gods spirit, without the Presbytery; but in that cafe the
Presbytery might not arrogate so much unto themselves as to join with the
Apostles in giving the holy Ghost, which was the very seal of their
Apostleship. and therefore whom the Spirit appointed, the Apostles ordained
with imposing hands without either people or Presbytery to join with them, to
ratify their election or action. Men's voices might be spared when Gods will
was revealed; and the spirit gave his gifts, not as others consented or
liked, but where himself purposed and appointed. The holy Ghost then electing
and choosing, how could the Presbytery take upon them either to confirm it
without presumption; or reuerse it without rebellion against God and his
spirit:

Can any be showed that was so named by the spirit to receive imposition of
hands from the Apostles?] No doubt the Apostles were directed as well to the
persons whom they should choose, as to the places where they should teach. When
Paul would have preached in Phrygia, he Act. 16.
was forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia. When he sought to
go into Bithynia, Act. 16.
the spirit suffered him not, but the Lord called him by a vision into
Macedonia. At Antioch Act. 13.
the holy Ghost said; Separa^e me Barnabas and Paul for the work whereto I
have called them. Of Timothy Paul says, 1. Tim. 1.
the prophesies (or Prophets) spoke of him before, that he should fight a good
fight. Neither was this private to Timothy, but as Chrysostom notes it, it
was usual in the Apostles times: Chrysoft. hom. 5. in 1. ca. 1. ad Timotheu^l.
Tunc quia nihil fiebat humanum, sacerdotes ex prophetia veniebant. Quid est
exprophetia? ex Spiritu sancto. Then, because nothing was done by men, the
Pastors were made by prophecy. What is, by prophecy? by the holy Ghost,
(speaking by himself, or by the Prophets) as Saul was showed by prophecy
where he lay hid amongst the stuff* as the holy Ghost said; separate me Paul
and Barnabas, so was Timothy chosen. And likewise Theodoret upon the same
words of the Apostle to Timothy, writes thus; Thou have not thy calling,
says Paul, Theod. in 1. ca. 1. ad Timoth.
by men, but thou receiuedst that order by divine revelation. And so the
Scholies collected by Oecumenius. Oecumenius in 1. ca. 1. ad Tim.
By the revelation of the spirit, Timothy was chosen of Paul to be his
Disciple, and circumcised, and ordained a Bishop. Yea this dured a long time
after Paul's death, as Eusebius reports out of Clemens Alexandrinus, all the
while S. John the Apostle lived. of whom he writes, that after his return
Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 23.
out of Patmos unto Ephesus, he went to the Churches of the Gentiles adjoining,
some where appointing Bishops, somewhere setting whole Churches in order,
(...), somewhere supplying the Clergy, with such as the spirit named, or
drawing lots for such as the spirit signified. So that thirty years after
Peter and Paul were dead, the holy Ghost signified to S. John whom he should
take into the Clergy; and for avoiding ambition and contention, he drew them
by lots; even as we read in the Acts was done in the choice of Matthias.

If you ask me, what was the general rule for elections and ordinations in
the Apostles times; in a doubtful case I must return a doubtful answer.
There are three sorts of elections mentioned in the new Testament, By the
spirit, By lots, By voices. By lots was Matthias chosen; by voices the seven
Deacons. By the spirit speaking in his own person, were Paul and Barnabas
called from Antioch to preach to the Gentiles. By the spirit speaking in the
Prophets, was Timothy designed. 1. Tim. 4.
Neglect not the grace which was given thee by prophecy with imposition of
hands of an Eldership. And again, 1. Tim. 1.
This commandment I commit to thee, according to the prophesies, that went
before of thee. The Apostles were warned by the spirit, as well of the parties
on whom he would bestow his gifts, as of the places whither they should go,
or where they should stay. Act. 8. v. 29.
The spirit spoke to Philip, to join himself to the Eunuchs charet; and
Act. 11. v. 12.
to Peter, willing him to go with Cornelius messengers. Ananias and his wife
would needs try whether the spirit in Peter knew the secrets of their
dealings: but their tempting the holy Ghost in the Apostle was sharply revenged
in them both. 2. Cor. 13.
If I come again, says Paul, I will not spare, seeing you seek experience
of Christ, that speaks in me. By that spirit were Peter and John directed on
whom they should lay hands at Samaria; and so was Paul at Ephesus, when he
laid the first foundation of that Church. And in that sense he might
afterward truly say to the Pastors and Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.
Take heed to the flock where the holy Ghost made you overseers; for it was
the holy Ghosts doing, both to notify the persons unto Paul, that should
receive imposition of hands, and to power out his wonderful blessings on them
to make them meet for the calling of Pastors and Prophets, whereto he had
chosen them.

Whatsoever the Apostles did, that had a most plentiful measure of Gods
spirit far above Pastors, Prophets and Evangelists: yet their followers,
for example, Timothy and Tite, were not to impose hands without the people and
Presbytery concurring with them.] I have heard this often and earnestly
asserted, but I could never yet see it proved. The greatest ground of this
presumption is, for that the Apostles themselves did so; from whose example
their scholars would not rashly depart. But as we find by better view, the
Apostles did not so. by lots and by Prophets, directed not by men's wills, but by
Gods spirit, the Apostles choose Elders; or rather by laying on their hands, as
the holy Ghost guided them, they did furnish such as before were neither meet
nor able to sustain that charge with the gifts of the spirit fit for that
calling: by the voices and liking of the people, they made no Pastors nor
Prophets, that I read; and therefore I must have leave to think that Tite and
Timothy used rather the help of Prophecy to find whom the spirit would
name, the^ the consents or suffrages of the people. for in their times the
gifts of the spirit were not quenched, yea the Prophets that were under the
Apostles, continued under them; and these two gifts, the 1. Cor. 14. 25.
revealing of secrets, and 1. Cor. 12. 10.
discerning of spirits, which the Prophets and Evangelists had, (though in
less measure then the Apostles) served chiefly to distinguish who were fit or
unfit for the service of Christ's Church. When Prophets failed, the Church was
forced to come to voices; but so long as the spirit declared by the mouths of
the Prophets whom he had chosen, the consent of the people or Presbytery
might not be required.

The Apostle gives rules to Timothy and Tite, what manner of men must be
chosen, and how they must be qualified before they be elected.] Paul does not
teach the people whom they should elect, but appoints Timothy and Titus whom
they should admit. To prevent ambition and emulation in the competitors,
affection and dissension in the electors, lots were first liked by the
Apostles, and retained a long time after by S. John; and to disappoint seducing
and lying spirits then crept into the world, and into the Church, these rules
were prescribed as a touchstone for Timothy and Titus, to discern the spirit
of truth speaking sincerely, from the spirit of error, flattring and admiring
the persons of men for advantage sake. for as God gave the power and grace of
his spirit to his Church in great abundance to illustrate the glory and
enlarge the kingdom of his son: so the devil ceased not to intermixe whole
swarms of false and deceitful workmen to obscure the brightness and hinder
the increase of Christ's Church; and therefore the Apostle sets down what
manner of men Tite and Timothy shall lay hands on, and whom they shall refuse,
left they be partakers of their sins.

Paul could not fear lest the holy Ghost speaking by the Prophets would name
men unworthy the place.] Paul saw the number of false Prophets already risen,
and every day likely to rise, and foresaw the poison and danger of their
deceits and pretenses; and for that cause sets down a perpetual canon to
the Church for ever, what vices must be shumed, and virtues required in a
Pastor and Preacher. Such did the holy Ghost name whiles he ruled the
mouths of the Prophets; and such for ever should be called even when the gift
of prophecy was decayed.

The Primitive Church used always to elect her Pastors by the suffrages of the
people; and Cyprian says, it is none other then a divine tradition, and
Apostolic observation.] I shall have place and time anon to speak of the
custom of the Church and opinion of the fathers; till then I reserve the
handling of both. I am now searching the Scriptures and viewing the word of
God, whether it can thence be proved, that Pastors and Elders were or ought
to be chosen by the consent of the people; and for my part I profess I find
none. I see some men men zealously bent to authorize it by the will and
commandment of God: I dare not profess to be sopriuie to his will without
his word. In the old Testament Hebr. 5.
Aaron was called of God, and all the Numb. 3.
Levites according to their families were like wise assigned to their places;
the children succeeded in their fathers roumes; the Prophets were inspired from
above, and none elected; Exo. 3.
Moses, Numb. 27.
Joshua and the Judges were appointed by God, as also the Numb. 1.
Princes of the twelve Tribes. The seventy Elders were such as were Numb. 11.
known, (not chosen,) to be Elders and Rulers of the people; and to make
Captains over 1000. 100. and 10. Moses Deuteronomy. 1.
took the chief of every Tribe: to 1. Sam. 10.
Saul God gave the kingdom by lottes; and after to 1. Sam. 16.
David by voice; their successors inherited or intruded. I see in all these
neither

(...) amongst the rest of the Gentiles, which till then the spirit had
deferred: but he received no power from them to be an Apostle, nor to preach
unto the Gentiles. Paul says of himself that he was an Apostle Galat. 1.
neither of men, nor by man; and that the Galat. 2.
chiefest (gave him nothing or) added nothing unto him, that is, neither
authority nor instruction; much less did these three of a meaner calling then
the Apostles, lay hands on him to make him an Apostle: that power belonged
only to Christ. Again, he received his Apostleship of the Gentiles long
before, as he says: Galat. 1. v. 15.
When it pleased God to reveal his son in me, that I might preach him amongst
the Gentiles, I did not straightway confer with flesh and blood; but went
into Arabia, and after three years came (first) to Jerusalem. He had been at
Act. 9. v. 26.
Jerusalem, and was presented by Barnabas to the Apostles, before he came to
Antioch. For, after the first sight of the Apostles he went from Jerusalem to
Act. 11. v. 25.
Tarsus; and thence Barnabas fet him, as Act. 9. v. 15.
a chosen vessel to carry the name of Christ unto the Gentiles, when he first
brought him ^^ Antioch. And at Antioch, where Act. 11. v. 26.
he preached a whole year ^^fore he received this imposition of hands, to
whom preached he but to the Grecians, that is, to the Gentiles: Wherefore they
did not impose hands on him, to give him authority to preach to the Gentiles;
he received that commission from Christ long before; and had then twelve
months and more, preached unto the Gentiles in the very same place where they
imposed hands on him.

To what end then did they impose hands on Paul and Barnabas?] They had
preached there a good time, and furnished the Church with needful doctrine and
meet Pastors to take charge of their souls: and then the holy Ghost minding
to have them do the like in other places, willed the Act. 13. v. 2.
Prophets and Teachers there to let them go, for so the word (...) may
signify, and the words following import as much, that the Prophets and
Pastors laying hands on them Verse 3.
(...) sent them away; and they Verse 4.
(...) being sent abroad by the holy Ghost, went to Saleucia, Cyprus and other
places.

Imposition of hands to that purpose was not necessary.] No more was fasting:
but by these two joined with prayer, the Prophets and Pastors witnessed unto
the Church, that they were called away by the holy Ghost, and departed not upon
their own heads; and that the work, they took in hand, needed the continual
prayers of the faithful, as well for the good success of their pains, as
protection of their persons amidst so many troubles and dangers, as they were
like to sustain; and therefore with a solemn kind of prayer for them, and
blessing of them (for August. de ^^^t scontra Donati^t. lib. 3. ca. 16.
Imposition of hands, as Austen says, is nothing else but prayer over a man,
and to that end was it here used) they commended them to the grace of God.
This was the purpose and effect of that imposition of hands, which Paul and
Barnabas received at Antioch, as Saint Luke himself reports: for after they
had labored and preached the Gospel in many places, they returned to Antioch,
Act. 14. v. 26.
whence they had been commended to the grace of God for the work which (now)
they had performed. So that when they departed from Antioch, the prayers there
made for them, and imposition of hands on them, were nothing else but A
COMMENDING THEM TO THE GRACE OF GOD, for the better prospering of the work
which they undertook.

Chrysostom, Oecumenius and others affirm, that Bishops, which differ not
from Elders, laid hands on Timothy as well as Paul.] They take the word
Presbytery, not for Elders as you do, but for Bishops; and add this reason,
because Presbyters could not impose hands on a Bishop: which directly
overthrows your imposition of hands by the Presbytery.

Yet others joined with Paul in imposing hands which is here denied.] The
word, as Jerome does expound it, admits no such sense. And if we follow
Chrysostomes interpretation, it rather harmeth then helps the Presbytery.
For no Presbyter by his assertion could impose hands. Neither does the Text,
if you consider it, say, they joined with Paul in imposing hands, 1. Tim. 4.
but grace was given to Timothy with the imposition of hands.

That must needs be, when Paul also imposed his hands.] The Presbytery, that
is, the Prophets might lay hands on him as well as Paul, though not at the same
time, nor to the same end. It is no strange thing in the Church of Christ,
neither was it then in the Apostles times for a man to receive imposition of
hands oftener the^ once. Act. 9.
On Paul first Ananias laid hands, and after wards the Act. 13.
Prophets of Antioch. Act. 1.
Barnabas wanted not imposition of hands when he stood in the choice with
Matthias, without which he was not capable of the Apostleship; and yet
afterward at Act. 13.
Antioch he received it the second time. In the Primitive Church, they were
first Deacons; and upon trial, when they had ministered well, and were found
blameless, they were admitted to be Elders or Priests; and after that, if
their gifts and pains so deserved, they were called to an higher degree; and
in every of these they received imposition of hands. So that every one by the
ancient discipline of Christ's Church before he could come from ministering to
governing in the Church of God, received thrice, or at the least twice
imposition of hands. The like, if any man list, he may imagine of Timothy,
that the Act 16. v. 2.
good report which the brethren of Lystra and Iconium gave of him unto Paul,
whereupon he Verse 3.
would that Timothy should go forth with him; grew upon trial of his
faithful and painful service in a former and lower vocation, for which he
had unposition of hands; and that moved Paul to take him along with him; and
when he saw his time, to impose hands on him for a greater calling. For it
is not credible, that Paul would impose hands on him at the first step to
place him in one of the highest degrees, being so young as he was, without
good experience of his sober and wise behavior in some other and formet
function.

Lastly, if it should be granted, that others joined with Paul in laying hands
on Timothy, we must not conclude it was of necessity, as if Paul's hands had
not been sufficient without them to give the holy Ghost; or that he had not
power in himself to choose who Act. 16.
should go forth with him, and Act. 19.
minister unto him: we must shun both these as sensible absurdities: but
because Timothy was very young, lest Paul should seem to be led with any
light respect in taking him unto his company, he might happily be content to
hear the judgments of the Prophets then present, and guided by the same
spirit that he was, and suffer their hands as well as their mouths to concur
with his in prophesying and praying over Timothy; that all the Church might
know, the spirit of God had pronounced him worthy the place, and not Paul's
affection advanced him unworthy. In that respect, I say, Paul might be willing
the Prophets should express to the whole assembly what the holy Ghost spoke
in them touching Timothy; and permit them with prayers and hands, as their
manner was, to confirm the same; otherwise Paul alone had power enough both to
impose hands on Pastors and Prophets, as he did at Ephesus; and to make
choice of his company, as he did not long before when he utterly refused
Mark, and retained Silas to travail with him.

CHAP. VIII. The Apostolic power in determining doubts of faith, and
delivering unto Satan.
ANother point in show diminishing Apostolic authority is; that the Act. 15.
Elders assembled in the Council of Jerusalem together with the Apostles to
discuss the matter in question between Paul and others; and the letters
deciding the controversy, were written to the Churches abroad as well in
their names, as in the Apostles. This case will soon be answered by Saint Paul
himself. Paul stood not in doubt of his preaching, neither needed he the
consent of the Apostles or Elders to confirm that doctrine, which the spirit
of Christ had delivered unto him: we must remember his earnest protestation;
Galat. 1.
If an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that you have
received (of me) hold him accursed. As we said before, so say I again, If any
man, (Apostle or other) preach unto you otherwise then that you have received
(already) let him be accursed. And why: The reason is yielded in the next
words. Galat. 1. v. 11.
For I certify you brethren, that the Gospel which I preached, was not of
man; neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ. What therefore Saint Paul was right well assured
Christ had delivered unto him; to submit that to the correcting or censuring of
men, yea of the Apostles themselves, had not been in him moderation or
sobriety but distrust and infidelity. And for that cause, when God revealed
his son unto him; he did not first Galat. 1. 16.
confer with flesh and blood, neither went he to Jerusalem unto those that
were Apostles before him; least he should seem to derogate from the voice
and truth of Christ; but straightwaie preached the Gospel, which he learned
by revelation, and stood always resolved, that what the son of God had
taught him, the sons of men ought not to revoke, and could not amend.

Why then repaired he at length to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders, to
have his doctrine examined, and confirmed unto the Churches by their letters?]
Many false brethren came from Jerusalem; and pretending the Apostles names,
impugned both the credit and doctrine of Paul, and taught that except the
Gentiles were circumcised, they could not be saved; and by enforming the
brethren, that this course was observed at Jerusalem, (for they counted Paul
fa^ inferior to the chief Apostles) they hindered the weak from believing,
and caused the strong to stagger at the truth of Paul's doctrine. To stop the
mouths of these seducers, and to retain the Churches in their stedfastnes,
and remove this stumbling block from before the simple, that Paul taught
contrary to the rest of the Apostles; the holy Ghost Gal. 2. v. 2.
willed him by revelation to go up to Jerusalem and declare to the rest the
Gospel which he preached; that by their general confession and letters, the
doctrine which he preached, might be acknowledged unto the Gentiles to be sound
and sincere. This was the intent of Paul's journey thither: Not to have his
doctrine reuised and approved by their authorities, but to have it heard and
acknowledged by their confessions, that the false report of their discording
every where spread by those deceivers, might no longer trouble the minds of
the Gentiles.

I ascended (says Paul of that his journey to Jerusalem) by revelation; when
he came thither, what did he? Gal. 2. v. 2.
I declared (says he) the Gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, and
particularly to the chiefest; Verse 4.
for the false brethrens sake, which crept in to spy out our liberty which we
have in Christ Jesus; to who^ we gave no place by yielding no not an hour,
that the truth of the Gospel might remain amongst you (that are Gentiles.)
And Verse 6.
they that were chiefest added nothing unto me, but contrariwise, when they
saw that the Gospel over the Gentiles was committed unto me, as the Gospel over
the Jews was unto Peter, when James, Cephas, and John, which are counted to be
Pillars, knew the grace which was given me, they gave to me and Barnabas
their right hands (in token) of fellowship.

What needed the presence of the Elders at this meeting?] Some of them had come
from Iewrie to Antioch, as sent from the church at Jerusalem, and troubled the
minds of the Gentiles with urging circumcision. Wherefore to know the reason
of their so doing, and to prevent the like in time to come; the Apostles would
not have the matter privately handled, but in the audience and presence of the
Act. 15. v. 22.
whole Church, and with a general consent, letters were written in all their
names, as well to disclaim the sending of any such; as also to confirm the
Gentiles in the course which they had begun. For these two points their
letters importe. Act. 15. v. 23.
The Apostles, Elders and brethren, which in the verse before are called the
whole Church, to the Brethren of the Gentiles at Antioch, etc. Verse 24.
Because we have heard, that certain coming from us have troubled you with
words and enta^gled your minds, saying you must be circumcised, to whom we gave
no such commandment; Verse 25.
it seemed therefore good unto us, when we were together with one accord to send
chosen men unto you with our beloved Paul and Barnabas, Verse 27.
which shall tell the same by word of mouth.

The Apostles wanted neither authority nor sufficiency to determine the
matter. How many doubts does Paul himself resolve to the Romans, to the
Corinthians, to others without a Council? This very question, when after this
meeting it troubled the church of Galatia, did Paul allege the Apostles
letters unto them; or the decision made at Jerusalem: No, he rests on his
own Apostleship and says, Galat. 5.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. For I testify unto every man which is circumcised, that he is
bound to keep the whole Law. ye are abolished from Christ: whosoever are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. The Council at Jerusalem
decreed it was not needful for the Gentiles to be circumcised before they
could be saved. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to them not to lay that
burden on their necks. But Paul goes a degree further and tells them, they
are cut off from Christ, and fallen from grace, if they seek or admit
circumcision. He is so far from standing on the credit of that assembly;
that he utterly denies, they added any thing to him; and avouches he
withstoode and reproved Peter to his face for the same cause at Antioch. Yea
in that Council, who decided the controversy but Peter and James? yet because
it touched the whole Church of Jury; and for that many of the Elders then
present were after to preach unto the Gentiles, and to live amongst them and
with them; the Apostles, no doubt, directed by Gods spirit brought y^ matter to
be fully discussed in the open hearing of the whole Church, thereby to satisfy
and quiet the consciences of those Jews that were Act. 21. ve. 20.
zealous of the Law, though they believed; and wholly to quench, if it were
possible, the heart-burning and detestation the believing Jews had of the
Gentiles, which well appeared by their Act. 11.
striving with Peter for entering into the Gentiles and eating with them; and by
their own Act. 21.
report made to Paul long after this Council was ended.

The last thing wherein the people or Presbytery seem to join with the
Apostles authority, is the putting the wicked from among the faithful, and
delivering them over to Satan, of purpose to reduce them to repentance, or by
their example to fear others from the like offenses. Of the incestuous
Corinthian Saint Paul writes thus. 1. Corinthians. 5.
I verily as absent in body, but present in Spirit, have already decreed, as
if I were present; that he which has done this, when you are gathered
together, and my Spirit in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ to deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Put
away therefore from among your selves that wicked man. By this it is collected
that the Apostle alone could not excommunicate, nor deliver unto Satan; but the
Church must join with him; and then for not hearing the Church, the offender
might be taken for an Ethnike and a Publicane.

This place breeds two great doubts; first, what it is to deliver unto Satan;
next, by whom this incestuous person was delivered unto Satan, whether by
Saint Paul, or by the Corinthians. And because the latter point is of more
importance to the matter we have in hand, let that first be examined: then
after, what is meant by delivering unto Satan.

The least we can imagine of these words is, that Paul being absent requires
them to put the malefactor out of their society, and to keep no company with
him. For that rule he gives touching all notorious offenders in the same
Chapter. 1. Cor. 5.
If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous person, or
an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one
eat not. As elsewhere he charged the faithful to 2 Thessalonians. 3.
withdraw themselves from every brother that walked disorderly, and not after
the instruction which he gave them. And if any man (says he) obey not our
words, keep no company with him, that he may be ashamed. If the Apostle did
but this; that is, require them (because he was not present) to remove that
incestuous person from their fellowship; this shows he had authority over
them, after that sort in Christ's name to command them; but the words, which
he uses, are far more forcible.

Reproouing their negligence for not doing, what in them lay, to put that
offendour from among them, he adds, (...). 1. Corinthians. 5.
I have already decreed (or determined) as if I were present, by the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ to deliver this wicked one to Satan. He asks not their
consents; he prays not their aid; he refers not the matter to their
liking; he says, I have already decreed; before he wrote, and before they read,
that part of his Epistle. What to do? To join with them in delivering the
Trespassour to Satan? No, I have already decreed to deliver this sinner unto
Satan. By what means? By the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then for ought
that we yet find in this place, the Apostle though absent, decreed as present
to do the deed himself, and that by the power and might of our Lord Jesus
Christ; not by the consent or help of the Corinthians.

But their assembling themselves was required withal. For he says; When you
are assembled in the name of the Lord Jesus and my spirit with you.] The
Apostle would then do it, when the whole Church might behold it; and be
afraid of the like. And though he were absent in body, yet should they
find the force of his Spirit present; even the might and power of the Lord
Jesus, to deliver that heinous sinner unto Satan. Now how should the power
and might of Christ, be showed in excluding a man from the word and sacraments:
Pronouncing a few words is sufficient for that matter. Which makes me to be of
Chrysostomes mind, that he was delivered unto Satan Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. ^.
homil. 15
vt eum percelleret vulnere malo aut morbo aliquo;to strike him with some
grievous plague or disease.

This power in the Apostles was neither strange nor rare. When Ananias and his
wife lied unto Peter, and thereby would try whether the holy Ghost in Peter
knew the secrets of their doings; Peter struck them both Act. 5.
dead with the very breath of his mouth, I mean, with the sound of his words.
When Elymas the sorcerer Act. 13.
resisted the preaching of the truth, and Act. 13.
sought to turn away Sergius Paulus from believing the same, Act. 13.
immediately the hand of the Lord was upon him at Paul's word, and took his
eye sight from him. That which the Apostle said of himself, 2. Corinthians. 10
we have vengeance in readiness against all disobedience; and even his words
next before the rebuking and punishing of this incestuous person; 1. Corinthians. 4.
shall I come unto you with a rod, or in the spirit of mildnes? and 2. Corint
13.
If I come again; I will not spare: This rod, This vengeance, This not
sparing, importe they no more then a plain remoouing them that sinned from the
fellowship of others? or, as the words lie, had Saint Paul the mighty power of
Gods Spirit to revenge the disobedient and to chastise the disordered? 2.
Corint. 12.
The tokens (says he) of an Apostle were wrought among you with signs, and
wonders, and great works, (or mighty powers.) And when some of them abused
the Lords supper; 1. Corint. 11.
for this cause (says he) many are weak and sick among you, and many be dead
or sleep. Whereby it is evident that in the Apostles times, when as yet there
were no Christian Magistrates to correct and punish the disorders of such as
professed the Gospel, the hand of God sometimes by himself, sometimes by the
Apostles did afflict and scourge the wicked and irrepentant sinners, that
thereby they might learn not to detain the truth of God in unrighteousness;
and the rest fear to provoke his wrath with the like uncleanness.

And this is no such new found or vain exposition, that it should be scorned.
Not only Chrysostom, but Jerome, Ambrose, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophilact
and diverse others embrace it, as most coherent with the Text. Jerome says
Ierom. in 1. Corinthians. 5.
To deliver him unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh]vt arripiendi illum
corporaliter habeat potestatem, That the devil may have power corporally to
possess him (or afflict him) Ambrose says, Ambros. in 1. ca. 1* ad Timoth.
This is the delivering unto Satan, when the Apostle pronounces the sentence,
and the devil which is ready to take into his power those that are forsaken
of God, hearing the sentence, seazeth on them (forthwith) to let them
understand they are therefore tormented because they have blasphemed.
Theodoret. Paul Theodor in 1. Corinthians. 5.
shows that the Lord pronounces sentence, and delivers him to the
tormenter, and appoints how far he shall proceed, to chastise the body
only. By this place we are taught that the devil inuadeth them that are
severed from the body of the Church, as finding them destitute of grace. The
Commentaries collected by Oecumenius, Oecumen. in 1. Corinthians. 5.
For the destruction of the flesh.] He appoints limits unto Satan, that he
should touch the body only, and not the soul. And he well says for the
destruction of the flesh, that is, to waste him (or pine him) with some
sickness. Theophilact, Theophi. in 1. Corinthians. 5.
For the destruction of the flesh] He does restrain the devil to certain
bounds, even as, (he was restrained) in holy Job to touch the body only, and
not the soul.

If we scanne the circumstances, I see no cause why this exposition should be
rejected. That he was excommunicated I make no doubt: these words of Saint Paul
lead me so to think. 1. Corinthians. 5.
You have not rather sorrowed, that he which has done this (lewd) fact might
be put from among you. Purge out therefore the old leaven: Put away from
among you that wicked man. For his excommunication these words had been
sufficient; there needed no further nor other circumstances: but because the
fact was heinous and horrible, and such as the very heathen abhorred, and
therefore tended to the great slander and reproach of Christ's name; the Apostle
not content, as I take it, to have him only removed from the company of the
godly; adds, that he had already decreed to make him an example; and at
their next meeting, though he were absent, by the mighty power of the Lord
Jesus (he would) deliver him unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, to
save the spirit by repentance. Paul decreed this of himself, without the
knowledge or consent of the Corinthians. To execute that which he decreed, he
needed, and therefore used the mighty power of the Lord Jesus. For (...) with
Saint Paul is often taken for the miraculous power of the holy Ghost, whereby
the Apostles and others did great works; and had even the devils in subjection
unto them. That which he would do, should be this: to deliver him unto Satan
in the presence of them all for the destruction of the flesh; to the end the
affliction of his flesh might bring him to repentance, and so save his soul in
the day of Christ. To deliver unto Satan, is more then to excommunicate. Many
are secluded from the company of the godly for a time, that are not yielded
unto Satan; yea many were delivered unto Satan without excommunication, as
Ananias and Elymas. The end of this action was the affliction or destruction of
the flesh; which in excommunication has no sense, except it be Metaphorical.
For excommunication endangereth the Spirit, and touches not the flesh. And
the lusts of the flesh are not destroyed by excommunication, but by
repentance, which of it self is no consequent to the other; (for many are
excommunicated, that never repent;) but affliction and fear of destruction
cause repentance; and thereby the soul is saved. For So Much then as Paul
decreed it alone, and that absent; and in perfourming it, used the mighty
power of Christ, to the destruction of his flesh, that had sinned; which
things can not be understood of excommunicating or remoouing the offendour
from the fellowship of the faithful; and that is before and after in other
words expressed: I am persuaded, that by de^i^ering unto Satan, the Apostle
meant to show the mighty ^ower, which Christ had given him to revenge the
disobedient, when the Spirit of God should see it needful, to make some men
example to others. Of that power he thus warns the rest of the Corinthians.
2. Corinthians. 13 verse 10.
I write these things unto you absent, lest when I am present I should use
sharpness according to the power which the Lord has given me. 2. Corinthians.
12 verse 21.
I fear when I come, I shall be wail many of them, which have sinned already
and not repented. 2. Cor. 13. v. 2.
I write to them which have heretofore sinned and to others, that if I come
again I will not spare.

But grant that by delivering unto Satan, were meant excommunication; what
reason is there to affirm; the Apostle alone could not do it? He alone
decreed it, and required them though he were absent, to execute it; yea he
rebukes them for not putting the Trangressour from amongst them; and
elsewhere he says of himself, that he did the like. 1. Tim. 1.
Hymeneus and Alexander I have delivered unto Satan, that they might be taught
not to blaspheme. Why should we not believe he could do it, since he says
he did it: He that had vengeance in readiness against 2. Cor. 10.
all disobedience, why could he not by the same power deliver the offendour
at Corinth unto Satan as well as he did elsewhere Hymeneus and others:

Excommunication, some think, pertained to the whole Church, because our
Savior said, Matthew. 18.
Tell the Church. If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an
Ethnike and Publicane; and therefore they conclude the Apostle neither could
nor would excommunicate without the consent and liking of the Church.] What I
take to be the true meaning of Christ's words (if he hear not the Church,
let him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane) I have said before, I shall
not need to repeat it as now; Nevertheless, because the ancient Fathers use
as well these words of our Savior, as those of Saint Paul to express the
strength and terror of excommunication, I will not gainesay their exposition;
yet this shall we find to be most true, that no Catholic father ever heard
or dreamed, that lay Elders or the whole multitude should meddle with the
keys and Sacraments of the Church; but only the Apostles and their
successors. Dic Ecclesiae] Chrysostom homil. 61. ex 18. Matthew
Praesulibus scilicet and Praesidentibus. Tell it the Church, that is, says
Chrysostom, the Rulers and Governors of the Church. And upon the next words,
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever you bind in earth shall be bound in heaven,
etc. he writes thus. Ibidem.
Non dixit Ecclesiae Praesuli, vinculis istum constringe; sed si ligaueris,
haec vineula indissolubilia manent. Christ bids not the Governor of the
Church to bind him, but if thou bind him; the band is in dissoluble. By these
words faith Jerome, Hiero in 18. Matthew.
Christ gives his Apostles power to let them understand that man's judgment is
ratified by Gods. He forewarneth, says Hilarie, that Hilar. in Matt^. ca. 18.
whom (the Apostles) bind or loose, answerably to that sentence they are
bound or loosed in heaven.

If this persuade us not y^ the Apostles had power without the consent of the
people or Presbytery to excommunicate and deliver unto Satan; we cannot deny,
but our Savior gave them this power, that Johan. 20.
whose sins they did remit should be remitted; and whose they did retain,
should be retained; yea speaking particularly to one of them, he said, Matthew.
16.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. If then the rest had Cypr. de vnitate
ecclesi. c,
equal power and like honor with Peter, as Cyprian says they had; and if
Paul were 2. Corinthians. 12
nothing behind the chief Apostles, as him self affirms he was not; it is
evident he had power to bind in heaven, and to deliver unto Satan without the
help of the Presbytery or people of Corinth. And why? The power of the keys
was first settled in the Apostles before it was delivered unto the Church; and
the Church received the keys from the Apostles, not the Apostles from the
Church. And therefore when Augustine says, August. tract. 50. in Iohann.
If this (I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven) were spoken
only to Peter, the Church does it not: if this be done in the Church, then
Peter when he received the keys, (represented or) signified the whole Church:
We must not think by the name of the Church he entendeth the Lay Presbytery
or the people, but he does attribute this power to the Church, because the
Apostles and their successors, the Pastors and Governors of the Church
received the keys in Peter and with Peter. Ambros. de dignitate sacerdotali
ca. 6.
The keys of the kingdom of heaven we all that are Priests, says Ambrose,
received in the blessed Apostle Peter.

The Apostles then had the keys of Christ's kingdom to bind and loose both in
heaven and in earth; and by the dignity of their Apostleship received the
holy Ghost to remit and retain sins as well before as after Christ's
resurrection, without either Presbytery or people to concur with them.
Hilar. de trinitate lib. 6.
O you blessed and holy men, (says Hilarie speaking of the Apostles,) that
for the desert of your faith gate the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
obtained right to bind and loose in heaven and earth.

I suppose then it is not much to be contradicted, that the Apostles had from
their master a larger commission, fuller instruction, higher power, and greater
gifts then the rest of the Doctors, Pastors, Prophets and Evangelist in the
Church of Christ; and that the Churches in their time were not governed by the
voices and consents of the greater part concurring with them before any thing
could be done, but by their precepts and rules delivered by speech, or
expressed by writing, which the faithful in every place as well Pastors as
people with all readiness obeyed: And that in appointing and ordeyning Pastors
and Elders; as likewise in reteyning sins, and binding offenders by
delivering them unto Satan; or rejecting them from the fellowship of Saints,
they needed not the help or agreement of the people or Presbytery; but had
power sufficient with imposing their hands as the Spirit directed, to make
Prophets and Pastors, by giving them the gifts of the holy Ghost needful for
their several callings; and by the same power, could yield the bodies of such
as sinned and repented not, to be punished and afflicted by Satan, or remove
them from the Communion of Christ's Church, and exclude them from the kingdom
of heaven, as their wickedness or wilfulnes deserved. This superiority they
retained whiles they lived; so moderating their power, that they sought rather
to win the evil disposed with lenity, then repress them with authority,
save when the wicked might no longer be endured, lest others should be
iufected; and using such meekenes and mildnes toward al, that no schism
disordered the Church by their rigor, nor soul perished by their default;
laboring more to profit many with their pains, then to prefer themselves
before any by their privilege, and utterly forgetting their own dignity,
whiles they served and advanced Christ's glory. I observe as well their
patience as their preeminence, lest any man should think, I go about to make
them Princes in the Church of Christ, to command and punish at their
pleasures, and not rather faithful Stewards and careful Shepherds, to feed
and guide the Church committed to their charges.

CHAP. IX. What parts of the Apostles power and charge were to remain in the
Church after their decease, and to whom they were committed.
IT will happily be granted the Apostles had their prerogative and preeminence
above others in the Church of Christ; but that limited to their persons, and
during for their lives: and therefore no reason can be made from their
superiority to force the like to be received and established in the Church of
Christ for all ages and places; since their office and function are long since
ceased, and no like power reserved to their successors after them. I do not
deny but many things in the Apostles were personal, given them by Gods
wisdom for the first spreading of the faith, and planting of the Churches
amongst Jews and Gentiles, that all nations might be converted unto Christ by
the sight of their miracles, and directed by the truth of their doctrine: yet
that all their gifts ended with their lives, and no part of their charge and
power remained to their after-commers; may neither be confessed by us, nor
affirnted by any, unless we mean wholly to subvert the church of Christ. To be
called by Christ's own mouth, and sent into all nations; to be furnished with
the infallible assurance of his truth, and visible assistance of his spirit;
not only to speak with tongues, cure diseases, work miracles, know secrets,
and understand all wisdom, but to give the holy Ghost to others that they
might do the like; these things, I say, were needful at the first preaching
of the Gospel, to convert infidels that never heard of Christ before; to
confirm the believers compassed with diverse temptations; and to store the
whole world then presently with meet Pastors and Teachers: but to maintain
the Church once settled, and faith once preached; there is no cause why either
the immediate vocation or general commission, or mighty operation, and sudden
inspirations of the Apostles should always endure. The Scriptures once
written, suffice all ages for instruction: the miracles then done, are for ever
a most evident confirmation of their doctrine; the authority of their first
calling lives yet in their succession; and time and travel joined with Gods
graces bring Pastors at this present to perfection; yet the Apostles charge to
teach, baptize, and administer the Lords Supper, to bind and loose sins in
heaven and in earth; to impose hands for the ordaining of Pastors and Elders,
these parts of the Apostolic function and charge, are not decayed, and cannot
be wanted in the Church of God. There must either be no church, or else these
must remain: for without these no church can continue.

The Gospel must be preached, the Sacraments must be frequented, for which
purposes some must be taken to the public service and ministry of the
Church. for Romans 10.
how shall they invoke in whom they have not believed? or how shall they
believe (in him) of whom they have not heard? or how shall they hear without
a Preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent? without sending
there can be no preaching; without preaching the word, there is no ordinary
means for faith; and without faith there is no Church. Neither only the lack
of the word and Sacraments, but the profanation and abuse of either, how
greatly doethit endanger the state and welfare of the whole Church of Christ:
yea, Mat. 7.
the casting of holy things unto dogs; and of pearls before swine; how
dreadful a judgment does it procure, as well to the consenters as presumers:
1. Cor. 5.
A little leaven so wreth the whole mass. So that power to send laborers into
Gods harvest, and to separate profane persons for de^iling the mysteries and
assemblies of the faithful, must be retained and used in the Church of Christ,
unless we will turn the house of God Iere. 7.
into a den of thieves, and make the Temple Revel. 18.
a cage for unclean and hateful birds.

As the things be needful in the Church of Christ; so the persons to whom they
were first committed, cannot be doubted. Mat. 28.
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, said our Savior to the eleven in mount
Oliuet, whenhe ascended. Luke 22.
Do this in remembrance of me, said he to the twelve that sat at supper
with him. After his resurrection when he appeared to the eleven sitting
together, he said; John 20.
As my father sent me, so send I you; Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins
ye remit, they are remitted; whose sins ye retain, they are retained. for
though the Lord before his death promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven
unto Peter, and as then said nothing unto the rest; yet after his rising from
the dead, Cypr. de vnitate eccles.
he gave all his Apostles like power, as Cyprian observes, and Hiero. li. 1
ad. uers. Jouinian.
they all received the keys of the kingdom of heaven, as Jerome avouches.
Orige. tract. 1. ex 16. Math.
Are the keys of the kingdom of heaven given only to Peter by Christ,
(saie^h Origin) neither shall any other of the blessed receive them? If this
saying, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, be common also to
the ^est; why should not all that went before and follows after, as spoken to
Peter, be common to all (the rest?) So Augustine: August. tract. 15. in
Io^an^em.
If in Peter had not been a mystery of the Church, the Lord would not have
said unto him, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Gal. 2.
The Gospel over the uncircumcision (that is over the Gentiles) was committed
to me, says Paul, as over the circumcision (or Jews) was to Peter. 2. Cor.
4.
Let^ man (therefore) so reckon of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God. The Apostles were Stewards of the word and
Sacraments, and had the keys of Gods kingdom, not only to dispense them
faithfully whiles they lived, but in like sort to leave them to the Church of
Christ, as needful for the same, until the end of the world. Neither need
I spend more words to prove they must remain in the Church, since that is not
doubted on any side, but rather examine to whom the Apostles left them, and to
whose charge those things were committed.

The word and Sacraments are not so much questioned, to whom they were
bequeathed, as the power of the keys, and right to impose hands, to whom they
are reserved. To divide the word and administer the Sacraments is the general
and perpetual charge of all those that feed the flock of Christ, and are set
over his household to give them meat in season. 1. Pet. 5.
The Elders that are among you, I that am also an Elder exhort, (says Peter)
feed you the flock of Christ, which is committed to you. Act. 20.
Take heed to your selves and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has
made you overseers, to feed the Church of Christ, says Paul to the Elders of
Ephesus. Matt. 28.
Go teach, baptize; which our Savior has joined, may not be severed; and the
service must endure as long as the promise, which is this; (in so doing) Ibid.
ver. 20.
I am with you always until the end of the world; not with his Apostles so
long; they are dead fifteen hundred years before our days, but Christ is
present with those that succeed his Apostles in the same function and
ministry for ever. Their Commission to do both cease not, so long as his
precept binds them, and help supporteth them in both, which is to the worlds
end.

The power of the keys, and right to impose hands, I mean to ordain
Ministers, and excommunicate sinners, (for so I always interpret those two
speeches) are more controuersied then the other two; by reason that diverse men
have diverse conceits of them. Some fasten them to the liking of the multitude;
which they call the Church; others commit them to the judgment of certain
chosen persons as well of the Laity, as of the Clergy, whom they name the
Presbytery; some attribute them only, but equally to all Pastors and
Preachers; and some specially reserve them to men of the greatest gifts, ripest
years, and highest calling amongst the Clergy; which of these best agrees
with the truth of the Scriptures, and use of the primitive Church, in place
convenient will soon appear. It shall now suffice in few words to observe,
how near imposing hands and binding sins do join with the dispensation of
the word and Sacraments: that thereby we may resolve whether lay men may
entermeddle with these ecclesiastical actions or no.

To create ministers by imposing hands, is to give them, not only power and
leave to preach the word, and dispense the Sacraments; but also the grace of
the holy Ghost to make them able to execute both parts of their function. This
can none give, but they that first received the same. They must have this power
and grace themselves, that will bestow it on others. Lay men which have it
not, can by no means give it; and consequently not impose hands, which is the
sign and seal of both. Yea what if to give power to preach and baptize, be
more then to preach and baptize? even as lawfully to authorize an other to do
any thing, is more then to do it our selves? August. de baptis. contra
Donatist. li. 1. ca. 1.
Sacramentum baptismiest, quod habet qui baptizatur. Sacramentum dandi baptismi
est, quod habet qui ordinatur. It is the Sacrament of baptism, (says Austen)
that he has, which is baptized. It is the Sacrament of giving baptism, that
he has which is ordered. Yea Calvin himself, a man of no small learning and
judgment in the Church of God confesses it is a kind of Sacrament, and in
that respect not to be given by any but only by Pastors. Calu. Institut. li 4
ca. 19. sectio. 28.
Surely, says he, (the Papists) are very lewd, in that they dare adorn
(their sacrificing Priesthood) with the title of a Sacrament. As for the true
function of the ministry commended unto us by the mouth of Christ; Libenter
eo loco habeo, I willingly accept it (for a Sacrament) for first there is a
ceremony (of imposing hands) taken out of the Scriptures; then Paul witnesses
the same not to be superfluous and empty, but a sure sign of spiritual
grace. And that I put it not third in the number (of Sacraments) it was because
it is not ordinary nor common to all the faithful, but a special rite for a
certain function; and therefore of imposition of hands he says; Idem
institut. li. 4. ca. 3. sect^o 16.
Hoc postremo habendum est non vniuer sam multitudinem manus imposu^sse
ministris, sed solos Pastores: This lastly we must learn, that the whole
multitude did not impose hands on their Ministers, but only the Pastors did
it. Then may lay men no more challenge to impose hands then to baptize; yea,
to preach and baptize, is not so much as to give power and grace to others
openly and lawfully to do the like in the Church of Christ; and therefore if
laie-men be debarred from the one, they be much more excluded from the other.

To excommunicate, is to remove the wicked and irrepentant from the
participation of the Lords Supper; least by sacrilegious presuming to violate
that table, the ungodly should condemn themselves, and defile others. Whose
calling it is to deliver the bread and cup of the Lord to the due receivers, is
out of question; they are for that cause named the ministers of the word and
Sacraments. Now to whom it pertains to admit the worthy, to them it
belongs to reject the unworthy. they that are placed by God to deliver the
mysteries to the faithful and penitent; are commanded by him to deny them to
the faithless and impenitent. The charge to deliver the Sacraments is theirs,
the care not to deliver them, (but where they be willed by God so to do) must
needs be theirs; you must free them from both, or leave both unto them. If it
shall be required at their hands, they may not be forced by others; if none can
excuse them, none may compel them. We may plainly perceive, as well by their
calling, which they have from God; as by the account they shall yield unto God,
that the delivering or withholding the Sacraments is in the Pastors power and
charge, and not in theirs, which have neither vocation nor commission to meddle
with the word or Sacraments. Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Mat. 26.
No small punishment (says Chrysostom to those that ministered the
Communion,) hangs over you, if knowing any man to be wicked, you suffer him
to be partaker of this Table. His blood shall be required at your hands. If he
be a Captain, a Consul, or a crowned king that comes unworthily, forbid him,
and keep him off; thy power is greater then his. If any (such) get to the
Table, reject him without fear. If thou dare not remove him, tell it me; I
will not suffer it. I will yield my life rather, then the Lords body to any
unworthy person; and suffer my blood to be shed before I will grant that
sacred blood to any, but to him that is worthy.

Again, it cannot be doubted, but the moderation of the keys, and imposition
of hands were at first settled in the Apostles, and exercised by them, as I have
already made proof by the Scriptures; and neither the people nor laie-Elders
succeed the Apostles, but only the Pastors and ministers of the word and
Sacraments. They can have no part of the Apostolic commission, that have no
show of Apostolic succession. They must look not only what they challenge,
but also from whom they derive it; if from the Apostles, then are they their
successors; if from Christ, as Colleagues joined with the Apostles, we must
find that consociation in the Gospel, before we clear them from intrusion.
Hebr. 5.
No man (should) take this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God,
as the Apostles were. If they be called by Christ, read their assignation from
Christ; if they be not, surcease that presumption. But in deed how should
they be called to deny the Sacraments, that are not licenced to divide the
Sacraments? or what right have they to stay the seal, that have no power to
affixe the seal? The word of God is sealed by his Sacraments; and whom he
has sent to denounce the one, those has he chosen to annexe the other. If in
preaching the word, laie-men were no public parteners with the Apostles; in
directing the Sacraments, which are the seals of the Gospel, they could not
be linked with the Apostles. They must be trusted with both, or with neither.
And so are Pastors, receiving by succession the power and charge both of the
word and Sacraments, from and in the first Apostles and messengers of Christ.
1. Pet. 5.
The Elders that are among you, I exhort, says Peter, (...), as a Co-elder
(with you) feed ye the flock of God, committed to you. Pastors then which
feed the flock, have coparcinerie with the Apostles; Laie-men have not, and
consequently the power and right granted by Christ to his Apostles and their
successors, may not be challenged or communicated to them that have no
fellowship with the Apostolic function. Hiero. ad Heliodorum de vita Eremetica.
God forbid, (says Jerome) that I should speak any evil of those who
succeeding the Apostolic degree, make the body of Christ with their sacred
mouth; by whom we become Christians; who having the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, in sort judge before the day of judgment. A monk has one calling, a
Clergy man another. Clergy men feed the flock, I am fed. It is not lawful
for me to sit before a Priest; he may, if I sin, deliver me to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved.

With imposing of hands, it may be the people had nothing to do: but the
electing of Pastors, when they came once to be chosen, pertained chiefly and
wholly to them as the story of the primitive Church declares. and so the
retaining and remitting of sins, the multitude might not challenge: but with
casting notorious and scandalous offenders out of their company, the whole
Church did intermeddle, as appears by Paul's words written to the Church, and
not to the Pastors or Elders of Corinth.] I come not yet to the manner of
electing Pastors, used in the primitive Church, when prophecy failed, and the
miraculous gifts of the spirit ceased; I reserve it, as time and order lead
me, to the next age after the Apostles: but with the Apostles, as there was no
cause the people should, so is there no proof they did concur in choosing
their Pastors. for the people might not appoint on whom the holy Ghost should
bestow his gifts; that were to tie Gods graces to their pleasures; but if they
were to choose, they must elect such as were meet and able, which then were
none, until by the Apostles hands they had received the wonderful and
extraordinary gifts of the spirit to prepare and fit them for the care and
charge of the Churches where the holy Ghost would make them overseers. Against
this, if any thing can be objected out of the Scriptures, I would gladly hear
it; as yet I find there neither example of it, nor reason for it. The election
of the seven Deacons, is the only precedent that can be found in the word,
and that conuinceth utterly nothing for the choice of Pastors. With money
matters not only at Jerusalem, but in all places the Apostles refused to
meddle; avoiding thereby all occasion of sinister reports and suspicion, that
they did any way increase or regard their private gain; and for that cause
Paul would not so much as carry the benevolence of the Gentiles to the poor
saints at Jerusalem, without some specially trusted and 2. Cor. 8.
chosen by the Churches, to see it faithfully done. Phil. 2.
All seek their own, and not that which is Christ's; had poisoned so many, 1.
Tim. 6.
thinking gain to be godliness; that Paul to clear himself of that
suspicion, and to show that he 2. Cor. 2.
sought them and not theirs, 1. Cor. 9.
did not use the power he might, in living on the Gospel, where he preached
the Gospel, but his Act. 20.
own hands ministered to his necessities. And for the same reason the Apostles
at Jerusalem would not have the goods and lands of the disciples pass through
their hands; but to be dispensed by some such, as the people liked and named to
that purpose. Now for choosing of Pastors, or rather making them fit to be
Pastors, which before were not fit; the people had little to say, and less
to do; but the holy Ghost directed the Apostles by prophecy, or otherwise on
whom he would bestow his gifts, and they should lay their hands; in which
case I cannot so much as imagine, how, or why the people should join with the
spirit of God, to power his heavenly gifts on such as he furnished for the
service of his Church; or limite the Apostles on whom they should lay their
hands; si^ce not man, but God, made choice of those persons.

As for excommunication, if you take it for remoouing the unruly from the
civil society of the faithful, until they conform themselves to a more
Christian course of life; I am not altogether auerse, that the whole Church,
where there wants a Christian magistrate, did, and should concur in that
action. for thereby the sooner, when all the multitude join in one mind to
renounce all manner of conuersing with such, will the parties be reduced to a
better mind, for shame and grief to see themselves rejected and exiled from
all company; and the whole Church shall declare their innocence before men,
by avoiding and shunning the doers of wickedness; and increase their zeal and
love of holiness before God, by hating and detesting unrighteousness in
others, and by keeping themselves clean and unspotted from the like offenses.
1. Cor. 5.
If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one eat
not. 2. These. 3.
Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. This rule as I
could wish every Christian man did for his own part duly observe; so I judge
it not amiffe, if the whole congregation in defect of a christian magistrate,
join with the Pastor in misliking, rebuking, and forsaking such disordered and
usual offenders, as will neither be reclaimed nor ashamed of their lewdness;
but for delivering or denying the Sacraments, I take that to be the Pastors
charge, and not the peoples. Yet Pastors shall do well after the example of the
ancient and godly fathers, Cyprian and others, not only to provoke repentance
in the malefactors, but to tender the offense taken by the multitude so far,
that as the minds of the godly are grieved by notorious impieties, so they may
be satisfied and contented by the earnest and unfeigned sorrow of the repentant,
before they be received to the Lords table. Against these rules of Christian
moderation and circumspection, I dispute not; I only enquire whether by the
word of God any lay persons have any interest to withhold or yield the
Sacraments without the allowance and liking of the Pastor. And to express
what I think, I find no warrant in the Scriptures for it; and the maine
consent of the Catholic fathers, and course of the Primitive Church against
it. Some places are detorted and wrested to that effect; but they must be very
partial, that will be led with such weak proofs.

The words of our Savior, Math. 18.
If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane,
which are the only groundwork of this opinion, I have before handled and
examined as far forth as needed. If by those words the church of Christ were
meant, which no circumstance there enforces; yet the rulers and governors of
the Church are thereby intended, as Chrysostom affirms, and Annotatio. in
18. cap. Math.
a soul error it is, as Beza thinks, to say the whole multitude is there
comprised. In deed it is no new rule, neither with the Scriptures, nor with
other writers, for the chiefer and worthier part to bear the name of the whole.

The fathers, who often attribute excommunication to the Church, by no means
endure that laie-men should use the keys delivered to the Apostles and their
successors. Ambros. de poenitent. li. 1. ca. 2.
That right is permitted only to Priests, as Ambrose says; Chrysostom. de
Sa^^rdotio, li. 3.
It is the Priests band that touches the soul, and reaches unto heaven, as
Chrysostom teaches. Orige* tract. 1. in Math.
When they which challenge the place of Bishops, and received the keys of the
kingdom of heaven from our Savior, teach; what they bind, is bound in heaven;
what they loose, is loosed in heaven; we must acknowledge they say well, if
withal they have those things, for the which it was said to Peter, The gates
of hell must not prevail against him, that will bind and loose. for if he be
bound with the ropes of his own sins, in vain does he (offer to) bind or
loose, says Origin. Cypr. li. 1, epist. 2.
Shall it not be imputed to us (says Cyprian with the rest of the Bishops his
Colleagues) if so good a soldier should die without peace, and without the
Communion? Shall not great slacknesse, or cruel hardness be ascribed to us in
the day of judgment, that being Pastors, we neither in peace would heal the
sheep committed and credited unto us, nor arm them in the battle? How do we
teach or provoke them to shed their blood in the confession of Christ's name,
if we deny them the blood of Christ, when they be entering the conflict? or
how do we make them ready for the cup of martyrdom, if first in the Church
we admit them not by right of Communion to drink the Lords cup? It has
pleased us therefore, the holy Ghost directing us, that upon examination of
every man's cause, such as fell in persecution, should be reconciled (or
received to the Lords table;) and if there be any of our Colleagues which does
not think it good to give peace (that is the Communion) to the brethren or
sisters persecution approaching, he shall in the day of judgment render account
to the Lord of his importune censure, or inhumane rigor. And so again, Idem
li. 3. epist. 16.
when as in smaller faults a man may not come to the Communion, except the
Bishop and the Clergy first lay their hands on him (in sign of
reconciliation,) how much more should the discipline of the Lord be observed in
these most grievous and extreme sins? Likewise Basil; Basil. in reguli^
contractioribu^, qu^st. 288.
Confession of sins must necessarily be made to them to whom the
dispensatio^ of the mysteries of God is committed: for so they which in former
times repented amongst the Saints, are read to have done. It is written in the
Gospel, that they confessed their sins to John Baptist; In the Acts they all
confessed their sins unto the Apostles, of whom they were baptized. Ibid.
quest. 15.
Power to forgive (sins) is not absolutely given; but (limited) to the
obedience of the penitent, and agreement with him that has the charge of the
soul.

Hiero. in Math. ca. 16.
Apud Deum non sententia Sacerdotum, sedreorum vita queritur, Quomodo ergo ibi
leprosum Sacrdos mundum vel immundum facit, sic and hic alligat velsoluit
Episcopus and Presbyter: With God says Jerome, not the sentence of the Priest,
but ye life of the party is respected. As therefore (in the law) the Priest
did make (that is pronounce) the Leeper clean or unclean; so (in the Gospel)
the Bishop and Presbyter binds or loses. And again, Idem in ca. 3. ad
epist, ad Tit.
formicator, adulter, homicida and caetera vitia per Sacerdotes de Ecclesia
propelluntur. The fornicator, the adulterer, the homicide, and all other
transgressors, are cast out of the Church by the Priest. S. Augustine; He
that willingly judges himself, least against his will he be judged of the
Lord, Aug li. 50. homil^arum hom. 50. ca. 11.
Veniat ad Antistites, per quos illi in Ecclesia claues ministrantur, and a
Praepositis sacrorum accipiat satisfactionis suae modum: Let him come to the
Presidents by whom the keys are ministered unto him in the Church, and receive
of them that have the oversight of the Sacraments, the manner of his
satisfaction. Ambros. de poenitentia, li. 2. ca. 2
It seemed impossible that by repentance, sins should be remitted, says
Ambrose, but Christ granted this to his Apostles, and from the Apostles it
descended to the Priests function. Greg. in euang. hom. 26.
Lo, says Gregory, (the Apostles) which feared the district judgment of God,
are made judges of souls. Their places now in the Church, the Bishops keep.
They have authority to bind and loose, that are called to (that) degree of
regiment. A great honor, but a great burden follows this honor. Let the
Pastor of the Church fear indiscreetly to bind or loose: but whether the
Pastor bind justly or unjustly, the Pastors sentence is to be feared of the
flock.

The Councils general and provincial, reserve both excommunication and
reconciliation to the judgment and conscience of the Pastout and Bishop; and
by no means impart either of them to the people or laie-Elders. The great
Council of Nice. Ni^^n. Council. ca. 5.
Touching such as are put from the Communion, whether they be Clergy men or
Lay, by the Bishops in every place; let this rule be kept according to the
Canon, that they which be rejected by some, be not received by others; but let
it be carefully examined, that they be not cast out of the church by the
weakness, waspishnes, (frowardnes) or rashness of the bishop. And y^ this matter
may the better be enquired of, we like it well, y^ twice every year there should
be kept a Synod in every Province, y^ all the Bb. of the Province meeting
together, may examine those matters; and such as have clearly offended their
bishop, let the^ be held justly exco^municat by all, until it shall seem good
to the bishops in common to give an easier judgment of them. This was the
ancient and universal rule of Christ's Church; for the Pastor or Bishop to
have the power of the keys to admit and remove from the Sacraments such as
deserved it; and for the examination and moderation of their doings, neither
people nor laie-Presbyters were joined with them, but a Synod of Bishops in
the same Province every half year heard the matter, when any found himself
grieved with the censure of his Bishop, and they according to the right of the
cause were to reuerse or ratify the former judgment; yea the Bishop had power
at the time of death, or otherwise upon the unfeigned repentance of the party
to mitigate the rigor of the Canons; as appears in the 12. and 13. of the
same Council. Council. Niceni, ca. 12.
It shall be lawful for the Bishop to deal more gently with them. And again,
Ca. 13.
generally for every (excommunicate person) that is ready to depart this life,
and desires to be partaker of the Eucharist; let the Bishop upon trial give
him the Communion. And so the general Council of Chalcedon. Council. Chalc^.
ca. 16.
We determine the Bishop of the place shall have power to deal more
favorably (with such as by the Canons should stand excommunicate.)

The Council of Antioch. Council. Antioch. ca. 6.
If any be deprived the Communion by his own Bishop, let him not be admitted
to the Communion by others before he appear and make his defense at the next
Synod; and obtain from them another judgment; except his own Bishop or
Dioecesan, be content to receive him. This rule to be kept touching laie-men,
Priests and Deacons, and all others within the compass of the Canon. The
Council of Sardica. Council Sardicens. ca. 14.
If a Bishop be over carried with anger, (which ought not to be in such a man,)
and hastily moved against a Priest or Deacon, will cast him out of the church,
we must provide that he be not condemned, when he is innocent, nor deprived the
Communion. And the Bishop that has put him from the Communion, must be content
that the matter be heard, that his sentence may be confirmed or corrected. But
before the perfect and exact hearing and looking into the cause, he that is
excommunicated, may not challenge the Communion. The third Council of Carthage;
Council. Carthag. 3. ca. 31. and 32.
Let the times of repentance be appointed by the discretion of the Bishops unto
y^ Pen^ents, according to the difference of their sins. And that no Presbyter
reconcile a penitent, without the liking of the Bishop; unless necessity
force in the absence of the Bishop. And if the fault be public and blazed
abroad, and offend the whole Church, let hands be imposed on him, before (the
railes, or) Arch (which seuereth the people from the ministers.) Concerning
those which worthily for their offenses are cast out of the assembly of the
Church, Augustine (then) Legate for Numidia said. May it please you to decree,
that if any bishop or Presbyter receive them to the Communion, which are
worthily thrown out of the Church for crimes committed, he himself shall be
subject to the same challenge that they were, declining the lawful sentence of
their own bishop. Sozomene declaring after what penitential manner the
excommunicate persons in the Primitive Church stood in an open place, whence
the whole assembly might see them; adds, that in this sort, Sozome. li. 7.
ca. 16.
every one of them abides the time how long soever, which the bishop has
appointed him. A thousand other places might be noted both in Fathers and
Councils, to show that from the Apostles to this day; no late person was ever
admitted in the Church of Christ, to join with the Pastors and Bishops in the
public use of the keys; and therefore the fathers have exceeding wrong to be
made favorers and vpholders of the late discipline and lay Presbytery.

Cyprian confesses, the people consented and concurred with him in the
receiving of Schismatikes, and such lewd offenders to the church and Communion,
upon repentance. His words to Cornelius be these: Cypr. li. 1. epistola ^.
O if you might be present here with us when perverse persons return from
their schism, you should see what labor I have to persuade patience to our
brethren, that suppressing their grief of heart, they would consent to the
receiving and curing of these evil (members.) I hardly persuade the people,
yea, I am forced to wrest it from them, before they will suffer such to be
admitted.] It is an easy matter to make some show of contradiction in the
writings of the ancient fathers, diverse occasions leading them to speak
diversely; but it will never be proved they thought it lawful for Lay men to
challenge the public use of the keys in the Church of Christ. The causes of
excommunication, and times of repentance were wholly referred to the judgment
of such as had the chiefest charge of the word and Sacraments, as we
mayperceiue by the former authorities; yet in notorious and scandalous
offenses, when the whole Church was grieved, or when a schism was feared; the
godly fathers did both in remoouing and reconciling of such persons, ^taie for
the liking and approbation of the whole people to concur with them; not to
warrant or confirm the sentence that should be given, but to satisfy their
consciences, and to prevent schisms. Aug. lib. ^0. homiliarum homil. 50. ca.
10.
In offering the sacrifice of a troubled heart, let the deuote and suppliant
do not only that which helps for the recovering of his own salvation, but
that also which may do others good by example: when his sin has greatly
hurt himself, and scandalized others, atque hoc expedire vtilitati ecclesiae
videtur Antistiti, and the Bishop (or chief Priest) think it expedient for
the good of the Church, let him not refuse to repent in the sight of many; yea,
of the whole people. How dangerous it is to Mat. 18. v. 6.
offend the least of those that believe in Christ, the Gospel does witness.
Great reason then had those godly fathers, to see the whole Church satisfied
before they released the sentence of excommunication, or time of repentance;
and in so doing, they showed, not what right the multitude or laie-Elders had
to sit Judges with the Bishop, but what care themselves had to remove from the
people all occasions of stumbling; diligently teaching their flocks neither
to stagger at other men's falls to their own subversion, nor to be straight
laced against repentance, through presumption of their own standing, which
were nothing else but to insult at other men's miseries.

The like course S. Augustine advises to be used, for avoiding seditions and
factions. August. contra Parmenian^ epistolam lib. 3. ca. 1.
When any man's fault is so known to all, and abhorred of all, that it has no
partakers, or not such by whom a schism may rise, slack not the severity of
discipline. And then may it be done without breach of peace and unity, and
without harming the corn, when the whole multitude of the Church is free from
that ^inne for which the offender is excommunicated. for then (the people)
rather help the Governor (or Pastor) nebuking, then the guiltle resisting.
Then do (the people) keep themselves from his society, so as not one of them
will eat with him, not of an hostile rage, but by brotherly correction. Then
the offender is stricken with fear, and recovered with shame, when seeing
himself held accursed of the whole Church, he can find no number to join
with him to insult on the good, and rejoice in his sin. But all this not
withstanding, the censure proceeded from the Bishop and Pastor of the place,
and not from the people or laie-Elders associated with him in pronouncing that
judgment. Examples and testimonies whereof are every where to be had both in
Austen and Cyprian.

When Roga^ianus a Bishop, contumeliously abused by his Deacon complained unto
Cyprian and others of that injury, Cyprian wrate back in this wise. Cypria.
li. 3. epistola 9.
You did us great honor, and showed your accustomed humility, in that you
choose rather to complain of him (to us,) Cumpro Episcopatus vigore, and
Cathedrae authoritate haberes potestatem, quia possis de illo statim vindicari;
whereas by vigor of your Episcopal function, and authority of your chair,
you had power (enough) to be straightway revenged of him. And after a long
discourse, that honor and obedience is due to the Priests and Pastors by Gods
law, he concludes; Ibidem.
Therefore the Deacon of whom you write, must show himself penitent for his
boldness, and acknowledge the honor of (your) Priesthood, and with full
humility satisfy (you being) his Bishop and Governor. And if he shall offend
and provoke you any more with his contempts, use against him ye power of your
(calling and) honor, either in deposing or excommunicating him. And because you
wrate of an other that took part with your Deacon in his pride and stiffenes,
him also, and if there be any more that set themselves against Gods Priest, you
may either repress, or remove from the Communion. Yet we wish and desire with
mild patience, to conquer the reproaches and wrongs of every one, potius quam
sacerdotali licencia vindicare, rather then to revenge them in such sort, as it
is easy for Priests to do. Speaking of himself and his own cause, he
says; Cypr. li. 1. epistola 3.
The Church here is shut against no man, the Bishop withholds himself
from none, my patience, facility and mildness are open to such as come. I
remitte all things, I conceal many things* I do not examine trespasses
against God with a religious and exact judgment, for the very desire and care
I have to keep the brethren together; I my self do almost sin with
remitting offenses more then I should.

Auxilius a fresh young Bishop, having excommunicated a person of good account
with his whole family for infringing the liberties of his Church, as he
supposed; Saint Augustine treats with him by letters to know what ground he
had out of the Scriptures to excommunicate the son for the Fathers, the wife
for the husbands, the servants for their masters offense; and amongst others
uses these words. August. epistola 75.
Lo, I am ready to learn; an old man of a young, a Bishop of solong
continuance, from my Colleague, not yet a years standing: what good reason we
may yield to God or to men, if for another man's sin we endanger innocent
souls with a spiritual punishment. If you can give a reason for it, vouchsafe
by writing to acquaint me with it, that I may be able likewise; if you cannot,
what is it for you to do (such a thing) upon an unadvised motion of the mind,
whereof being asked, you are not able to yield a just reason? Neither think
that unjust anger cannot overtake us, because we are Bishops; but let us rather
remember we live dangerously amidst the snares of temptations, because we are
men. Saint Austen blames neither people, nor Presbyters for the deed; but the
Bishop whose hasty judgment it was; and wills him, not them, to be think
himself what account he can yield to God or man for that Ecclesiastical
censure. And that excommunication pertained to the Pastoral charge, and
proceeded from the Episcopal power and seat; the same Father every where
witnesses. Upon the words of Saint John, I saw seats, and some sitting on
them, and judgment was given, he writes thus. August. de ciu^tate Dei lib.
20. ca. 9.
Non hoc putandum de vltimo iudicio dici, sed seeds Praepositorum and ipsi
Praepositi intelligendi sunt, per quos ecclesia nunc gubernatur. Iudicium autem
datum nullum melius accipiendum videtur, quam id quod dictum est, quaecunque
lig aueritis in terra erunt ligata and in caelo etc. This must not be thought
to be spoken of the last judgment, but the seats of the Presidents, and the
Presidents themselves, by whom the Church is now governed, are thereby to be
understood. And judgment given can no better way be taken, the^ for that
which is spoken of (in these words;) Whatsoever you bind in earth, shall be
bound in heaven; and what you loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

May not the word Praepositi signify the Lay Elders, as well as Bishops; since
they also are set over the Church to govern the flock in their kind as well
as Pastors?] The Fathers use many words to express the calling and office of
Bishops, as Antistites, Praesules, Praesidentes, Praepositi, Rectores,
Sacerdotes, and such like, but of all these Praepositus with Cyprian and Austen
is the most usual word for a Bishop, and has best warrant from the
Scriptures. Cypr. lib. 1. spist. 3.
Ob hoc ecclesiae Praepositumpersequitur, vt gubernatore sublato, atrociui
atque violentius circa ecclesiae naufragia grassetur. For this cause says
Cyprian, does (Christ's enemy) pursue him that is set over the Church, that
the Governor being made away, he may with more violence and fury make
havoc in the shipwrackes of the Church. And again in the same place, We may
not be so unmindful of the divine doctrine, vt maiora esse furentium
scelera, quam Sacerdotum iudicia censeamus, as to think the wicked enterprises
of the desperate to be of more force, then the judgments of Priests. Ibidem.
Shall we lay aside the power and authority of Priests, vt iudicare v^lle se
dicant de ecclesiae Praeposito extra ecclesiam constituti? de indice rei? de
Sacerdote sacrilegi? To let them that are ought of the Church say they will
judge of the Ruler of the Church? the guilty of him that is their Judge?
sacrilegious persons of their Priest? And elsewhere; Cypr. lib. 3. epist. ^4.
what danger is not to be feared by offending the Lord, when some of the
Priests, not remembering their place, neither thinking they have a Bishop set
over them, challenge the whole unto themselves cum contumelia and contemptu
Praepositi, even with the reproach and contempt of him that is set over them.
And so almost every where Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 9.
Apostolos, id est Episcopos, and Praepositos Dominus elegit. The Lord
(himself) chose the Apostles, that is, the Bishops and overseers. And
again, Episcopo praeposito suo plena humilitate satisfaciat: Ibidem.
with all humility let him satisfy the Bishop, being set over him.

Saint Augustine uses the word in the same manner. August. de ciuitate Dei
lib. 1. ca. 9.
Their case is far worse, says he, to whom it is said by the Prophet; He
shall die in his sins, but his blood will I require at the watchman^hands. Ad hoc
enim speculatores, hoc est populorum Praepositi constituti sunt in ecclesiis,
vt non parcant obiurgando pecca^a. For to this end are watchmen, I mean the
Pastors of the people placed in the Churches, that they should not spare to
rebuke sin. August. epist. 166.
Our heavenly master (says he in another place) gave us warning before hand,
vt de Praepositis malis plebe^secura^ redderet, ne propter illos doctrinae
salutaris Cathedra desereretur, to make the people secure touching evil
overseers, lest for their sakes the chair of wholesome doctrine should be
forsaken. And again, August. in Johan, tract. 46.
Habet ouile Domini Praepositos, and filios and mercenarios. Praepositi aute^,
qut fily sunt, Pastores sunt. The Lords fold has some overseers, that be
children, and some that be hirelings. The overseers that be children, are
Pastors. Ibid. epist. 162.
Diuina voce laudatur sub Angeli nomine Praepositus ecclesiae: By Christ's own
mouth the ouerseer of the Church is praised under the name of an Angel. August.
de Pastor^bus ca. 4.
Attendit ouis etiam fortis plerumque Praepositum suum; The sheep that is
strong for the most part marketh his Leader: and says in his heart, si
Praepositus men's sic v^uit: If my leader so live, why should not I do that
which he does. The old translation of the new Testament has ye very same use
of the same word Praeposits. Hebr. 13.
Mementote Praepositeru^ vestroru^, qui locuti sunt vobis verbum Dom. Remember
your (Leaders or) overseers which spoke unto you the word of God. And agame,
Ibidem.
Obedite Praepositis vestris; ipsi enim peruigilant quasi ratione pro animabus
vestris reddituri; Obey your overseers, for they watch over your souls, as
those that shall give account (for them.)

And as the use of the word is clear in S. Austen, so is this assertion as
clear, that excommunication is a Pastoral and Episcopal judgment, and no
Laicall or popular action or censure. August. de cor. reptione and ra. tia ca.
15.
Ipsa, quae damnatio nominatur, quam facit Episcopale iudicium, qua poena in
ecclesia nulla mayor est, potest si Deus voluerit in correptionem saluberrimam
cedere. Pastoralis tamen necessitas habet, ne per plures serpant dira contagia,
separare ab outbus sanis morbidam. That which is called condemnation, an effect
of the Episcopal judgment, then the which there can be no greater punishment
in the Church, may if it so please God turn to a most wholesome correction. Yet
the Pastor must needs separate the diseased sheep from the sound, lest the
deadly infection creep further. But what need we more private testimonies,
when the public Laws of the Roman Empire will witness as much: Novel
constit. 123. ca 11.
We charge all Bishops and Priests (says the Emperor by his authentike
constitution) that they separate no man from the sacred Communion before they
show the cause, for which the holy Canons will it to be done. If any do
otherwise in remoouing any from the holy Communion, he that is unjustly kept
from the Communion, let him be absolved from his excommunication by a
superior (Bishop or) Priest, and restored to the Communion; and he that
presumed to excommunicate (without just cause) let him be put from the
Communion by the Bishop under whose jurisdiction he is, as long as (the
Superior) shall think good, that he may justly abide that, which he unjustly
offered. No man ought remove an other from the Communion but a Bishop or a
Priest; and he that unjustly did it, was by a superior and higher Bishop to be
put from the Communion for such time as he thought meet.

Every private man by Saint Austens confession, might admonish and reprove,
yea, bind and loose his brother; and Theophilact says; Theoph in Matthew. ca. 16.
Not only those things which the Priests do loose, are loosed; but whatsoever,
we being oppressed with injury, do bind or loose, those things are bound and
loosed also.] Echman by word of mouth, and with grief of heart, might and
should detest sin, and reprove sinners; and he that is afflicted with any
wrong, has best right to release the same. But this does not touch the
public use of the keys in Christ's Church, whereby wicked and impenitent
persons are excluded or removed from the Sacraments, until they show
themselves sorrowful for their sins, and willing to amend their lewd course
of life. With preaching the word and delivering the Sacraments, neither people
nor lay Elders might intermeddle, but only Pastors, which had the charge and
care of souls committed unto them.

To whom then did Paul speak when he said to the Corinthians, 1. Corint. 5.
Remove that wicked one from among you?] If he spoke to the people, he meant
they should refrain all society with that incestuous person, and not so much
as eat with him: if he intended to have the malefactor removed from the
Lords Table; he spoke to the Prophets and Pastors that had power and charge
so to do. S. August. contra Parmen^a in epistola lib. 3. ca. 1.
Austen does often expound it, as if he had required them to remove that evil
one from themselves, in not allowing, consenting, or favoring so wicked a fact
in their hearts. Take which you will, I stand indifferent; howbeit by the
words of his second Epistle it should seem, he spoke not to the whole Church
of Corinth, but to the leaders and teachers there, when he willed them to
remove that wicked one from amongst themselves. For this he writes of the
very same person: 2. Corinthians. 5.
Sufficient for this (offender) is the punishment, (or reproof) that proceeded
from many (not from all.) Wherefore I pray you confirm your love toward him.
For this cause also did I write, that I might see the proof of you, whether
you would be obedient in all things. So that in excommunicating the incestuous
sinner, Paul asked not their consents, but tried their obedience, and they with
all care and zeal showed themselves ready to execute his precept.

At least yet the Presbytery joined with the Apostle in excommunicating that
malefactor; and of this Presbytery the Lay Elders were no small part; so that
by this precedent of the Apostolic discipline, the Pastors cannot exclude any
men from the Sacraments without the liking of the Lay Elders and Presbyters.]
What the Presbytery might do cannot well be resolved, until it be first
agreed, of what persons this Presbytery consisted. Some think certain
skillful and discreet men as well of the Laity as of the Clergy, were
appointed by the common choice of the people to deliberate and determine of
manners and all other matters pertaining to the regiment of the Church; and
that by their advise and consent, as it were by the decree of an
Ecclesiastical Senate, the power of the keys was directed, and hands
imposed. For this assertion, they show the witness both of Scriptures and
Fathers so clear, as they suppose, that they cannot be avoided. Some others
confess there was a kind of Presbytery in the Apostles times and long after
in many Churches: but thence they exclude all Lay persons as no parts thereof,
and account in that number none, but such as had charge of the word and
Sacraments, and jointly labored the converting of unbelievers to the faith, and
preserving of the Church in truth and godliness. Which of these two positions
is the sounder, in process will appear.

CHAP. X. What the Presbytery was, which the Apostles mention in their
writings, and whether any Lay Elders were of that number or no.
IT is not to be doubted, that in the Apostles time, every city where the
Gospel was received, had many Prophets, Pastors and Teachers not only
traueling to and fro to exhort and confirm the brethren, but abiding and
persisting in the same place, all laboring to increase the number of the
Church, and continue the faithful in their profession. At Jerusalem fifteen
years after Christ's ascension were Act. 15.
Apostles and Elders; At Antioch in the Church were Act. 13.
Prophets and Teachers, Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manehen and Saul, besides
Mark and others. In Rome when Paul wrate thither were many approved Romans 16.
Laborers and helpers in Christ whom he knew before, besides such as the city
it self yielded; of whom he had then no such experience, and therefore
passes them over unsaluted by name as men unknown. After, when he came
thither, he shows who were his Coloss 4.
work fellows unto the king dome of God, to the Church of Corinth he says,
1. Cor. 14.
Let the Prophets speak two or three, and the restiudge. Being ^t Miletum he
Act. 20.
sent for the Elders of Ephesus, whom the holy Ghost had set to watch and
feed the Church of God. He writes to the Saints at Philippi Phil. 1.
together with the Bishops and Deacons. S. James says to the Jews dispersed,
Iaco. 5.
If any be sick, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
over him: nothing there were in every Church not one, but many Elders, whose
office it was to pray over the sick, relcase their sins, and ease their
infirmities.

This number of Teachers and Helpers in the Gospel was not superfluous, but
very requisite in those days; by reason they were forced to exhort and
admonish as well privately Act. 20.
throughout every house, as openly when the Church was assembled, for fear of
seducers that secretly 2. Tim. 3.
crept into houses leading away women laden with sins, and Tit. 1.
subverted whole houses teaching things (they ought not) for filthy lucres
sake; and also for that they were daily to win those to Christ that yet
believed not. In which case they were to refrain no place, nor slack no time to
make Christ known to every particular person, and house that was ignorant of
him. And to this end they needed more aid then otherwise to guide and direct
the Church at such times as the Saints met together. Neither ceased this
necessity with the Apostles; it dured many hundred years after them; which
was the cause that in every great city the Pastors and Bishops had many
Ministers and helpers joined with them, to labor the conversion of miscreants,
to strengthen and encourage the Martyrs and Confessors that suffered by
thousands for the name of Christ, to visit the sick and comfort them in their
extremities, to cate chise the Nouices, to attend the service and Sacraments of
the Church, to examine the faith, and survey the behavior of all that repaired
to the Lords Table, and to perform a number of such sacred duties, which for
one Pastor or Bishop alone to do in so populous cities and assemblies, as they
had, was utterly impossible.

A Presbytery then of Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, the Apostles in their
times had and used in every City, where they planted the Faith and settled the
Church: but that lay Governors or Elders were part of that Presbytery, and
concurred jointly with the Pastors and Prophets in imposing hands, and
exercising the power of yt keys, and censuring both doctrine and manners; I find
no such thing commanded or warranted by the Scriptures; the patrons of yt Lay
Presbytery must undertake the burden to prove their assertion.

The very foundation of the Lay Presbytery so strongly conceived and eagerly
pursued by men in our days, is the place of S. Paul 1. Tim. 5. 1. Tim. 5.
The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, chiefly they that labor
in the word and doctrine. Hence it is resolutely inferred; ergo, there were
some Elders that labored not in the word and docrine; and those by comparison
of other places are supposed to be 1. Cor. 12.
Governors, which office Paul names amongst the spiritual functions of the
Church, when he says; Romans 12.
He that rules (let him do it) with diligence. It is a matter of nosmal
weight to give Lay men power in every parish to impose hands and use the
keys, yea to have the full and whole government of the Church, above and
against the Pastors by number of voices, if they differ in judgment; and
therefore the ground that shall bear the frame of the Lay Presbytery had
need be sure, especially when it is urged as a part of Christ's spiritual
kingdom, without the which no Church can be Christ's, no more then it may
without the truth of his doctrine. But whether the words of Saint Paul 1.
Timoth. 5. infer any such thing or no, this is the matter we have now in
hand. Some learned and late writers do so conceive of that place; for my part,
I see so many just and good reasons against their supposall, that I can not
yield to their judgment.

The first reason I have of the weakness of this place to uphold the Lay
Presbytery is, that many learned and ancient Fathers have debated and sifted
the force of these words, and not one of them ever so much as surmised any
such thing to be contained in this Text. Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose,
Theodoret, Primasius, Oecumenius, Theophilact and diverse others have considered
and expounded these words, and never dreamed of any Lay Presbytery to be
mentioned in them. If then the words of Saint Paul stand fair and clear
without this late devise, as in the judgment of these learned and ancient
Writers they do; What reason after fifteen hundred years, to entertain a
new platform of governing the Church by Lay men, upon a bare conceit that the
words of Saint Paul may sound to that effect as some imagine?

The second reason of my dissenting is; for that Saint Paul naming the
Presbytery but once in all his Epistles, excludes al Lay Elders from that
Presbytery. 1. Timoth. 4.
Neglect not the grace which is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy,
with the imposition of hands of the Presbytery. This is the only place in all
the Scriptures, where the Presbytery is namely mentioned; and Lay Elders are
most plainly removed hence as no part of this Presbytery. For this
Christian Presbytery gave imposition of hands to ordain Ministers: but
Lay Elders had no right to impose hands to that purpose; Ergo. Lay men were no
part of this Presbytery. That imposition of hands to make Ministers is a kind
of Sacrament, and reserved solely to Pastors; if Saint Austens authority were
not sufficient, Caluins confession is very euid^nt, which I noted before. They
must be Ministers of the word and Supra page 109.
Sacraments and succeed the Apostles in their Pastoral charge and function,
that must ordain others by imposing hands, and give them power and grace to
dispense both the word and Sacraments. This Lay Elders in the Apostles times
neither did, nor might do; they were therefore no part of that Presbytery,
which Saint Paul speaks of in his writings. Must we take the word not for
the College of Elders, but for the degree and office which Timothy received?
Neither so is the force of my reason avoided. For choose which you will to be
the signification of the word (...), either collectiue for the whole company
of Elders, or distributive for the degree and office of every Elder: if
collectiue, none could be of that College that might not give imposition of
hands; if distributive none might take that function and calling on him, but
must receive imposition of hands, as Timothy did. Then Lay men which neither
did give nor receive impositio^ of hands, are barred both from the degree, and
from the society of Presbytery, which was in Saint Paul's time.

Beza thinks best to take it for a nowne collectiue, and adds, Annotat. in
1. Timoth. 4.
(...) id est, ordinis Presbyterorum; quo nomine coetus ille omnis
significatur, qui in verbo laborabant in ea ecclesia, vbi hoc factum est. The
Presbytery; that is, the order or company of Elders; by which name the whole
company is signified, that labored in the word in that Church, where this was
done. Then the whole Eldership or company of Elders in S. Paul's time labored in
the word. Where now were the Lay Elders that labored not in the word: What
Presbytery were they of: Had every Church two Presbyteries? I trust not. This
whole Presbytery consisted of Pastors and Teachers; An other College of Lay
Elders and no Pastors will never be found.

My third reason is, for that the Text it self does clearly refuse the sense
which they enforce. For as they conclude, there were ergo some Elders that did
not labor in the word and doctrine, and yet governed well; so the words are
more evident, that they all were worthy of double honor, whether they
labored or governed. Which by Saint Paul's proofs presently following, and by
the consent of all old and new Writers is meant of their maintenance at the
charges of the Church. Chrysest homil. 15. in 1. Tim. 5.
Honor in this place, (says Chry sostome) Paul calls reverence and
allowance of things needful. Paul Hiero. in 1. Timoth. ca. 5.
will have (the rest) yield carnal things to them of whom they receive
spiritual, because being occupied in teaching, they can not provide things
needful for themselves. Ambros. in 1. Timoth. ca. 5.
Good and faithful Stewards, says Ambrose, ought to be thought worthy not
only of high but of earthly honor, that they be not grieved for lack of
maintenance. Paul Calu. in 1. Timoth. ca. 5.
wills maintenance to be chiefly yielded to the Pastors that are occupied in
teaching. For such is the ingratitude of the world, that take small care for
nourishing the Ministers of the word. Bulling. in 1. Timoth. ca 5.
As the poor, so the Elders serving the whole Church, are to be maintained by
the goods of the Church. Paul Vilichius in 1. Timoth. 5.
mentioning the Church treasure, presently exhorts the Ministers of the
Church to be thence maintained. Bezain 1. Timoth. 5.
By the name of honor is signified al godly duty and relief, after the use of
the Hebrewe (speech.)

Now that Lay Judges and Censors of manners were in the Apostles time found at
the expenses of the Church, or by Gods Law ought to have their maintenance at
the peoples hands; is a thing to me so strange and unheard of, that until I see
it justly proved, I can not possibly believe it. S. Paul has laid down this
rule; 1. Cor. 9.
They that serve at the Altar, should be partakers of the Altar; and by Gods
ordinance, they that preach the Gospel, must live of the Gospel. Where shall
we find the like for the Lay Judges that labored not in the word? They were,
(if any such were;) as the sagest, so every way the sufficientest men that were
amongst the people; for fear of faction, contempt and corruption, which
easily grow when the weaker and baser rule over the richer and better sort. If
the Apostle will not have the poor widows, so long as they might otherwise be
succored or employed, grieve the Church; would he then put the burden of the
Lay Judges and Elders, in number many, in state able to relieve others, on the
necks of the meaner and poorer brethren? there is neither cause, nor
commandment in the word so to charge the Churches of Christ with maintaining
the Lay Senate, which yet must be done before this construction can be admitted.

The fourth reason that holds me from receiving this construction is, that I
find diverse and sundry interpretations more agreeable to the Text, and more
answerable to S. Paul's meaning, then this; which is lately so much liked and
obtruded to the whole Church as the express voice of Gods spirit.

I derive my first exposition from the Apostles purpose, which here is so
plain, that it can not be doubted. For letting Timothy understand with whom
the Church of necessity must be charged, and what degrees must be observed in
their maintenance; he begins with widows, and shows which of them are
fit to be relieved by the Church, and which to be left to their friends
and kinsfolks, that 1. Tim. 5.
the Church be not burdened, but may suffice for those that are widows
indeed. From widows he comes unto Elders; that is, from the women to the
men amongst them that must be found food and apparel for them and theirs at
the charges of the Church, and of them he says, Ibidem.
The Elders that rule well, to wit, which guide well the things committed to
their charge, let them be counted worthy of double honor; he means either
of larger allowance then the widows, because their calling was higher, and
pains greater; or else maintenance for themselves and their families; which the
widows might not expect. For since they were to relinguish their former trades
of life, whereby they succored their families, and wholly to addict themselves
to the service of the Church; the wisdom of God provided for them, as under
Moses for the Priests and Levites, that they which served at the Altar,
should live of the Altar, both they and theirs. These Elders were of two
sorts; some labored in the word, some cared and attended for the poor. Both
were worthy of double honor, if they discharged their duties well, but
Ibidem.
specially they that labored in the word and doctrine. The Church that was to
bear the charge; the party to whom he wrate, were acquainted with it before
this time, and accustomed to it. Paul requires the people to do it willingly
and liberally, and warns Timothy to see it done. For such as serve the
Church are worthy of it, chiefly the Ministers. There were then, you will
say, other Elders in the Church that were not Ministers of the word. There
were, and those were the Deacons, whom you must either exclude from
maintenance, and that you may not; or else comprise in this place under the
name of Elders.

Happily you think this an evasion and no exposition. It stands more clearly
with the intent of Saint Paul then Lay Elders, and as clear with the words.
When the Church at Jerusalem was divided by Saint Luke and their own letters,
into Act. 15.
Apostles, Elders and Brethren; in which of these three are the Deacons
contained? Not in Elders? When Paul and Barnabas Act. 14.
ordained Elders in every Church as they passed, left they the Churches
without Deacons, or neglected they the care of the poor? The next words to
these, 1. Tim. 5.
Receive not an accusation against an Elder, but under two or three witnesses;
do they exclude the Deacons, or include them in this rule? If the word (...)
an Elder, be a name of age; why shall the Deacons be barred that name, when
as they were chosen for their age, gravity and wisdom, as well as the
Ministers? If it be a name of office; that the Deacons 1. Tim. 3.
by well ministering get themselves a good degree, Saint Paul witnesses: that
Lay men had any office in the Church as here is imagined, what Text
proves? This only place of all the New Testament is produced; and by this,
the doubt is rather increased, then decided.

Besides, that the words (...) be often so largely taken, that they comprise
all Ecclesiastical functions, might soon be proved, if it were not confessed
by such learned men as very much favor this late found construction. Annotat.
Bezain 1. Tim. 4.
These names of Bishops, Elders and Deacons be sometimes general. Idem in 1.
Pet. ca. 5.
The name of Elder is general comprehending all those, that have any
ecclesiastical function. Then is our first exposition neither false nor
forced, but matcheth as rightly with the words of Saint Paul as theirs does,
and far righter with the sense.

A second interpretation of the words is that which Chrysostom and other
Greek writers embrace; that where in a Minister of the word, good life, good
government, and good doctrine are required: the two first are commended; but
painfulness in yt word, is chiefly to be preferred in men of their calling.
And so not two sorts of Elders, but two parts of the Pastoral charge and
function are employed in these words. Speak I more then you your selves
confess? Is it not your own distinction, that some are Doctors, which labor in
the word, but have no cure of souls; some Pastors, which besides their public
pains in the word, have a special charge and watch over every man's soul,
where they live? S. Paul to the Hebrews calls the Ministers of the word Hebr.
13. verse 7. and 17.
(...); and between (...) which is to stand before, and (...), which is to go
before, (as Leaders do,) what difference can you find? Hear one whose
learning you cannot, and judgment in this case you do not mislike. Annotat.
Beza in 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Idem valet (...); quia nimirum Pastores gregi praeeant. These two words are
al one in signification; because the Pastors do go before or lead the
flock. They must as well Act. 20. v. 28.
(...), that is, ouersee, as feed* and does ouerseeing import no more then
simply teaching? why should it seem strange to any man, that we affirm the
Ministers of the word should be not only (...) paineful to reach, but (...)
watchful to guide and ouersee, since the Apostle joins them both in good
Pastors? 1. These. 5. v. 12.
We beseech you brethren (says he) acknowledge (...), those which labor
amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and have them in
singular love for their work sake. Whereupon a great Patron of the discipline
writes thus: Cal^. in 1. These. 5.
Notandum est quibus titulis Pastores designet* primo dicit eos laborare, simul
praefecturae nomine eos ornat. It is to be noted, by what titles Paul
designeth Pastors: first he says, they labor; and withal he adourneth them
with the name of rule and government. It is then no consequent out of this
place, ergo, some Elders did not teach, but govern; this rather is inferred;
ergo, more is expected of an Elder then teaching; to wit, good example of life,
and watchfulness over his charge. As if he should have said; Pastors or
Elders are worthy of double honor in that they guide well themselves and
their flock; but chiefly for that they labor in the Word, which is the
greatest and chiefest part of their function. And so is our second
interpretation warranted both by the true bounds of the Pastoral function,
and the like use of the same words elsewhere in the Apostle, and all this
confessed by them that are very well learned, and well affected to the
Presbytery.

A third explication of these words, may be shortly drawn from the force of
the word (...), which imports paineful and earnest labor; and then the
sense is: The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, chiefly
they which be laborious and painful in the word. This to be the proper and
usual force of the word (...), when it does not signify bodily labor; but
is transferred to the mind, I think no man learned does doubt. (...) is simply
to labor, (...) is to weary our selves with labor. Beza Annotat. in Matthew. 11.
Certe plus est (...) quam (...) s^propriam vtriusque significationem spectemus
(...) is more then (...) says Beza, if we respect the proper signification of
either; as wearines is more then labor. He then which labors is worthy of
his wages; but he that even wearieth himself with hard labor, is more
worthy. So says Saint Paul. The Pastors or Elders that discharge their
places are worthy of double honor, chiefly they which refuse no pains and
weary themselves with labor and care to teach and admonish. Speak we
absurdly, obscurely, or not answerably to the force of the Apostles words, when
we thus expound him:

A fourth construction may be had of this Text, and that consonant to the words
and intent of S. Paul; and yet ^o Lay Elders empanelled in the Jurie. (...) may
be referred to such Pastors and teachers as were abiding in every Church; and
therefore are properly said (...) to have the charge and over sight of the
faithful, as being affixed to the place for that purpose; (...) to those that
traveled from place to place to visit and confirm the Churches. The words
serve well for this difference, and both forts were to have maintenance from
the Churches, as well they that traveled as they that persisted. Touching the
use of the word (...), besides that in the 6. of Matthew; the 5. and 12. of
Luke; the 4. of John; 20, of the Acts; the 1. Corinthians. 14; the 4. Ephesians. the
2. Tim. 2: it does without all contradiction signify bodily labor and
weariness; Saint Paul in the 1. Corinthians. 15. thus writes: 1. Cor. 15.
Christ rising from death the third day was seen of James, then of all the
Apostles; last of all he was seen of me as one borne not in due time: for I
am the least of the Apostles, and not fit to be called an Apostle, because I
persecuted the Church of God; (...), yet have I labored more then all they. He
means, then the rest of the Apostles, to whom Christ appeared. I demand
whether Paul charged the other Apostles with negligence, or whether he durst
affirm, that he had preached Christ more diligently then all they? It were an
arrogant presumption so to say; and a lewd imagination so to think. What then
is the meaning of his words? Though he were an Abortiue, and the least of them
all, yet had he traveled further in spreading the Gospel then all they. And
why: They were sent to the Jews dispersed in some few Countries, and none of
them passed the limits of Asia, for ought that we teade, save Peter, who was
brought prisoner to Rome toward the end of his life; but Paul had the
Gentiles allotted to him, and so traveled not only Arabia and Jury, but
filled Asia, Greece, Italy and Spain, and many other countries and nations
with the Gospel of Christ; and in that signification of the word (...), which
is to travel for the spreading of the Gospel, he says very soberly,
advisedly and truly, that though he were last called, he had traveled to
preach Christ further then they all.

This word is often so used in the 16. to the Romans. Greece Romans 16.
Marie, (...), who has traveled much for us. And again, Greet Triphaena and
Triphosa, (...), women that labor and travail in the Lord. Greet Per^^^ the
beloved, (...), a woman that has much traveled in the Lord. The women
neither did nor might prea^h in the Church; but many of them traveled far
and near, and dealt by private persuasions (which was more seemly for them to
do then for men) with women to embrace the knowledge of the truth, and repair
to the houses where the Apostles and others did instruct the believers.

And as there were of women that traveled for Christ, so were there of men no
final number, both Prophets, Evangelists and Teachers employing their pains,
and hazarding their lives to convert the faithles, to confirm the faithful.
And though some of them happily lived of their own, and others wrought with
their hands to furnish themselves with things wanting; yet because their work
was more painful and perilfull, then the Pastors that kept their fixed
places; and as needful to increase Christ's kingdom; the Apostle wills the
Churches to have special regard to such that they were not left destitute,
after they had dedicated not only their labor, but also their lives to the
service of Christ. Saint Pa^^es comparisons include both when he ^ayeth, 1. Corinthians. 9.
Who goes on warrefare at his own charges? who planteth a Vine and eats not
of the fruit? Who tends a flock, and ^asteth not of the milk? So that he
which trauelleth abroad for Christ in danger, is more worthy of recompense
then he that fee death the flock at home ingrenter ease and better safety.
Tauching such he says, 1. Cor. 16.
If Timothy come, see he be without fear amongst you: for he works the
work of the Lord even as I do; and send him away in peace. And again Tit. 3.
Bring Zenas, the Lawier and Apollo on their ^ay with diligence, that they
lack nothing. And noting whence they should have it; Ibidem.
Let ours learn to be forward in good works to necessary uses. And Saint
John, Joann. epist. 3.
Thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren and unto
strangers. Whom if thou bring on their journey as it beseems in God, thou
shall do well: because for his names sake they went forth, and took nothing
of the Gentiles. We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be helpers
unto the truth. The sum then of Saint Paul's words after this fourth
exposition is this; The Pastors or Elders that guide well and do their duties
in the places where they remain, are worthy of double honor, but chiefly
they that travel from place to place for the words sake are to be supported;
their pains and need are greatest.

Thus have we four expositions of the place 1. Timoth. 5. consonant to the
signification of the words, and intent of the speaker; and all excluding the
Lay Elders; which we cannot deduce out of this Text without manifest wrong to
the Apostles purpose, and ^^neth of the Scriptures. For then must all Lay
Elders by the word of God have double maintenance from the Church, which is
apparently false; and the Pastors which labor in the word, may not meddle
withguiding, ouerseeing and ruling the flock committed to their charge, which
is as manifest an untruth as the former. If the functions of ruling and
teaching be two distinct offices, then may none intrude on both; if they be
coincident, what need two sorts of Elders, to execute one charge: Set this
place aside, in which I see utterly nothing for Lay Elders; and where else in
the new Testament shall we find, I say, not a sentence but a syllable sounding
for them:

Romans 12.
He that rules (let him do it) with diligence.] Does he say, the Lay man that
rules the Church, let him do it with diligence: No, but he speaks of diverse
functio^s in the Church, and so some must rule that may neither teach nor
exhort, which must needs be lay Elders.] He speaks indeed of Romans 12. v. 6.
diverse gifts and graces of y^ holy ghost; for so (...) does import; of diverse
offices he speaks not: for then they might not concur in one man, and
consequently, neither might the Prophet teach, nor exhort, nor the Deacon
distribute nor show mercy. Many gifts may conioyne in one man; many offices
cannot.

Paul speaks of offices to be executed by those that had gifts according;
and to that end brings in the example of man's body, where the members have
several powers, and several actions.] I see the comparison, and thence I
prove he speaks of particular gifts and not of public offices in the
Church. Romans 12.
As in one body, says he, we may have many members; and all the members have
not the same action; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one an
others members. I ask now whether only the officers of the Church, or the
whole multitude of believers be the the body of Christ: The whole no doubt is
the body, and not this or that part, though excelling the rest. Then as in man's
body, every part has his action; so in Christ's body, which is the Church,
every member must have his gift, and not a public office in the Church.

But Paul names here only those gifts that had their public use in the
Church, and no where else; as prophecy, teaching, exhorting, distributing,
governing, helping.] Which of these gifts in the Apostles times was not common,
as well to the people, as to the Pastors, and to women as well as to men:
Prophecy which is the greatest and unlikeliest to be found in all sorts; was
it not a common gift to old and young: men and maids: Shall Joel make alie that
foretold it: Joel 2.
After that, I will power out my spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy; and upon the very servants and handmaids in those
days will I power out my spirit. Shall Peter be a false witness, that says;
This was performed when the gifts of the holy Ghost were poured on the Church
after Christ's ascension: All those that heard Peter's sermon in Cornelius
house, received Act. 10.
the gifts of the holy Ghost, to magnify God before they were baptized. Act.
21.
The four daughters of Philip, did they not prophecy? 1. Cor. 11.
Every woman, says Paul, praying or prophesying bare headed, dishonors her
head. If then prophecy were a gift of Gods spirit, common to all sorts and
sercs, as well as a public office in the Church; and Paul in the 12. to the
Romans, prescribes and teaches the right use of those gifts, which God gave
to every man, that all the members of Christ's body might have their peculiar
actions according to the measure of faith; what reason have we to convert this
place from the private gifts of every member to the public offices of some
few in the Churches, which were not here intended?

Teaching and exhorting seem not to be private gifts; and therefore stand
rather for ecclesiastical functions.] We are so violent in this conceit of
discipline, that we never remember the Scriptures that contradict it, be they
never so often or evident. Priscilla the wife of Aquila, did she not instruct
and Act. 18.
teach Apollo a Preacher, the way of the Lord more exactly? and does not Paul
call her Romans 16.
his helper in Christ, as well as her husband? The women that labored so much
in the Lord, did they go idly up and down, or did they teach and exhort as
they traveled? 1. Cor. 14.
If the women will learn anything, let them ask their husbands at home,
says Paul, then might the husbands teach them. Coloss. 3.
Let the word of God dwell in you plentifully in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your selves in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the Lord; is a rule for all Christians of all
sorts and degrees, and not for Pastors and Elders only. 1. These. 5.
Exhort one an other, and edify one another, even as you do; admonish them
that are unruly; comfort the feeble minded; bear with the weak; be patient
toward all men. These be general precepts for all believers; to all are they
prescribed, and by all to be performed. If then prophecy, doctrine and
exhortation, be private graces of Gods spirit, and to be used of all according
to the measure of each man's gift, as time and place require, for the good of
our selves and others; what probability can there be that the Apostle in this
place should reckon Church offices, and not rather moderate and direct the
gifts of Gods spirit poured out on his church, and parted amongst all the
members of Christ's mystical body?

Distributing is no gift of the spirit, but plainly an office in the Church;
and so governing and showing mercy joined therewith do fairelie resemble the
Deacons, Elders and widows, that were three ecclesiastical and public
functions.] Distributing of our own in singleness of heart, is a far
greater gift of Gods spirit, then distributing of other men's, as the Deacons
did; and here the Apostle speaks of spiritual gifts. Again, (...) which is
a ministry or service, is before used, and had been the fittest word for the
Deacons office, if the Apostle had purposed to treat thereof. But if we seek
for the true meaning of S. Paul in this place, and not to please our own
humors, S. Peter's words uttered to the same effect that these are, will help
us. 1. Pet. 4.
Be harbourers one to another without grudging. As every man has received the
gift, minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace
of God. If any man speak, let them be as the words of God; if any man
minister or give any thing to an other, let him do it as of the ability that
God has given him, that in all things God may be glorified. This place, as
well as the rest, I find is racked to serve for the supposed discipline; but
if we mark whereabout Saint Peter goes, we shall learn as much of S. Peter
here in few words, as of Saint Paul there in larger speech and more
plentiful parts. As every man (says Peter, (and not every Pastor or
Deacon) has received the gift; (of Gods grace, and not an office by man's
choice:) so minister the same one to another (for the benefit of each other.)
If any man speak let him speak to comfort and edify) as the words of God;
if any man minister (that is, do good, not in words, but in deeds, to an
other) let it be according to the ability that God has given (him, not
according to the contributio^s he has received of other men) that in all
things (even in all our words and deeds) God may be glorified. S. Paul with
alonger circuit of words, expresses the same sense. As all the parts of our
bodies have diverse actions tending all to the use and profit not of
themselves, but of others; so Romans 12.
every man says he, (and not only Teachers and Elders) according to the
grace given (by Gods spirit and not by man's election, should be soberly
content with their measure, and use to the good of others) whether it were
prophecy, teaching and exhorting (which consist in words) or governing and
serving with diligence, relieuing and helping with cheerfulness (which
consist in deeds.) for all the members of Christ's body, though they can not
teach, exhort, and guide; yet may they serve, relieve, and show mercy; and
these are the gifts of Gods Spirit, not so miraculous, but as precious in his
sight as the former, and proceed from the most excellent gift of Gods spirit
passing all gifts, which is, 1. Cor. 13.
unfeigned love and charity.

The Text may more kindly and currantly be referred to the public offices of
the Church.] First then you must point us forth seven such offices: for Romans
12.
here are seven diverse parres. Next, you must prove that (...), these gifts of
the spirit, belong to the officers of the Church only, and not to the rest of
the faithful. Thirdly, we must know whether these offices must be divided, or
may be combined in one person; if they be distinct, no Prophet may teach or
exhort; no Teacher may exhort or prophecy; if they may meet and agree in one
subject, then are they no offices, but graces; and he that has one, may have
all; and so are you further from your purpose, then you were be fore. Lastly,
make them even ecclesiastical functions if you list, how then can you challenge
them, or any one of them to lay persons:

Clergy men may not govern the Church.] You must leave that error for your
credites sake, as crossing the Scriptures, which makes Pastors to be John 21.
Shepeheards, Hebr. 13.
Watchmen, Overseers, Act. 20.
Rulers and Guiders of the flock, and infringeth your own positions, who say
that Pastors do rule and govern the Church. If he that rules, must do it
with diligence; the Pastors by these words are appointed to be watchful, as
those that shall answer for the souls of their flock, and not the lay
Elders.

If it be a private gift, to whom does it appertain?] To every man that has
charge or family. The father with diligence is to guide his children, the
master his servants, the husband his wife. 1. Tim. 5.
He that has cast away the care of his household, is worse then an Infidel. To
feed them, and not to rule them, and train them in the fear of the Lord, is
grossly to neglect them. He that rules not well his own house, by S. Paul's
prescription, must not be 1. Tim. 3. v. 5.
trusted with the Church of God. It is therefore a special virtue and grace of
Gods spirit to rule well the persons committed to our charge. Let it be gift
or office, private or public, it makes nothing for lay Presbyters.

There remains yet one place where Governors are named amongst
ecclesiastical officers; and that is 1. Cor. 12.] The answer is soon made,
if we be not contentious. Teachers are there expressed, but Pastors omitted;
and therefore well might Governors be mentioned in stead of Pastors. If this
content you not, I then deny, they be all ecclesiastical functions that are
there specified. 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Powers, gifts of healing, kinds of tongues, what functions shall we call them
in the Church of Christ: They were ornaments to the Pastoral and Prophetical
calling.] And so was government. To govern, is a duty and no gift.] To
govern wisely is a great gift of the holy Ghost, and more needful for the
Church then tongues, healing, or miracles. To the governing of the Church
belonged more then censuring of manners, or examining of witnesses; wisdom to
prevent dangers, to direct doubtful cases, to discern spirits, to calm
strifes; many other weighty graces were requisite for the governing of the
Church. This is therefore a principal gift of the holy Ghost; but not a
different office from those that go before. The Apostles, Prophets, and
Teachers in the Church, had they not power to do miracles, to cure the sick,
to speak with tongues: if these three be no diverse offices, but graces, and
all three found in every Apostle, in many Prophets and Teachers; why should
not government, being reckoned in the midst of them, be a gift likewise of the
holy Ghost, bestowed on such Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, as pleased the
spirit of truth and grace to vouchsafe that honor:

To make us understand, that we must not confound the functions in the Church
with the gifts of the spirit, much less mistake the one for the other; let us
number the gifts of the spirit that are noted in this one Chapter, and see
whether the public functions of the Church can any way be proportioned to
them. 1. Cor. 12. v. 8
To one, says S. Paul, is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom; to
another the word of knowledge; verse. 9.
to another faith; to another, the gifts of healing; verse. 10.
to another, the operation of great works; to another, prophecy; to another,
discerning of spirits; to another diversities of tongues; to another, the
interpretation of tongues. Here are nine gifts of the holy Ghost numbered; in
the end of this very chapter are named two more; helping and governing, that
were not reckoned before. To the Romans, are five different from these
rehearsed; in all sixteen. I trust there were not so many distinct offices in
the Church. The Apostle even in this chapter verse. 8.
setting down eight degrees and dignities of spiritual gifts, and placing
them as it werein order, clean smitteth Pastors and Deacons, as being rather
standing offices in the Church, then miraculous gifts. Many Pastors and
Doctors were furnished with many of them; the Apostles had them all, and that
in greater measure then any other; which in offices could not be, in gift might
be. These were therefore neither usual nor perpetual functions in the
Church, as Pastors and Deacons must be; but miraculous and extraordinary
gifts and graces during only for a time, and given in what measure and to what
persons it best liked the holy Ghost, for the overthrowing of Satan's kingdom,
and gathering of the Saints together, at the first planting of the Church.

What were Governors then in the Primitive Church?] for my part I am not
ashamed to say, I could easily presume, I can not easily prove what they
were. The manner and order of those wonderful gifts of Gods spirit, after so
many hundreds may be coniectured, cannot be demonstrated. Why should they not
be laie-Elders, or Judges of manners?] Because I find no such any where else
mentioned, and here none proved. Governors there were, or rather
Gouernements, (for so the Apostle speaks) that is, gifts of wisdom,
discretion and judgment to direct and govern the whole Church and every
particular member thereof in the manifold dangers and distresses, which those
days did not want. Governors also they might be called, that were appointed
in every congregation to hear and appease the private strifes and quarrels that
grew betwixt man and man; least the Christians to the shame of themselves, and
slander of the Gospel, should pursue each other for things of this life
before the Magistrates, who then were infidels. Of these S. Paul speaks, 1.
Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 6.
Dare any of you, having matters one against another, seek for judgment
before the unjust, and not before the Saints? If you have any quarrels for
things of this life, appoint the worst in the Church, (to be your Judges.) I
speak this to your shame: Is there never a wise man amongst you, that can
look into his brothers cause, but brother goes to law with brother, and that
before Infidels? These Governors and moderators of their brethrens quarrels and
contentions I find; others I find not in the Apostolic writings, but such as
withal were watchmen and feeders of the flock.

None fitter then those Governors which you last named, to restrain the
unruly, and chastise the ungodly. for they censured the misbehauiors and
disorders of men against men, and why not likewise the sins and offenses
committed against God?] These Governors had neither authority, necessity,
nor perpetuity in the Church of God. Rather then the Christians should eagerly
pursue one another before Pagans, and by their private brabbles cause the
unbelievers to deride and detest the doctrine of Christ; the Apostle wills
them to suffer wrong, o^ else to refer the hearing and ending of their griefs
to some wise and discreet arbiters within the Church: but he gives those
judges no leave, to challenge the determining of other men's matters, nor power
to command or punish the disobeier. that were, to erect magistrates in the
Church, and to give them the sword even in temporal and civil causes; which
the Apostle neither did, nor could warrant. Besides, in Christian common
wealths where there can be no doubt of despising or scorning the Gospel for
going to law, those judges must cease; since there is no cause to decline the
Tribunals of believing Princes, to whom the preserving of all men's rights, and
punishing of all men's injuries and enormities does by Gods law generally and
wholly appertain. If these were the laie-Presbyters and Governors, which you
so much stand on; they must give place to the magistrates sword, where the
state vpholdeth the Christian faith, as in England it does, and God grant it
long may.

Think ye that Pastors and Prophets in the Apostles times were hindered from
their callings, and combred with examinations of parties principal,
exceptions, and depositions of witnesses, and such like Consistory courses, as
were needful for the trial of the truth when any man accused? How far better
is it to refer these things to the hearing of certain grave and good men chosen
from amongst the Laity, rather then to busy and ouerload the Preachers and
laborers in the word with those tedious and superfluous toiles?] The
Iudiciarie pains in the Apostles time were not great, nor the process long.
They meddled with no matters, but with so notorious, that they scandalized the
Church, and infamed the doctrine of our Savior with Infidels; and in those
cases, where every man could speak, the proof was soon made. Again, the
Prophets and Pastors in those days had the gifts of discerning spirits, and
knowing secrets; so that malefactors were soon discovered and convinced, if
the case were doubtful. S. Paul is a witness, that to know secrets was then
incident to the gift of prophecy. 1. Cor. 14.
If you all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, he is rebuked
of all men, and judged of all men; and so are the secrets of his heart made
manifest; and he will fall down on his face and worship God, and say plainly,
that God is in you in deed. A little before he ioineth them both together. 1.
Cor. 13.
Though I had prophecy, and knew all secrets. To reveal things hid, and
foresee things to come, were then annexed to the gift of prophecy, not
generally and perpetually, but when and where the necessity of the Church, or
Gods glory required it should be so. Thirdly, the Apostle has plainly
committed, 1. Tim. 5.
the receiving of accusations even against Elders, and 1. Tim. 5.
open rebuking of such as sinned, unto Timothy; and he in sight was no lay
man. What warrant have you then to take that from Pastors and Teachers, as a
burden to their calling, which Paul charge them with; and to give it to lay
Elders, upon pretense of some better policy, as if the spirit of God in Paul
had missed his mark in establishing the worst way to govern the Church? That
Pastors must iudicially examine and rebuke such as sin; we prove by the
evident words of S. Paul: show you the like for lay Elders, and we will
quietly resign you the cause. Lastly, since the power of the keys, and
oversight of the Sacraments, did, and do clearly belong to Pastors, and not
is lay Elders; I see not how lay men that are no magistrates, may challenge to
intermeddle with the Pastors function, or overrule them in their own charge,
without manifest and violent intrusion on other men's callings against the word
and will of Christ, who gave his Apostles the holy Ghost, John 20.
to remit and retain sins* and so joined the word and Sacraments together,
that he which may not divide the one, may not dispose the other; and so both
word and Sacraments must pertain to lay Elders, or neither.

I call no man Lay in contempt or derogation either of his gifts, or of that
state, in which I know the Church of God has always had, and has many grave
and worthy men fit for their wisdom and gravity, to be are as great, or
greater charge then clergy men. I use that name for distinction sake, which I
find in the best and (...) ancient writers: for such as were not by their
calling dedicated and devoted to the public service and ministry of the
Church in the word and Sacraments; notwithstanding they were and be the people
of God, and his inheritance; even a chosen generation 1. Pet. 2.
and royal Priesthood by the inward sanctification of the holy Ghost, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And so the
learned know the word (...), whence Lay is derived, imports even the Lords
peculiar people; which distinction of people from Priests, is neither profane
nor strange in the Scriptures. Esa. 24.
There shall be, says Esaias, like people, like Priest. And so says Ose. 4.
Osee; as also Ier. 23. and 26.
Jeremy divides the Church into the Prophet, Priest, and People. As for the
name of Clergy men, Jerome says, Hiero, ad Nepotianum de vita Clericorum.
Propterea vocantur Clerici, vel quia de sort sunt Domint, vel quia ipse
Dominus sors, idest, pars Clericorum est. Therefore are they called Clergy men,
or Clerks, either because they are the Lords portion (to serve the Church of
Christ,) or for that the Lord is their portion and part (to live on such things
as are dedicated to the Lord.) The Lay he calls Seculares, Secular men,
which word is not so good as Laici, the Laity or people.

The name of Presbyter I use, not thereby meaning aged and ancient men, of what
calling soever they be, as the word sometimes signifies and wherewith I see
many that favor the Presbytery, deceived and deceiving others; but I use it
for those whom the Apostles call (...), Presbyters, (whence our tongue
following the French, long since derived Priests) who for their age should be
Elders, and by their office are ministers of the word and Sacraments, and
overseers of the flock of Christ. And though there can be no doubt, but very
often in the Scriptures, (...), in Latin Seniores, in English Elders, are
taken for Pastors, Teachers, and such as labored in the word, and dispensed
the Sacraments; yet some more zealous then discreet, no sooner he are of the
word Presbyter or Senior, an Elder, in Scriptures or Fathers, but they
straightway dream of their lay Presbytery, which is the greatest ground of
all their error, and lightest proof that may possibly be brought. For which
cause I am forced often to distinguish the ministers of the word, from such as
some men would have to be Governors of the Church, by the name of Presbyter,
and not of Elder, which in our tongue is more common to aged men, then to
Clergy men. But howsoever they may play with words, to make some the we that
Elders were Governors of Christ's Church in the Apostles times; assuredly no
man is able to (...) that lay men were public Governors to ordain
ministers, or remove sinners from the Lords table while the Apostles lived;
and after their deaths the longer we search, the further we are from finding
any such Elders.

The whole Church by the very words of our Savior might exclude disobedient
and froward persons, from their fellowship, as Et^nikes and Publicanes; and bind
them both in heaven and earth.] I have answered already that those words of
Christ by the ver^^ confession of such as are the greatest defenders of this
new discipline, were spoken of the Judges and Magistrates of the Jews. And if
by the credit and authority of the fathers we will needs have them spoken
of Christ's Church, we must then take the Church for the Pastors and leaders
of the Church, that have received power from Christ to bind and loose in
heaven and earth. Lastly, if we intend nothing else by those words, (Let him be
to thee as an Ethnike and Publicane) but refrain all company with him, and
eat no more with him, then thou would with an Ethnike and Publicane; this
charge pertains rather to the whole Church then to any lay Elders or
Governors in the Church. The Apostles words, 1. Cor. 5.
When you are gathered together, put away from among you that wicked man, are
rather directed to the whole Congregation then to any lay Elders in the Church
of Corinch; as are also these that follow, 1. Cor. 5.
I wrate unto you, that you should not company together with fornicatours; but
now I have written unto you, if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator or covetous; an Ido^ater, railer, drunkard or extortioner, with such
an one eat not. Must only the lay Elders, or all the multitude avoid the
company of such enormous persons? Romans 16.
I beseech you brethren (says Paul) observe those which cause divisions and
offenses against the doctrine which you have learned, and decline them. Should
none but Elders and Teachers shun Schismatikes and heinous malefactors, or
must the people and hearers do the like? 2. These. 3.
If any man obey not our sayings, keep no company with him, that he may be
ashamed; yet count him not an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. Shall we
think the Apostle thought it sufficient for so^^ few lay Elders to forbear
the company of such disordered persons? or does he will the whole Church with
one consent to shun all society with such unruly ones, that they may be
ashamed?

Then yet the whole Church might excommunicate, and not Pastors only.] With
open reproouing by the word, and excluding from the Sacraments such as
notoriously sinned, Pastors and Prophets might intermeddle; the people and
lay Elders might not; it was no part of their charge: but in banishing
malefactors from all fellowship and company both civil and sacred with the
faithful; the Pastors were to direct, the people to assist and execute that
judgment. The Apostle does not leave it to peoples liking as a matter
indifferent, till they have consented, but enioineth it as a necessary duty,
and 2. These. 3.
commands them in the name of Christ Jesus, to withdraw themselves from every
brother that walked inordinately. For as S. John warns us; Iohanni^ epist. 2.
He that receives to his house the bringer of another doctrine, or bids him
good speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. And so is every one that with
countenance, favor, or familiarity does embolden the wicked to go on in any
other lewdness, when by Christian duty he should reprove such offenders, and
if they persist, renounce al society with them; yea, where there wants a
believing magistrate, the Pastors shall not do wisely to proceed to any such
rigor against wilful and obstinate sinners, without the knowledge and consent
of the people, for fear of contempt, if the most part mislike, or factions, if
the multitude be divided.

If Pastors in such cases were to stay for the liking of the whole Church, is
it not more likely that the people did refer the hearing and censuring of all
such matters, to certain chosen Elders of themselves, rather then in a tumult
confusedly without any Judicial form determine such causes? That if we
euict, we make no doubt that lay Elders were Governors in the Church of
Christ, as well as Pastors.] Indeed, likelihoods and surmises were the best
demonstrations, that ever were made for your supposed discipline: but if this
he all, you will never euict any thing. The people might well rely themselves
on the credit and conscience of their Pastors, and believe them in other men's
cases, whom they trusted with their own souls. Again, they might approve
and confirm their Pastors judgment in an open assembly without an uproar;
things were at that time handled in the Church religiously not tumultuously.
Lastly, if the people did appoint certain wise and sufficient men from amongst
themselves, to look into the truth of every crime, before they would believe
the accuser, or reject the accused from their company; then must your lay
Elders claim, not from Christ as authorized by him to use the keys, and
dispose of the Sacraments, but from the people, as their committies, to hear
and report what they found detected and proved in every such offense as
deserved separation from all Christian society: and their delegation from the
people must utterly cease, where he that bears the sword, embraces the
faith. For though by the laws of God and nature, where there is no magistrate,
every multitude may both order and govern themselves, as they see cause with
their general consent, so they cross not superior laws and powers; yet we
must beware when God has placed Christian Princes to defend and preserve
Justice and Judgment amongst men, that we not erect under a show of
discipline, certain petit magistrates in every parish by commission from
Christ himself in crimes and causes ecclesiastical, iudicially to proceed
without depending on the princes power.

I seek not to charge the favorers of this new discipline with any dangerous
devise. I had rather acknowledge mine own weakness, that cannot conceive how
lay Elders should be Governors of Christ's Church, and yet be neither
ministers nor magistrates. Christ being the head and fullness of the Church,
which is his body, governs the same as a Prophet, a Priest, and a King; and
after his example all public government in the church is either Prophetical,
Sacerdotal, or Regal. The Doctors have a Prophetical, the Pastors a
Sacerdotal, the Magistrates a Regal power and function; what fourth regiment
can we find for lay Elders? Prophets they are not, they have no charge of the
word; much less have they priestly power; which concerns sins and
Sacraments. If they have any, they must have Regal; and consequently, when the
magistrate believes, lay Elders must ^eli^quish all their authority to him,
or derive it from him, except they will establish an other regiment against him.

What you gi^e only to Pastors making them Monarchs to rule the Church at
their pleasures, we impart to lay Elders as Associates with them in the same
kind of government; so that lay Elders with us do no more prei^dice the
Princes power, then Pastors do with you.] Inpreaching the word, dispensing the
Sacraments, remitting sins, and imposing hands, I trust your lay Elders are
not associated unto Pastors. If in these things they be ioint-Agents with
Pastors, then are they no lay Elders, but Pastors. You must give them one
name, if you give them one office; the same deeds require always the same
words. If you join not lay Elders in those Sacerdotall and sacred actions
with Pastors, but make them overseers and moderators of those things which
Pastors do; this power belongs exactly to Christian magistrates to see that
Pastors do their duties according to Christ's will; and not abuse their
power to annoy his Church, or the members thereof. Neither is the case like
betwixt Pastors and lay Elders. Pastors have their power and function
distinguished from Princes by God himself; in so much that it were more then
presumption for princes to execute those actions by themselves or their
substitutes. To preach, baptize, retain sins and impose hands, Princes have
no power; the Prince of Princes, even the son of God, has severed it from
their callings, and committed it to his Apostles; and they by imposition of
hands derived it to their successors: but to cause these actions to be orderly
done according to Christ's commandment, and to prevent and repress abuses in
the doers, this is all that is left for lay Elders; and this is it that we
reserve to the Christian magistrate.

The power of the sword in crimes and causes ecclesiastical, we wholly yield
to the Christian Magistrate; and yet lay Elders may censure the Pastors
actions by liking and allowing them if they be good, or by disliking and
frustrating them if they be otherwise.] God has not given Princes the sword
in any causes temporal or ecclesiastical to go before or without judgment,
but to follow after, and support judgment. The sword without judgment, is
force and fury; with judgment, it is justice and equity. You cannot yield
the sword to the magistrate, and reserve judgment in these cases to the lay
Elders: you then bind the Magistrate to maintain what your lay Judges shall
determine; and ^o the sword is not sovereign above them, but subject under
them. Wherefore in ouerseeing the Pastors doings, and redressing their abuses,
you must leave the examination, determination, and execution to the Christian
magistrate, and not divide stakes between the Prince and the lay Presbytery.

Princes have no skill in such matters; and in that respect it is not amiss
for them to take their direction from the Presbytery.] A noble consideration
and worthy to be registered. The Church wardens and Sidemen of every parish,
are the meetest men that you can find, to direct Princes in judging of
ecclesiastical crimes and causes. A most wretched State of the Church it must
needs be, that shall depend on such silly Governors. I omit how far
gentlemen and landlords can prevail in every parish with their neighbors and
tenants, both to rule them and overrule them at their pleasures. Uiew the
villages in England, and tell me how far you shall seek, before you shall
find lay Elders, that in any reason ought to be trusted with the government
of the Church. I will not advantage my self by the rudeness and ignorance of
most part; I hope for very shame you will admit, that Princes are far fitter
in their own persons, if they would take the pains to determine
ecclesiastical matters, then husbandmen and Artisants. And if they want
direction, or will give Commission to that purpose, they need not descend to
the plough and carte for help or advise. The world will greatly doubt of your
discretion, and suspect, you savor of popular faction and ambition, if by Gods
law you press Princes against their wills to accept such counselors and
substitutes in ecclesiastical government. If they be at liberty to make
their choice, they have store of learned and able men of all sorts within
their Realms, whom they may trust with the censuring and ouerseeing of Clergy
men's actions; so as to prefer Ploughmen and Craftesmen to undertake that
weighty charge for Christian Princes, were ridiculous, if not infamous folly.
Wherefore the lay Presbytery must either claim to have their power and
authority from Christ without the Prince, and before the Prince; which is
somewhat dangerous, if not derogatorie to the Princes right; or else they must
stay till the Magistrate give them power in every place to govern the causes
of the Church, and moderate the actions of the Pastors. For since they will
needs concur with the Prince in the same charge and oversight of
Ecclesiastical crimes and causes; they must derive their warrant, either from
the Prince, as his delegates, or from the Princes superior.

Must not Pastors do the like?] Princes cannot authorize Pastors to preach
the word, administer the Sacraments, remitte sins, and impose hands, these
things are exempted from the Princes power and charge; the King of heaven has
appointed for that purpose Messengers of his will, and Stewardes of his
mysteries, without taking their authority from earthly Princes; but to
redress the disorders and abuses of these things in others, and to displace
the doers; that neither Pastoures nor lay Presbyters may challenge to do
without the Magistrates consent and help, where the State is Christian.

And where the State is not Christian, from whom shall the Pastors derive
their power to repress disordered actions in others?] When the Church is not
protected and assisted by the sword, but oppressed and pursued, (as where the
Magistrate is an heretic or an Infidel) the whole may detect and disclaim
any part as unsound and insufferable. Cypr. li. 3. epistola 13.
Idcirco copiosum est corpus Sacerdotum, etc. Therefore (says Cyprian) is the
number of Priests many; that, if one of our society should attempt to uphold
an heresy, and to spoil and waste the flock of Christ, the rest might help
(repress him,) yea, the people have by Gods law, where there wants a
Christian Magistrate, the desertion, but not coertion of wicked and corrupt
Pastors. They may decline them, and forsake them; they may not compel them or
punish them. Uiolence and vengeance belong only to the Princes sword; not to
any private persons or assemblies. Romans 16.
Mark them, says Paul, that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which you have learned, and decline them. Ioh 10.
My sheep, says Christ, hear my voice and follow me. A stranger they will not
follow, but fly from him. And so Cyprian and the rest of the Bishops with him
being consulted, answer. Cypria. li. 1. epistola 4.
Separate your selves (says God) from the tabernacles of these wicked men,
and touch nothing of all that is theirs, least you perish together with them in
their sins. Wherefore the people obeying the Lords precept, ought to
separate themselves from a sinful (Pastor or) ouerseer, and not to
participate with the sacrifice of a sacrilegious Priest; since they chiefly
(where the public state embraces not the faith) have power to (admit, or)
choose worthy Pastors, and to refuse un worthy.

The best writers of our age, and those no small number, interpret the words
of S. Paul, as we do, and affirm that lay Elders were governors of the
Church in the Apostles time, and part of the Presbytery.] Some learned and
late writers living under persecution, or in free Cities, where the people and
Senate bear the greatest sway, have liked and commended this form of
governing the Church by lay Elders joined in one Presbytery with the Teachers
and Pastors: but I see not how it may be defended by the word of God, as
tolerable, except they derive the power of that Presbytery from the whole
Church in time of persecution, and in time of peace from the Magistrate; in
which case they be no Elders authorized by Christ or his Apostles, to govern
the Church, but Commissioners deputed by the State to moderate disorders in
Pastors and Teachers, and so though they may have the over sight of
ecclesiastical causes pertaining properly to the magistrate, yet may they not
challenge any interest or right, if they be lay men, to impose hands or exclude
from the Sacraments, which is the Pastors power and charge. Otherwise, if any
late writers be otherwise minded, I say of them as Austen said of Cyprian.
Their August. contra Cresconium, li. 2. ca. 32.
writings I hold not as Canonical, but examine the^ by the Canonical writings;
and in them what agrees with the authority of the divine Scriptures, I accept
with their praise; what agrees not, I refuse with their leaves. To whose
praise I cannot attain, with whose labors, I compare not mine, whose wits I
embrace, with whose words I am delighted, whose charities I admire, whose
deaths I honor, their judgments in that they were otherwise minded, I receive
not. God suffers the best me^ to have some blemishes, lest their writings
should be received as authentike. The Text should not differ from the gloze, if
both were of like truth and certainty. In much writing many things escape the
best learned, even as with long watching men oftentimes wink.

It is no wrong to their labors nor touch to their credites to say their
writings and resolutions be not always Canonical. August. epist. 111.
The disputations of Catholic, and praise-worthie men (says Austen) we ought
not to esteem as we do the Canonical Scriptures, that we may not without
blemishing the honor due unto those men, mislike or refuse some what in their
writings, if happily we find that they otherwise thought then the truth
warranteth, understood by Gods help, either of others, or of our selves. Such
am I in other men's writings; such would I have the readers of mine to be.

Their learning would prevail much with me, as it does with others, men I
suppose of no evil mind, but zealous for that which they take to be the
truth; were it not, that the very places which they draw to this intent, in
the judgment of as learned and more ancient writers and fathers import no such
thing; and other places of the Scriptures where Elders are named do rather
contradict then authorize Lay Elders.

Paul sent for the Act. 20.
Elders of the Church of Ephesus to Miletum, and gave them this charge: Take
heed to your selves and to the whole flock, over which the holy Ghost has
made you Bishops to feed the Church of God. If all the Elders came to Miletum,
they were all Pastors and Bishops; if your Lay Elders came not, why stayed
they at home, Paul sending for ye Elders: They must loose that name, or take
this charge, choose which you will. If they for sooke the name of Elders, I
have my desire; if they undertook this charge, they were not Lay, they were
Pastors and Bishops. I shall not need to prove the confinitie between (...)
and (...), as if they could feed the flock, and not be Pastors. The charge
that Christ gave to Peter, as an Apostle, was this; John 21.
feed my sheep. If they did that, they were Sheepeheards; if they did not,
they were no Elders. And so says Peter. 1. Pet. 5.
The Elders that are among you, I exhort, being my self an Elder; feed the
flock of God left to your care, and when the chief Sheepeheard shall appear,
you shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. They must join with him
in Pastoral pains before they shall receive a Pastoral reward. If it be not
their function to feed, it must not be their lot to be called Elders. The
communion of the name and charge must go together. The Apostles words to
Titus will soon declare, what Elders were in his days. Tit. 1.
For this cause I left thee in Creete that thou should est appoint Elders in
every City, if any be unreprovable for a Bishop must be unreprovable as
Gods Steward; holding fast the faithful word of doctrine, that he may be
able to exhort with found doctrine, and convince the goinesayers. No
Teachers, no Elders by this rule. For they were Gods Stewards to exhort and
convince with found doctrine before they took that name. Elders might not be
appointed in any City, but so qualified as is here prescribed; there was no
place then in Creete for your new found Elders.

And as for Lay Governors of the Apostolic Church to be mentioned by Saint
Paul in the 1. to the Corinthians and twelfth Chapter, the ancient and learned
Fathers are further from admitting any such, then I am; howsoever our late
writers be lighted on them. Nazianzene expounding the words of Saint Paul,
which our men imagine concern Lay Governors, says Nazianzen. de moderatione
in disputationibus seruandae.
(...); Gouernements, that is, ouer-ruling the flesh. Chrysostom makes Helps
and Gouernements all one, and says, Homil. 32. in 1. Corinthians. 12.
It is a great blessing of God, in matters of the Spirit to have an helper and
exhorter. Ambrose says, Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. ca. 12.
In the fifth place is given the gift of understanding. For they be Governors,
that with spiritual raines do guide men. Theophilact refers it to the
Deacons. Theophilact. in 1. Corinthians. ca. 12.
Helps, gouernements] that is, to receive the sick and guide and dispense the
goods of our brethren.

Then neither do the Scriptures any where mention Lay Presbyters; nor the
Fathers expounding the places that are brought for them, did ever give so much
as an inkeling of any such persons. The words of Paul to Timothy be not only
cleared from them by diverse sound interpretations, but produced against them.
For they admit no Elders, but such as were for their work sake maintained at
the costs of the Church, and so were never any Lay Presbyters. The two other
places name Rulers and Governors, but express neither what persons or things
they governed, neither who they were that did govern, whether Lay men or
Pastors. Lay men had Christian gouernements; but over their families; over the
Church and house of God, none had, in the Apostles days that we read, save
Pastors and Teachers, I mean, such as did feed and watch the flock committed
to their charge.

And yet if we should grant, that in the Apostles time, for want of a
Magistrate to uphold the discipline of the Church, and punish the disorders
and offenses of loose brethren; there were certain grave and wise Elders
joined with the Prophets and Pastors to admonish the unruly, examine the
guilty, and exclude infamous and scandalous persons from the common society
of Christians; Is it any consequent, the like must be used with us in a
Christian kingdom under a believing Prince: The Apostolic Churches were
planted in populous Cities where they could not lack meet men to sustain
that charge: ours are dispersed in rural Hamlets; where there can be no hope
to find so many fit Governors, as shall be requisite. To the first
Churches came none but such as were willing and zealous, without all
compulsion: to ours come all forces, Atheistes, Hypocrites, and how many
rather forced by Law, then led with devotion; yea, would God it did not
often so fall out that in many places the richer and wealthier men either
regard no Religion, or secretly lean to the woorst. Every Church with them
had many Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, the number, and need of the
people, and time so requiring; so that their Presbyteries might be
indifferently weighed without ouerbearing either side; We have but one in each
Parish, and to exact maintenance for more at the peoples hands, in every
Uillage; would breed that sore which no plaster would heal. To give that
one a negative voice in all things against the Lay Elders; were to fill the
whole Realm with infinite contentions and questions. To give him no voice, but
as one amongst the rest; is to shake the Church in sunder with every faction
and fancy of the multitude. Lastly, those Churches under persecution had none
that could justly challenge to rule the rest; ours has a lawful Monarch
professing the faith; to whom by Gods Law the government of all crimes and
causes Ecclesiastical does rightly belong; and therefore the private and
popular regiment of the afflicted Churches must cease, since God has blessed
this realm with a public, peaceable and princely government. The greater and
stronger power does always determine and frustrate the lesser and weaker in
the same kind. What need we private men to punish vices, when we have princes
to do it? What need we Suffrages of Lay Elders to reform disorders and
abuses in Pastors, when we have open and known laws to work the same effect
with more force and better speed? In popular states, and persecuted Churches
some pretense may be made for that kind of discipline; In christian kingdoms,
I see neither need nor use of Lay Elders.

Howbeit, for my part, I do not believe that Lay Elders were used in the
Apostls times to govern the Church. With imposition of hands, remission of
sins, distribution of Sacraments, I am right assured, no just proof can be
made they did or should intermeddle; yea the oversight of those things could
not belong, whiles the Apostles lived, to Lay men; and after their deaths, the
Churches planted by them, and ages succeeding them, never used nor acknowledged
any Lay Elders. Which is to me an invincible demonstration, that the Apostles
left them none. For would all the Churches in the world with one consent
immediately upon the Apostles deaths, reject that form of governing the Church
by Lay Elders, which was settled and approved by the Apostles, and embrace a
new and strange kind of government without precept or precedent for their so
doing? How others can persuade themselves, that the whole Church of Christ
felt so generally and presently to a wilful Apostacy, I know not; for
myself I confess I had rather forsake the devise and conceit of some late
Writers, were they in number more then they are, before I will proclaim so many
Apostolic men, and ancient and learned fathers to be manifest despisers of the
Apostolic discipline, and voluntary supporters, if not inuentors, of
Antichrists pride and tyranny. Wherefore if they show me Lay Elders
universally received for governors in the Churches and ages next following the
Apostles, I will agnise they came from the Apostles; if there were no such after
the Apostles, I cannot believe they were in the Apostles times.

CHAP. XI. What Presbytery the primitive Churches and Catholic fathers did
acknowledge and whether Lay Elders were any part thereof, or no.
MAny men think and write that the first Churches and fathers after the
Apostles, retained and used Lay Elders for Governors; and so witness (as they
say) obscurely Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine; more clearly Ambrose,
Hierome, Possidonius, and the Canon law; and therefore I do not well in their
opinions to pretend the authority of Christ's Church against them. If all
these Fathers or any of them did clearly mention or witness Lay Elders; I
would be far from contradicting them: but now I cannot admit them, nor in
this case the first authors of them, by reason I find no such Elders expressed
or testified in any father or writer of the Primitive Church. Elders I find,
Lay Elders I never find, and by the name of Elders or Presbyters, the ancient
fathers do mean such Teachers and Laborers in the word, as with their
counsel and consent did advise and direct the Bishop of each Church and City
in cases of doubt, danger and importance, when as yet neither Synodes could
assemble, nor Christian Magistrates be found to help and assist the Church
against the deadly poison of heresies, and cruel rage of persecutors, which
those days did usually offer. Examine your own witnesses; if they say not as
much, as I affirm, I am well content to yield the whole.

Ignatius is the first that is alleged for Lay Elders; and the first if his
testimony may be taken, that will utterly overthrow the Lay Presbytery. He
often mentions the Presbytery, but chiefly in his second Epistle, where he
writes thus, to the Church of Trallis. Ignat. ad Tralliano^.
Be subject to the Bishop, as unto the Lord: he it is, that watches oueryour
souls, as one that shall account unto God. you must therefore whatsoever you
enterprise do nothing without the Bishop; but be subject also to the
Presbytery, as unto the Apostles of Jesus Christ. You must likewise by all
means please the Deacons of the mysteries of Jesus Christ. The Bishop is the
(...).
figure of the father of all; the Presbyters as the (...).
Senate of God, and a (...).
knot of the Apostles of Christ. without these the chosen Church is not, nor
the company of Saints, not the assembly of the holy. What is the Bishop, but
(...).
one that has power over all, as much as is possible for a man to have; a
resembler in power, of Christ, that is, God? What is the Presbytery but a
sacred (...).
assembly, the (...).
Counselors and (...).
Coasse^sours of the Bishop? Presbyters or Elders we see here with all their
titles, Lay Elders we see none. To presume upon the an^^iguitie of the word
that they were Lay, is so childish aproofe, that it should not come in wisemens
heads: yet lest we should be carried with that wilful persuasion, which I see
many possessed with; mark what Elders they were, of whom Ignatius spoke. He
calls them in this Epistle (...), a knot or company of Apostles or Messengers
of Christ: and in the next he says, In epistola ad Magnesianos.
As the Lord did nothing without his father, so must not you without the
Bishop, (...) whether you be Presbyter, Deacon or Lay man. To the Chrch of
Philodelphia he writes thus; Ad Philodelphienses.
(...): The Presbyters, Deacons and the rest of the Clergy together with all
the people, obey the Bishop. And so every where; Ad Smyrna^s.
(...), Let the Lay men be subject to the Deacons, the Deacons to the
Presbyters, the Presbyters to the Bishop. And expressing their office with
Saint Peter's words he says; Ad Antioch^^os.
(...): You Presbyters, feed the flock that is with you, till God show who
shall be ruler or Bishop over you. for I now hasten to gain Christ. Presbyters
then with Ignatius were Pastors and part of the Clergy; and so far from
being Lay men, that all Lay men were subject unto them as unto the Apostles of
Christ, and not joined with them in the same Presbytery to govern the Church.

Hierome the next of your witnesses (for I take them not as their ages, but as
their testimonies join nearest together) writing on Esaias, says, Hiero. in
Esa. 3.
Et nos habemus in ecclesia Senatum nostrum, coetum Presbyterorum: We have in
the Church our Senate, even the assembly or company of Presbyters. And
again, Hiero. in Tit. 1.
Comm^ni Presbyterorum consilio regebantur ecclesiae. The Churches were at
first governed by the common advise of the Presbyters. Th^^ Elders at first did
govern the Church by common advise, i^ no doubt at all with us; this is it
which is doubted and denied by us, and shall never be proved by any, that those
Elders were Lay men, which so governed the Church. What Elders Jerome meant is
soon discerned by his own words, Hier^. in Tit. 1.
Idem est ergo Presbyter, qui Episcopus: An Elder or Presbyter then is the
self same, that a Bishop is, and before there were factions in religion by the
Devils instinct, and the people began to say, I hold of Paul, I of Apollo, and
I of Cephas, the Churches were governed with the common advise of Presbyters.
But when every one thought those, whom he baptized, to be his own and not
Christ's; it was decreede in the whole world that one of the Presbyters chosen
should be set above the rest; to whom the whole care of the Church should
appertain. Ierom avouches that Bishops and Presbyters were at the first all
one, and says the Church was guided by their common advise, until the
Presbyters began to challenge such, as they had baptized, for their own, and
not for Christ's. He writes then of such Elders as did baptize, and feed the
flock, and differed from Pastors and Bishops neither in dispensing the word
nor Sacraments, but only in wanting power to impose hands. For so, debating
the very same matter in his Epistle to Euagrius, he says, Hi^rony. Euagrie:
tom. 2. f^l. 329.
Quid en^m facit, excepta ordinatione, Episcopus, quod presbyter non faciat?
What does a Bishop, save ordering (or imposing hands) which a Presbyter may not
do? Then Presbyters with Jerome did preach, baptize, and administer the Lords
supper as well as Bishops; and were indeed Teachers and Pastors by whose
counsel at the first the Churches were governed. And of such Jerome says;
Hiero. in epist. ad Tit. ca. 1.
Bishops must know they are greater then Presbyters, rather by custom, then
by the truth of the Lords disposition, and ought to govern the Church in
common. Let any man that has care of his conscience or credit read the places
in Hieromes Epistle to Euagrius, and in his Commentaries upon the first to
Tite, where he shows what Elders did and should govern the Church; and if
this that I say be not more then evident, I will hazard mine before God and
man.

Ambrose is an other that speaks to the same effect: Ambros. in 1. Timoth. 5.
Amongst al Nations age is honorable. Unde and Synagoga, and postea ecclesia
seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio nihil agebatur in ecclesia. Wherefore the
Jewish synagogue, and after the Church, had Seniours or Elders, without whose
counsel nothing was done in the Church. The which by what negligence it is
out of use, I know not, unless it be by the sloth or rather pride of the
Teachers, whiles they alone will seem to be somewhat. Here likewise is
mention of Elders, without whose advise nothing was done in the Church; but by
Ignatius and Jerome we saw before, they were not Lay men but Clergy men, by
whose counsel the Churches were governed. Had we not Ambrose opinion else
where delivered, that in cases of faith and manners Lay men never did, never
might judge of Priests, of whom yet the Presbytery might and did judge? what
one word is here sounding for Lay Elders? They were aged that were called to
the regiment of the Church in former times, and not one, but many. Ambrose
misliketh that in his time some, whiles they would seem alone to rule, had
excluded or neglected the rest that were wont to be joined with them in
consulting and caring for the Church. By this you may prove that ancient good
Bishops in guiding their flocks used the help and advise of their Clergy;
that Lay men were coupled with them to govern the Church, you cannot prove.
He does not blame them for refusing Lay Elders to be their Colleagues, but for
affecting to be so wise, that they needed not the aid and counsel of their
brethren, who were wont to advise and assist their Bishops as well in doctrine,
as in discipline.

What Ambrose thought of Lay Judges over persons and ^a^ses Ecclesiastical,
his Epistle to Valentinian the Emperor, will quickly resolve. Ambros lib. 5.
epistola 32.
No man ought to think me obstinate (says Ambrose) when I avouch that, which
your father of sacred memory, not only answered in words, but established by
his laws: in causa fidei vel ecclesiastici alicuius ordinis, eum iudicare
debere, quinec munere impar sit, nec iure dissimilis: in a matter of faith or
touching any Ecclesiastical order, he ought to be judge, that has neither
his calling diverse, nor his right different. Those are the very words of the
rescript; that is, he would have Priests to be Judges over Priests. Yea if a
Bishop be to be reproved for any other thing, and his manners to be
examined, this also would he have pertain to the judgment of Bishops. When
ever heard you, most gracious Emperor; in a matter of faith, that Lay men
judged of Bishops? Shall we then so bow with flattery, that we forget the
right of Priests, and what God has given to me, shall I commit to others? If
a Bishop must be taught by a lay man what to follow, let the Lay teach, and
the Bishop hear; let the Bishop learn at a Lay man's hands. Your father a man
of ripe years, said, Non est meum iudicare inter Episcopos: It is not for me
to sit judge amongst Bishops, you shall be old by Gods grace, and then shall
you find what a Bishop he is, qui Laicis ius Sacerdotale substernit, that
casts the right of Bishops under Lay men's feet. Would he call it pride in
Bishops to refuse Lay men for their Consorts in censuring all persons and
causes of the Church; that greatly praised the Emperor for saying, it was not
his part to judge amongst Bishops? and highly commended the Law that barred
all Judges over Priests; save such as were pari munere and simili iure, of the
same calling and right that Priests were? The longer we seek, the further we
are from finding Lay Elders. We have now a public and Imperial Law; that
with Ecclesiastical causes and persons, no Lay man should meddle; but leave
them to Bishops, as best acquainted with the Rules and Canons of the Church, by
which such men and matters must be guided.

Tertullian, Austen and Gregory admit all three one answer. They use the
Latin word Seniores, for those whom Hierome and others call by the Greek name
Presbyteros, such Elders, as were Pastors and Priests. Isidor. originum. lib.
7.
Presbyter in Greek, says Isidore, is in Latin Senior, Presbyters and
Elders being so called not for years and old age; but for the honor and
dignity which they took when they entered that order. This name the
Translatour of the new Testament gives them, even in those places, where the
Greek calls them, (...) Seniores, qui in vobis sunt, obsecro consenior. 1.
Petr. 5.
The Seniors that are among you, I beseech being my self a Senior, feed ye
the flock of God that is with you. And again, Ichan. episto. 2. and 3.
Senior electae Dominae; Senior Gaio charissimo: The Senior to the elect Lady;
and the Senior to the most dear Gaius: and yet I trust Saint Peter and Saint
John were no Lay Elders. At first, Pastors and Teachers were usually chosen by
their age; as to whom the rather for their wisdom and gravity, reverence
and honor should be yielded in the execution of their office; and afterward,
when some of rare gifts, though younger in years, were elected to that charge,
they retained the name, which use had accustomed; and so generally men of that
profession were and are called Presbyters and Seniors, which in English are
Elders. What proof is this then for Lay Elders, if Latin writers now and then
call them Seniores; which is common to all Pastors and Ministers of the word
and Sacraments?

The circumstances perchance will somewhat induce, that those Fathers spoke of
Lay Elders. They will the contrary very well; but this they will never.
Tertullian opening to the Gentiles the manner of the Christian assemblies, and
what they did, when they were gathered together, says: Tertull. in
Apologetic^.
We meet in a company, that we may join as an army in our prayers to God.
We meet to the rehearsing of the divine Letters where with sacred words we
nourish faith, we stir up hope, and fasten confidence; and nevertheless
confirm discipline by the often instructions of our Preceptorum.
teachers. There are also exhortations, reprehensions, and divine censures.
Judgment is used with great deliberation, as being out of doubt that God sees
us. There have we an evident foreshewing of the Judgment that shall one day
come, if any so offend that he be banished from the fellowship of our
prayers, assembly, and all holy company. The Rulers of our meetings are
certain President.
approved Seniours such as gate this honor, not by reward, but by good
report; for nothing that is Gods may be bought. Praying, reading of the
Scriptures, teaching, exhorting, reproouing in their public assemblies were
Pastourall duties; why should not censuring be the like? The self same
persons that were in one, were Rulers in all these actions. Again, the honor
which they had to sit before the rest in the Church: and was so sacred, that
it could not be procured by reward, but by good report, shows they were
Clergy men, and not Lay persons that did moderate their meetings. The very
word Praesidere with Tertullian is an evident distinction between the
Pastors and the people. Tertull. lib. 1. (...) (...).
Disciplina ecclesiae, and praescriptio Apostoli digamos non sinit praesidere:
The discipline of the Church and precept of the Apostle suffer not a man, that
has more wives then one, praesidere, to be a Bishop, which by reason of their
function did sit before all others in the Church. Idem de Menagamia.
Quot and digams praesident apud vos, insultantes vtique Apostolo? How many
with the second wife are presidents and Bishops amongst you, insulting on the
Apostle, that says a Bishop should be the husband of one wife: And again
Idem de cor^na m^^itu.
Eucharistiae sacramentum non de aliorum manu quam Praesidentium sumimus: we
take not the Sacrament of the Eucharist at any others, then at the Pastors (or
Rulers) hands.

Handling this assertion, Idem de exhortatione ad castitatem.
Nonne and Laici Sacerdotes sumus? We that are of the Laity, are we not
Priests? he says Differentiam inter ordinem and plebem constituit ecclesiae
authoritas, and honor per ordinis consessum sanctificatus a Deo. A difference
between the order of Priests and the people, the authority of the church has
made; and the honor sanctified of God by the setting together of their order.
And showing how many degrees he accounted in the Clergy; he says. Idem de
fuga in persecution^.
Quum ipsi authors, idest, ipsi Diaconi, Presbyteri and Episcopi fugiunt;
quomodo L^icus, etc. When the first men, that is, the Deacons, Presbyters and
Bishops flee; how shall the Lay forbear fleeing? when the Leaders flee, which
of the Soldiers will stand? He is an evil Pastor, Christ confirming it,
that flees when he sees the woolfe, and leaves his sheep to the spoil.
Which is never more done then when in persecution, ecclesia destituitur a
Clero, the Church is forsaken of the Clergy. Porro si eos, qui Gregi
praesunt, fugere, quum lupi irruunt, nec decet, imo nec licet; (qui enim
Pastorem talem, malum pronunciauit, vtique damnauit;) ideo Praepositos
ecclesiae in persecutione fugere non oportebit: Then if it be neither seemly
nor lawful for the Rulers of the flock, to flee, when the woolues rush in;
(for he that pronounced such a one an evil sheepeheard, did doubtless
condemn him;) the overseers of the Church may not flee in persecution. By this
we may plainly perceive there were in Tertullians time, no Leaders, Rulers
nor Overseers of the flock and Church, but Pastors and Clergy men; and
those either Deacons, Priests or Bishops: Lay Elders are far from Tertullians
words, and further from his meaning.

Why his hook De B^ptis^^ should be alleged for Lay Elders, I can not so much
as guess. Some men are so infected with the fancy of Lay Elders; that they no
sooner read the word Presbyter, but they straight dream of their Lay
Presbytery. Otherwise, if we would seek for a place to cross their new
discipline, we could not light on a better. Tertul. de Baptismo.
Dandi baptismum ius habet summus Sacerdos, qui est episcopus. Dehinc
Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen sine episcopi authoritate propter ecclesiae
honorem. quo saluo salua pax est. alioquinetiam Laicis ius est. To give
baptism is the right of the chiefest Priest, which is the Bishop. After him
the Presbyters and Deacons, not yet without the Bishops authority for the
honor of the Church, that is, the honor allowed him in the Church: the which
being observed, peace is preserved; otherwise it were lawful for lay men to do
it. Here find we the Bishop to be the chiefest Priest, and without his leave
the rest not to baptize. With his leave the Presbyters and Deacons might, but
not Lay men, save in cases of extremity; then as he thinks any Lay man
might. The truth of his opinion I am not here to discuss; the tenor of his
report I have no cause to distrust; I find it confirmed by others, that in
the presence of the Bishop, the rest might not baptize, as also that none of
these three degrees were Lay men. Admit the Bishop to be the chiefest, the
Elders and Deacons without his authority to do nothing; and remove Lay men
from the number of Bishops, Elders and Deacons; the platfourme of your Lay
Presbytery must needs fall.

Augustine much misliked the fond and lewd excuses that some in his time made,
when they were rebuked for their sins. August. de ver^is Domini sermon. 19.
Cum arguuntur a senioribus; When they are reproved by (thee or their) Elders
for drunkenness, rapine and killing of men in tumults; they answer; what
should I do, being a Secular man or a soldier? have I professed to be a
Monk, or a Clergy man? Here is the bare name of Elders; but whether they
were Lay men or Clearkes, here is no mention. If this admonition and
reprehension were private, the Elders may he, the one or the other, as you
will; Every Christian man has liberty to reprove and admonish his Brother
privately for any sin committed; and it best becomes age and gray hayres,
to mislike the disorders and enormities of yoonger and rather heads; and then
the words of Austen are, when they be reproved by their Elders. But if the
rebuke were open, then Seniores were the elder sort of such Clergy men, as
had the charge and oversight of other men's lives and manners; and sat in
judgment with the Bishop, to exhort, chastise and censure licentious persons.
That Lay men in Austens time intermedled with the keys or sacraments, I
utterly deny; and therefore the word Elders cannot import that, which then was
not. The keys, whereon Excommunication depends, and the Sacraments, from
which offenders are excluded, were then the Pastors charge, and not the
peoples. It is more then ignorance, for those that would seem learned, to
imagine that Austen ever heard or thought any Lay men had an interest in the
open and ordinary use of the keys and disposition of the Sacraments.

The Judges that Austen acknowledged in the Church were no lay Elders, as
plainly appears by his words before alleged, neither had lay men any
judgment seats provided for them in y^ church: August. de c^uitate Dei lib. 20
ca. 9.
sed seeds Praepositorum and ipsi Praepositi intelligendi sunt: per quos
ecclesia nunc gubernatur: But the seats of the Rulers and the Rulers
themselves (says Austen) are understood, by whom the Church is now
governed. And lest you should doubt who governed the Church in his days,
Bishops, or Lay Elders; noting upon the 106. psalm, three tentations that
every religious and faithful man amongst the people of God might have trial
of, he says, August. in psalm. 106.
Fortassis dignus eris, cui populus committatur, constituaris in gubernaculis
nauis, recturus ecclesiam. Ibi quarta tentatio. Tempestates maris quatientes
ecclesiam turbant Gubernatorem. Quarta ista nostra est. Quanto plus honoramur,
tanto plus peri^litamur. Tentatio ergo gubernandi, tentatio periculorum in
regenda ecclesia nos potissimum tangit: Happily thou shall be found worthy to
whom the people may be committed, to sit at the helue of the ship, to govern
the Church. There is the fourth tentation. The storms of the Sea that shake the
Church, trouble the Governor. This fourth is ours. The higher our honor, the
greater the danger. The tentation then of governing, the tentation of troubles
in ruling the Church, chiefly concerns us: yet are ye not free. For brethren,
though you sit not at the same stern, yet sail you in the same ship. Pastors
then in S. Austens time, and no Lay persons did govern the Church, and rule
the flock, and by them judgment was given and discipline exercised against
wicked and dissolute livers. August. de fide and operibus ca. 5.
Cum eis, per quos ecclesia regitur, adest salua pace potestas disciplinae
aduersus improbos au^ nefarios exercendae, etc. When they that rule the Church
may without breach of peace (that is, danger of schism) exercise discipline
upon lewd and wicked offenders; then are we to be stirred up with the
sharpness of those precepts, that lead to severity of repressing (evil)
that directing our steps in the way of the Lord, we neither slack under
the name of patience, nor rage under the show of diligence.

But Saint Austen in his hundredth thirty and seventh Epistle, writes; Clero,
Senioribus, and vniuersae plebi ecclesiae Hipponens^^: to the Clergy, Elders,
and whole people of the Church of Hippo; where the Elders are reckoned, by
themselves, as no part of the Clergy.] If naming Elders by themselves, make
them no part of the Clergy; by that consequent, they be likewise no part of
the people; for they be reckoned asimder from the people. But these inferences
have no sufficient ground; they must be either of the Clergy or people, and
yet here they be named betwixt them. The rules of civility are not always
bound to the rules of Logike. They that have preeminence above others, may be
saluted aparte from others, though the general salutation before or after, by
force of reason does include them. Wherefore if any man answer, that Austen
naming the whole Clergy of his Church in that Epistle, thought to make a more
special remembrance of the better sort of them, by the title of Elders, it
can not be refuted; the words do well endure it. If any dislike that
exposition, let him take Elders in Gods name for the better sort of the
Laity; I mean for the Rulers and Governors of the people, as if a man
should write to the Clergy, Aldermen, and Commons of any good City; for an
Alderman is the right English for Senior in Latin, when it does not import an
Ecclesiastical function: and it is not unlikely, that Austen then absent and
writing to the whole City, divided the superior sort of the Laity, from the
Inferior by that style. Howsoever you bestow the word, it is evident by the
whole course of that Epistle, those Elders had no power in the Church, more
then the rest of the people. Yea, the hearing of the cause then in question
about the accusation of Bonifacius a Priest, for a foul crime objected unto
him by an other of the Clergy, did so little concern them, that Austen heard
the matter himself alone, and took order in it as he thought good, and kept
it from the knowledge of them all. And in this Epistle giving a reason why he
did not remove Bonifacius from his degree at the first examining of the
matter, he says; August. epist. 137.
Nomen Presbyteri propterea non sum ausus de numero Collegarum eius vel
supprimere vel delere, ne diuinae potestati, sub cuius examine causa adhuc
pendet, facere viderer iniuriam, si illius iudicium meo vellem iudicio
praeuenire: The name of his Priest I durst not suppress or strike out from the
number of the Colleagues, lest I should seem to offer wrong to Gods
judgment, (under whose trial the matter yet depends) if I should prevent
his judgment with my censure. Read the Epistle, if he attribute any more to
those Elders, then he does to the lowest of the people and Clergy; if he
did not take the whole cause into his own hands, and set an order in it
without their consents or priuities; I will agnise your Lay Elders.

Happily you think, Saint Austen did the Lay Elders wrong to keep this cause
from them; and to deal in it without them? I can not let you from so thinking;
but all that be well advised will rather suppose, Lay Elders had nothing to do
with such cases in Saint Austens time; and that the good Bishop did not close
up such horrible offenses by wrongful withholding the cause from the knowledge
of the Elders, to whom by order of the Church it then appertained; but he
kept it from them and the rest with good conscience using his own right, In
^ad^m epist.
ne atrociter and inaniter contristando turbaret, as himself says; Lest he
should trouble their minds with a grievous sorrow to no purpose.

Gregory's authority is quoted out of the 15 quast. si quid.
Canon Law, for name of Lay Elders: which sure were very strange; that six
hundredth years after Christ, the power of Lay Elders should remain in the
Church, and their name all this while not heard of; but I think we shall find
no more here, then we did before. Gregor. lib. 11. 49.
If (says Gregory) any thing come to thine ears of any Clerk whomsoever,
which may justly offend thee; believe it not easily, sed praesentibus ecclesiae
tuae Senioribus, but in the prefence of the Elders of thy Church, search out
the truth diligently, and if the quality of the matter shall so require, let
the offendour be punished according to the rigor of the Canons. Elders of the
Church I hear, Lay Elders I hear not; and by the Laws Imperial long before
this established, even in Ambroses time, a Clergy man's cause could not be
examined and determined but by men of the same right and the same calling. And
of all others Gregory is the unfittest man to prove that Lay Elders should
have the hearing and deciding of Clergy men's causes; who could not endure,
that any thing whatsoever pertaining to the Clergy should be committed to
the hands of Lay men. Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 66.
Cauendum est a fratern^^ate vestra, ne Secularibus viris at que non sub regula
nostra degentibus res ecclesiasticae committantur; Your brotherhoode must
beware that Ecclesiastical matters be not committed to Secular men, and such
as live not under our profession. The punishment, which by the very words
must be Canonical, or according to the Canons, shows that these Elders were
the discreetest and wisest of his Clergy. For what have Lay men to do either
with the knowledge, or execution of the Canons? What reason to charge the^ with
the Canons; to whom the Canons were not written? He means therefore the
Elders of his Church, that is, such Clergy men as were of best account and
greatest experience in his Church.

And so the Council of Turon decreed, Council. Tur^^ens. 2. ca. 7.
Quem negligentia eijcit, cum omnium Presbyterorum consilio re^utetur* whom
negligence makes unworthy of his place, let him be removed by the advice of
all the Presbyters. And Gregory himself says; Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 110.
Lest there be any dissension amongst brethren, lest any discord be nourished
inter Praepositos and Subiectos, between the Rulers (of the Church) and those
that be under them, in vnum conuenir^ Sacerdotes necesse est; It is needful for
the Priests to meet in one place together, that they may discuss such causes
as happen, and wholsomly confer about Ecclesiastic all rules, so as things
past may be amended, and an order set for things to come. Of Lay men the
Council of Hispalis says, Council. Hispa^ens. 2. ca. 9.
Indecorum est Laicum vicarium esse Episcopi, and Seculares in ecclesia
iudicare. Vnd^ oportet nos and diuinis libris, and sanctorum Patr^m obedire
praecep^is; constituentes, vt hij qui in administrationibus ecclesiae
Pontificibus sociantur, discrepare non debe ant nec professione, nec habitu. It
is an unseemly thing for a lay man to be vice gerent to a Bishop; and for
Secular men to judge in the Church. Wherefore we must obey the books of God,
and the precepts of our fathers being holy men; decreeing that they which are
joined with the Bishops in the administrations of the Church, should not differ
from them neither in profession, nor habit. Iflaie Elders had been current in
Gregory's time, and assisted the Bishop in Clergy men's causes, as his
Coassessors; the Council of Hispalis not long after him, did open wrong to the
truth, in saying it was against the book of God, and rules of their
forefathers, that lay men should be joined with Bishops in any causes or
matters of the Church: but for any thing we yet see, they spoke the truth, and
no more then was long before confirmed as well by the decrees of Councils, as
public laws of the Roman empire.

Authentic. 123 de sanctissimi^ episcopis, ca. 21.
Si ecclesiastica causa est, nullam communionem habeant Iudices ^iu^les circa
talem examinationem; sed sanctissimus Episcopus secundum sacr as regulas causae
finem imponat. If it be an ecclesiastical cause (says Justinian the
Emperor) let not the civil (or temporal) Judges any way intermeddle with the
examination thereof; but according to the sacred rules, let the most holy
Bishop determine the matter. Now who were to be present with the Bishop, when
he sat in judgment, and assist him, the fourth Council of Carthage declares
in these words; Council. Carthaginens. 4. ca. 23.
Episcopus nullius causam audiat, absque praesentia Clericorum suorum; alioquin
irrita erit sententia Episcop^, nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur. Let the
Bishop determine no man's cause without the presence of his Clergy; otherwise
the sentence of the Bishop shall be void, that is not confirmed with the
presence of the Clergy. With the Bishop sat no lay Elders in judgment, but
his own Clergy; and those not all, but the grauer and elder sort of them. The
Deacons and the rest of the Clergy beneath their degree, might not sit with
the Priests, much less with the Bishop. The Council of Nice says; Council.
Niconi, ca. 18.
Sed nec sedere Diaconis licet in medio Presbyterorum. The Deacons may not sit
in the company or assembly of Priests. So that only Clergy men and Priests
sat with the Bishop in Church and Consistory, and their presence and advise
was required, as we see by the Council of Carthage, before the Bishop might
give judgment against any man.

This course Gregory wills the Bishop of Panormus in Sicelie to observe, as
nearest to the Canons, and freest from all challenge, when he conuented any
Clergy man, not rashly to pronounce; but advisedly to deliberate with the
wisest and eldest of his Clergy, and then to proceed accordingly; for Priests
and Deacons the case is clear, the Bishop alone might not deprive them. The
Council of Hispalis says; Council. Hispal. 2. ca. 6.
Episcopus Sacerdotibus ac Ministri^ solus honorem dare potest, solus auferre
non potest. The Bishop alone may give Priests and Deacons their honor; but he
can not take it from them alone. They may not be condemned by one, neither may
they loose the privilege of their honor by the judgment of one. but being
presented to the judgment of a Synod, let them be ruled and ordered as the
Canon prescribes. Over the rest, the Bishop alone might sit Judge without the
assistance of other Bishops: but not without the Elders of his own Church and
Clergy. for so the Council of Carthage decrees, and Gregory advises;
Council. Af^^c^^i, ca. 20.
If any Priests or Deacons be accused, let the Bishop of the parties accused,
discuss their causes, taking to him a lawful number, (six in a Priests,
three in a Deacons) of the Bishops adjoining such as the defendants shall
require. The causes of the rest of the Clergy, the Bishop of the place alone,
shall hear and determine. Lay Elders I trust are excluded by this Canon, from
deciding or debating the causes of any Priests, Deacons or other Clergy men;
and so are they by all the Canons that were ever made in any Council
Provincial, or General, since the Apostles times.

Lastly, the Canon law itself is produced for the name of lay Elders, I
might take just exception against the Compiler of those decrees; his
corruptions and ouersights do pass the number of his leaves. Hieromes name is
twice abused by him, and twice alleged by you without any regard, whether
those authorities be found in his works, or make to your purpose. The first
is 16. quaest. 1. ecclesia; which place is no where found in Hierome, though
his book ad Rusticum be extant, prescribing the manner how a Monk should
order his life. Some of the words were patched out of his Commentaries upon
Esaie; and the rest touching Monks added, which are not at all in Hierome. The
second place; distinct. 95. ecce ego; is a lusty tale, not of Hieroms, but of
some others in his name; beginning with a forged inscription, and ending with a
presumptuous untruth, and fraighted in the middle with unsavory railing.
Hierome wrate in deed to Rusticus a French man, but as yet no Clergy man:
that ever he wrate unto him after he was Bishop of Narbon, neither do we read
it in any of his works, neither is it likely; for so much as Leo Bishop of
Rome more then thirty years after Hieromes death, wrate, Epist. 92. 94.
Ad Rusticum Narbonensem Episcopum; to Rusticus Bishop of Narbon. And touching
the matter of which, this counterfeit Hierome talks; Epist. 88. alias 86.
Leo writing unto the Bishops of France and Germany, conuicteth this prater of
manifest falsehood. for where this forged Hierome says it was used in Rome,
in Africa, in the East, in Spain, France and Britain, and calls them proud,
envious, and most injurious Prelates that otherwise do; Leo with a Council of
Bishops affirms it was not used, but where men were altogether ignorant of
the ecclesiastical rules, and expresselie forbids it by a Synodall consent,
as contrary to the Canons.

Whosoever were the author of that sturdie epistle, he turns your lay Elders
clean out of doors. for as he affirms; that Presbyters or Elders were
Dis^. 95. ^c^^ ego dic^.
at first Judges of the Churches affairs, and present at the Bishops Councils;
so he says the same Elders must Ibidem.
preach in the Church, bless and exhort the people, consecrate Christ at the
Altar, restore the Communion, visit the sick, At que omnia Dei Sacramenta
complere, and finishe all the Sacraments of God. I shall not need to put you
in mind that here is no room for Lay Elders; the words be so plain,
that if you but read them, I think you will quickly resign all the interest
you have in them.

Thus have we perused the proofs that are brought out of ancient Fathers to
uphold the Lay Elders; whether these be great endu^ementes to enforce your
Lay Eldership; I appeal to your own consciences. You have not so much as one
circumstance in any father to infer they were Lay. The names of Presbyteri
and Seniores, which in English are Elders or Priests, you show, whereof we
never doubted; but those names when they imply age, are common to all men that
are stricken in years: when they note an office, they are proper to Clergy
men. More then the doubtful signification of the word Elders; I profess
before him that sees the secrets of all men's hearts, I see no inforcement in
any Father yet produced. On the contrary, though it might suffice me to stand
on the Negative, that no lay Elders can be proved; yet because I seek not
to distinguish words, but to searchout the truth, I have proved by other
places out of the same writers, that they had no such intent, as you pretend;
use your eyes and not your fancies, I am well content your selves shall be
Judges.

But the rest that remain, as Cyprian, Socrates, and Possidonius, do most
clearly speak of Lay men.] Of Lay men they speak in deed; for they speak
of the whole people: but of your Lay Elders, they speak not a word. This
short answer might serve for all the places that are behind, neither is there
any cause to stand longer in discussing them, were it not that I seek rather
to satisfy the Obiecters as brethren, the^ to repel them as adversaries, for
whose sake I will rip up the circumstances.

Socra. li. 5. ca. 21
Agelius a Nouatian Bishop, ready to die, imposed hands on Sisinnius to be
Bishop in his place, being one of the Presbyters that were under him. The
people of the Nouatians (misliking or) complaining of the fact, for that he
rather laid not hands on one Marcian, by whose means the Nouatians in the
time of Valens, enjoyed quietness, Agelius willing to ease the peoples grief,
laid hands also on Marcian. And when he was a little recovered, he entered into
the Church, and in his own person said; You have Marcian to succeed me, and
after Marcian Sisinnius. This is the true report of Socrates words; and in
these, what one letter for lay Elders? Sisinnius was no lay man; he was a
Clergy man long before this, as Li. 5. ca. 10.
Socrates himself records. As for the name of Elders or Presbyters, besides
that in all the Church stories it notes an ecclesiastical function; and lay
men by the Canons could not be made Bishops, except they were first in orders;
this very chapter is a manifest testimony, that none were promoted to bear
that name, or have that place but by imposition of hands. I had occasion before
to allege the words of Marcian, repenting that ever he laid his hands on
Sabbatius and others, to make them priests, I will not now repeat them.

But the peoples dislike made Agelius recall his fact? Of all examples, this is
one of the weakest and worst. The Nouatians were Schismatikes from the Church
of Christ, and no members of it; it skilleth not therefore whatsoever they or
their Bishop did. Next, it was but a point of policy in Agelius, to retain
the liking of his folowers; for as they departed from the Catholic Church upon
a conceit; so were they as like upon a Spleen, to return thither again, and
forsake the Nouatian Bishops. Thirdly, he might justly fear, and so prevent a
Schism amongst his own, least some adhering to Sisinnius, and some to
Marcian, his Congregation should be divided, which was no rare thing in the
elections of Bishops. Lastly, if this example were worth the standing on; it
is certain, that Agelius lying sick in his bed, made first Sisinnius Bishop
without the peoples consent; and meaning to please the multitude, he did as
much for Marcian; and when he came to the Church upon his recovery, he asked
no consents for Sisinnius; but told the people, that according to their desire
Marcian should be next, and Sisinnius should expect till Marcian was dead. In
all this proceeding, there is no one part answerable to the Canons of the
Church, and as for lay Elders, not so much as any suspicion of them.

The people had always an interest in the choice of their Bishop and Elders,
as appears in Possidonius by their preferring S. Austen to be an Elder.] I
do not deny, but after the Apostles and their followers were dead, in whose
days the holy Ghost named the most of the Pastors and Teachers; the good will
and liking of the people was greatly respected in the choice of their Bishops;
and when there wanted Presbyters and Deacons needful for the Church, the
Bishop of the place used to admonish and exhort the people, if they found any
men amongst themselves meet for their good behavior and to wardnesse to serve
in the Church of Christ, to bring them forth or name them, that he might
accordingly consider of them, whether by the Canons they were capable of that
honor. And when himself would prefer such as he knew to be sufficient for
their learning, he proposed their names to the people, that their lives and
conuer^actions in time past might be remembered and examined, least any
suspected or infamed for notorious crimes, or otherwise prohibited by the
Canons of the Church, might secretly creep to that degree. This am I far
from refuting or impugning. I wish it rather with zeal to be enjoyed, and with
care to be observed, that none might be taken to serve Christ in his Church,
but such as are unreprovable, and so welltried and reported of, that neither
the people of God might be offended with their enormities, nor the Church
burdened with their indignities. But what is this to the Lay Presbytery? Was
Austen made a Lay Elder: or did the Lay Elders prefer him to the Bishop to
receive imposition of hands, or join with the Bishop in laying hands on him:
Can any of these things be thence so much as surmised: view the place.

When Valerius Bishop of Hippo, Possidon. de vita August. ca. 4.
spoke to the people of God, and exhorted them about the providing and ordering
of a Presbyter for the City, (the necessity of the Church so requiring) the
Catholics, already knowing the ende^our and learning of Saint Austen, laid
hands on him as he sat amongst the people, not fearing nor thinking what
should follow; and holding him fast, brought him to the Bishop to be ordered,
as the manner was in such cases; all with one consent and desire, praying it to
be done and finished, and earnestly following it with great zeal and
outcries. Ibidem ca. ^.
Valerius which ordered (or imposed hands on) him, rejoiced and gave thanks
to God that his prayers were heard, which he had often made, that God would
send him such a man as might edify the Church with the word of God, and with
wholesome doctrine. And to the same Presbyter he gave leave to preach in the
Church in his presence, and very often to expound the Gospel; in deed against
the manner and custom of the Churches of Africa; whereupon some Bishops were
offended with him. This is the whole narration of Possidonius, touching S.
Austens Presbytership, which was no lay function, as we see by the sequel,
neither given him by any Lay Elders; but motioned and urged by all the people,
and consummated by Valerius, that ordered him without the help or assistance
of any other to join with him.

Cyprian I reserved to the last, though in years he were first; because he is
largest, as being alleged no less then six times; howbeit the number of
allegations do not help forth the matter, but the truth and force of them
is more to be regarded. Of these six, there is one place of some importance;
the rest are soon answered. Cyprian writing to the Presbyters and Deacons of
Carthage, where he was Bishop, says; Cypr. li. 3. epist. 10.
Ad id quod scripserunt mihi Compresbyteri nostri Donatus and Nouatus, and
Curdius, solus rescribere nil potui, cum a primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim
nihil sine consilio vestro, and sine consensu plebis, mea priuatim sententia
gerere. To that which Donatus, Nouatus, and Curdius our Compresbyters wrate
unto us, I alone could answer nothing, for so much as I have resolved with my
self even from my first entrance into the Bishoprike, without your counsel
and the consent of the people, to do nothing upon my private opinion. If the
Presbyters to whom Cyprian wrate, had been Lay Elders, it were somewhat to the
purpose; but Cyprian never heard of any such. They were Clergy men to whom
he wrate, and Clergy men of whom he spoke: They sat with him in the
Church, with them he treated in common of the Church affairs, their counsel
and advise he used in all things. This, if you read Cyprian, cannot be
strange unto you; if you peruse but the places which your selves have quoted,
you will confess it.

Writing to the whole Church of Carthage of one Numidicus, that in persecution
was scorched with fire, overwhelmed with stones, and left for dead amongst many
that were slain; and yet after found half alive by his daughter, and
recovered; Cyprian says, Cypr. li. 4. epist. vltima vel 10.
Know ye brethren, your selves to be admonished and instructed by this favor
of God, Vt Numidicus Presbyter ascribatur Presbyterorum Carthaginensium numero,
and nobiscum sedeat in Clero, etc. That Numidicus the Presbyter, should be
adjoined to the number of the Presbyters of Carthage, and sit with us amongst
the Clergy, (for this as we see, was the cause of preserving him) that the
Lord might add him to our Clergy, and adorn with glorious Priests the
perished honor of some of our Presbyters. The Presbyters or Elders then of
Carthage, were the Clergy, that sat with the Bishop; and with him consulted
of matters concerning the good of the Church. To Lucius bishop of Rome, he
says; Cypr. li. 3. epist. 1.
The Lord (by persecution) showed which was his Church, who was his Bishop; qui
cum Episcopo Presbyteri Sacerdotali honor coniuncti, who were Presbyters
joined with the Bishop in Priestlie honor, and which the true people of
Christ. And again, Li. 3. epist. 5.
Presbyteris and Diaconis non defuit Sacerdotis vigor, etc. To the Presbyters
and Deacons there wanted not the vigor of Priesthood, to compresse those that
being unmindful of discipline, and rashly running on, began to communicate
with such as were fallen (in persecution.) These Presbyters and Elders were
(...), Counselors and Coassessors to the Bishop, as Ignatius remembers; they
ruled the Church in common, as Hierome avouches; and without their counsel
was nothing done in the Church, as Ambrose asserteth; and they had even the
honor and vigor of Priesthood, as Cyprian witnesses. Of these speaks
Cyprian in every epistle; of lay Elders no ^illable can be found in all his
writings. These Elders be as rare, as the other be rife; the one every where,
the other no where to be proved or pretended.

If the people must consent before any thing may be done, why not also the late
Elders?] Nay, if the peoples assent must be sought to every thing, what needed
lay Elders: Where the whole multitude should be asked, why dee you take a part
to exclude the rest: Lay Elders are not the people, but part thereof; all both
old and young, are comprised in that name; and yet Cyprian makes this rule of
consulting the people in every thing, neither general for others, nor
necessary for himself. He does not say that he and others by Gods Iawe were
bound to do nothing without the people; but that he from the beginning
determined in all things to take the counsel of the Presbyters, and consent of
the people. And why: he was vehemently impugned from his first ingresse to the
bishoprike, all occasions were sought to draw the people from him; many
advantages by reason of his absence from the place in time of persecution, were
taken against him, to disgrace him and cross him in all his doings. To
strengthen himself, and retain the Jove of his Clergy, and people toward
him; what better way could he take, then in all his enterprises to depend on
the counsel of the Clergy, and consent of the Laity. for by that means he
stood assured, that neither Schism could arise, nor faction prevail against
him.

You ask where I find that I say? Even in Cyprian himself, and that not once
or twice. Cypr. li. 1. epist 8.
That I could not come to you before Easter, the malice and perfidiousnesse of
some of the Presbyters has brought to pass, whiles mindful of their
conspiracy, and retaining their former venime against my being Bishop, yea
rather against your suffrages and election, they begin a fresh their ancient
manner of impugning us, and renew again their sacrilegious devises, with their
woonted lying in wait for us. Against our counsel they rebel, and all
Priestly authority and power is destroyed by their factious conspiracies. Is
it not sufficient, that I have now been two years banished from your presence,
and separated from your sight? that tears fall night and day from me, because
my luck was not as yet to salute you, or embrace you, whom you made Bishop
with so great love and zeal? A greater grief oppresses my languishing mind,
that in so great a distress and need, I can not my self come unto you,
whiles I beware, least at our coming, through the threats and secret practices
of perfidious persons, a greater tumult rise among you.

His epistle to Cornelius largely rehearses and lamenteth their erecting an
other Bishop after him, their maintaining a faction against him, their
rejecting his letters, and despising his threats, their perverting and
intising to take part with them as many as they could, with sundry other
practices and conspiracies too long to recite. Cypr. li. ^. epist. 3.
We, says he, in the very time of persecution wrate our letters, but we were
not regarded; after often consulting, we not only with our consent, but with
our commination decreed, that our brethren should show themselves penitent, and
no man hastily give peace to such as did not penitence; yet they sacrilegious
against God, carried headlong with a wicked rage against the Priests of God,
forsaking the Church, and lifting up particidiall arms against the Church, do
all they can, (to accomplish their intent with a devilish malice) that Gods
mercy should not cure in his church such as are wounded. And again, Cypr. li.
^. epist. 14.
What danger is not to be feared when some of the Presbyters neither
remembering their place, neither thinking there is a Bishop over them, with the
reproach and contempt of the chief, chaleng^ the whole unto them. The disgraces
of my office I can dissemble and bear, as I always have. But now is no time
to dissemble, when our brethren are deceived by some of you, which seek to be
plausible without regard of restoring them to the health of their souls. What
marvel if Cyprian thus besieged, thus impugned, and banished from his Church
and charge, did not only purpose and profess to do nothing without the full
consent of the Clergy and people; but persisted in that course, which he saw
to be safest for himself, and surest against his maligners, to decrease their
number and defeat their expectance? but whether he were bound by Gods law so
to do, and all others tied to the same rule, that is the greatest part of this
doubt. If it were but a private moderation and provision for his own
security, no man is obliged by his example to do the like. If it be a
general form of governing the Church prescribed by the holy Ghost; then
neither might Cyprian, nor any man else swerve from that direction, without
transgressing the will and word of God; then all Councils both Provincial and
General, that assembled and concluded in the Primitive Church without the
liking and agreement of the people, did wilfully break the commandment of
the living God, and all Christian Princes, that in former Ages by their laws
and Edicts intermedled with matters of the Church without the knowledge and
consent of their subjects, presumed without warrant, and offered open wrong to
the kingdom of Christ; yea, Cyprian himself was the first that cassiered his
own confession, and when cause so required, yea, sometimes without cause,
excluded and ouer-ruled the peoples just desires.

One example may seruc for the present; your own allegations will afterward
more at large euince as much. Cypr. li. 1. epist. ^.
Vix plebi persuadeo, imo extorqueo, vt tales patiantur admitti; and iusti^r
factus est fraternitatis dolor, ex eo quod vnus atque alius, obnitente plebe
and contradicente, mea tamen facilitate suscepti, peiores extiterunt, quam
prius fuerant. With much ado persuade I the people, yea, rather extort from
them to suffer such to be admitted; and the grief of the brethren is the
iuster, for that one or two being by my facility received, (the people
striving against it, and contradicting it,) waxed worse then they were before.
Cyprian admitted some to the Church after repentance, when the people
withstoode it and gainesaied it, and were justly grieved with his over much
remissness. Wherein Cyprian did not violate the duty which he ought to
God, nor tyra^nize in the Church with the contempt of his brethren; but
relented from his purpose to do nothing without the peoples consent, for
reasons then moving him, or of his own iuclination leading him to hope their
amendment, that were thus admitted with favor and facility to the Church of
God.

See whether your own examples do not prove as much. The first place you
allege, is this. Cypr. li. 2. epist. 5.
In ordinandis Clericis, fra^res charissimi, solemus vos ante consulere, and
mores ac merita singulorum communi consilio ponderare. In ordering of Clerks
most dear brethren, our manner is to consult you first, and to weigh the
behavior and deserts of every one with common advise. This use
notwithstanding, where just occasion served, he ordered Clerks without their
consents; and so much is expressed in the very next words. Ibidem.
Sed expectanda non sunt testimonia humana, eumpraecedant diuina suffragia; but
the witness of men must not be expected, when Gods approbation is precedent.
The conclusion is; That where one Aurelius a youth, had twice in stocks and
torments professed Christ; Cyprian and his Colleagues that were present with
him (for he was not then at Carthage) had made the said Aurelius, thought young
in years, a Reader in the Church; and so much he signifies by his letters to
the Presbyters, Deacons, and people of Carthage; not doubting but they would
embrace him, though they gave no consent to his ordering. Ibidem.
He deserved a further degree of Clericall ordination, but in the mean time
it has pleased us, he should begin with the office of a Reader. Know you
therefore, most beloved brethren, that I and my Colleagues, which were here
with me, have ordered him a Reader, which I know you will gladly accept, and
wish many such to be ordered in our Church. Cyprian was absent from his own
Church, by reason of persecution then raging; and without the consent either of
his Clergy or people, he did order Aurelius, and sent him with letters to be
received as a Reader in the Church of Carthage.

The like he did for Optatus, Saturus, Caelerinus and Numidicus, as your own
authorities do witness. for as by them you prove Cyprian was wont to take
the good report and testimony of the people concerning such as should be
admitted to the Clergy, and with common advise to examine their worthiness;
so by the self same places I she we, that Cyprian brake that custom, when he
saw time and cause require; and without the consent of his people or Clergy,
ordered such as he found to be meet for that calling. Whereby we collect
that the consent of the people and Clergy is no essential point in ordering
Ministers, without the which they may not be called; but a very Christian and
commendable course to keep off all notorious and enormous persons from that
function; and the surest way to save the Bishop from communicating with other
men's sins, whiles he trusted not his own judgment or knowledge; but used
the eyes, ears, and consciences of the whole Church, for the better view,
search, and trial of their integrity, gravity and industry, to whom the
flock of Christ was to be committed. This which I say, will appear to be
true, even by your own authorities.

Because many of the Clergy of Carthage were wanting; and those few that
remained, did skant suffice for the daily work of the Ministry, for which
cause it was requisite to have more; Cypr. li. 3. ca. 22
Know you, (says Cyprian writing to the Presbyters and Deacons of his Church)
that I have made Saturus a Reader, and Optatus a Subdeacon, whom a good while
since by common advise we appointed to be Cler^ proxim^^ feceramus.
next placed in the Clergy. I have then in your absence done no new thing; but
that, which long ago took a beginning with all our aduises, upon urgent
necessity I have finished. In the like case writing to the Presbyters, Deacons
and whole people of Carthage, he says of Caelerinus that openly professed
Christ, and valiantly endured the rage and fury of the heathen persecuters;
Cypr. li. 4. epist. 5.
Exult and rejoice with us at the reading of our letters, by which I and my
Colleagues which were present, signify unto you, that Caelerinus our brother
is received into our Clergy, not by the voices of men, but by Gods acceptance;
because it was neither lawful nor seemly, that he should be without
ecclesiastical honor, whom the Lord so honored with the excellency of his
heavenly glory. He and Aurelius were appointed for a time to be Readers; but
now know you that we have assigned unto them the honor of the Presbytery, and
to have the same allowance with the Presbyters, and to sit with us, when they
come to ripe and perfect years. Of Numidicus we spoke Page 176.
before, why he was taken by Cyprian into the number of the Presbyters of
Carthage; and that without the consent or knowledge of the people or Clergy. I
suppose it to be clear by these examples (which are your own) that as Cyprian
for his discharge did take the liking and advise of the Clergy and people, for
the better examining of their lives and behauiours, that were to serve in the
Church of Christ; so when he found such as in his conscience he knew to be fit
and worthy, he and other Bishops his Colleagues imposed hands on them,
without expecting the assent or agreement of the people or Presbyters of
Carthage, where he was bishop.

These be the Fathers which your selves picked out to muster before her
Majesty's presence, as pregnant witnesses for the Lay Presbytery; and these,
if you suffer them to tell on their tales, most clearelie refute your Lay
Elders. Other places I know are alleged, or rather abused, to the same
purpose; but the mistaking of them is so palpable, that children will not be
deceived with them. for what if the word Presbyter in Greek signify an aged
man, as well as a Priest; has it any sound or show of reason, where the
Councils and Fathers use the word Presbyteri, you should straight enforce they
were lay Elders? To innouate the discipline received and established ever
since the Apostles times, you should have better grounds then these; you will
otherwise hardly discharge your credites before men, howsoever you will your
consciences before God. For my part, though I compare not with their gifts
which first began, and now maintain this devise; yet by perusing their
proofs, I find that the prejudice of their own opinion rather enclineth them
to this conceit, then the weight either of Scriptures or Fathers. For were
they not over willing to embrace this fancy, where there is one place for them
to stumble at the ambiguitie of the word, there are an hundred fair and
plain testimonies to recall them, and direct them to the ancient and true
discipline of Christ's Church. So that in this question (whether there were any
Lay Elders to govern the Primitive Church) no diligent or indifferent
examiner of the Fathers, can long err; the case is so clear, that unless we
affect rather our wills then the truth, we cannot be led away.

The sum of all that is said touching Lay Elders, rests in three points;
which I wish the learned advisedly to consisider, and the rest carefully to
remember. First, it cannot be proved either by Scriptures or Fathers, that in
the Apostles times or after, any lay Elders were part of the Presbytery, or
that any such were authorized or acknowledged to be Governors in the Church
of Christ. Secondly, if there were such Censors of manners appointed by the
whole Church to remove the unruly, and banish them from the fellowship and
company of the faithful, least their offensive behavior should be a shame
and slander to the Gospel; yet no Text nor title can be showed in Scripture,
Council or Father, that they governed the power of the keys, imposition of
hands, or any other ecclesiastical duty, which concerned the dispensation
of the word and Sacraments. In those things they were to obey, and not to
rule their Pastors. Thirdly, though the oversight and restraint of evil
disposed and disordered Pastors were then committed to such Elders, for want
of believing Magistrates to take care thereof; yet since by the law of God,
the government of such causes, as well as of civil affairs belongs to
Christian Princes, and they have straighter charge, higher power, and better
means to repress such disorders, and refourme such abuses in Pastors and
others; whatsoever pretense may be made for Lay Elders and Governors in time
of persecution, they must utterly cease and give place, where the Magistrate
receives the faith, and vpholdeth the Church. His power not only includes,
but excludes theirs; since they be Governors by consent of private men: and
the Magistrate has his power and sword delivered him immediately from God; to
which all men, Pastors, Lay Elders, and whosoever must be subject not only
for fear of vengeance, but for regard of Gods ordinance. As for the Jewish
Synedrion, to which some men fly for help, it cannot be (as I have touched
before) either Rule or Refuge for the Lay Presbytery. God erected that as the
plot-forme of the Jews common wealth, and made their Elders civil Magistrates
to execute the Judicial part of Moses law, as well without, as under the
king. And therefore as they might not alter it, so we must not urge it in
Christian kingdoms; it contradicts the truth and freedom of the Gospel,
to tie all Christian common wealths to the pattern of Moses policy; yea,
that position, if it be stiffelie stood too, maymeth all Monarchies, and
reduces them to popular, or at least to Synedricall Regimentes; the
consequents whereof are so desperate and dangerous to all Christendom, that I
trust of your selves you will forbear, and if need be, disclayme that
assertion.

It is agreed on both sides there was a Presbytery in every Church; but those
you say were Clergy men.] Not in every Church, but in every City, there were
Presbyters assisting and aiding the Bishop, and those were Clergy men. The
Churches in villages and country towns, had neither Bishop nor Presbytery;
but were subject to the Bishop of that City within whose precincts the
villages were; and had a Presbyter or Priest ordained by the Bishop, or sent
from the Bishop to teach them, and yield them divine Service and Sacraments.
And where the Bishops of the Cities were content to ease their own travel,
and supply their absence or sickness, that in certain country Towns
bishops should be appointed, whom they called (...), these country Bishops
were so restrained by the Council. Ancyr. ca. 13.

Neocasariens. ca. 13.

Antiocheni. ca 10.


Canons, that without special leave of the Bishop of the City, to which they
were subject, they might execute no part of Episcopal power and prehem^nence,
and in short space after were abolished for Leo epist. 86.
presumption and intrusion upon the bishops office; since which time every
City and diocese adjoining, had but one Bishop. The Council of Sardica for y^
West, disliked and prohibited the making of Bishops in villages and small
Cities. Sa^dicens. Concila, ca. 6.
Licentia danda non est ordinandi Episcopum, aut in vico aliquo, aut in modica
Ciuitate, cui sufficit vnus Presbyter. None must be permitted to ordain a
Bishop either in a village, or small City, where one Presbyter will suffice. The
Council of Laodicea did the like for the East. Council. Laodic^n. ca 56.
(...). None must place Bishops in towns and villages, and those that are
already placed, must do nothing without the consent of the Bishop of the
City. As then there were no Bishops but in Cities; so was there no Presbytery
to attend and assist the Bishop, but in the same place where the Bishop had his
chief charge and Church. And therefore your urging of Presbyteries in every
parish and village, is a thing utterly dissonant from the regiment of the
Primitive Church.

In each populous City there was a Bishop to govern the people committed to
his charge; and a Presbytery, that is a number of Priests to help the Bishop
in all sacred actions, and advise him in all Judicial and ecclesiastical
proceedings; and these are called Council. A^cyranum, ca. 13. and Neocaesariens.
ca. 13.
(...), the Priests of the City, by the ancient Councils of Ancyra and
Neocesaria. The villages and country Towns, as they were converted to the
faith, and by reason of the number that believed, needed a minister of the word
and Sacraments, to be a resident amongst them, and were able and willing to
maintain one; so repaired they to the Bishop of the City next to them, and
desired of him a fit man to serve their necessities, and became subject both
the people and Priest to that Bishop, who first gained them to Christ, or who
first erected and ordered their Churches. By which means each Bishop had not
only his principal Church and chair in that City, where he was Pastor,
which the ancient Councils and Stories call (...), but had the care and
oversight of the Towns and villages round about that City, which they call
(...). for (...), does not import a country parish, as our age abuses the
word; and whereon some unwisely have collected that every such parish had and
should have a Bishop, but the greatest Cities with their suburbs, and the
chiefest Churches in the world were so termed, as appears by Eusebius. li. 3 ca.
21 ca. 4. ca. 11. ca. 31 li. 5. ca. 5. li. 7. ca. 3. ca. 28.
Eusebius calling Alexandria, Corinth, Jerusalem, Ephesus, Lions, Carthage,
Antioch, and such other famous Cities and Churches by the name of (...). the
like is extant in the same writer, li. 4. ca. 1. 4. 5. 15. 19. 23. li. 5. ca.
22. 23. 27. li. 6. ca. 1. 8. and li. 7. ca. 28. and in many other places. And
so much the very composition of the words imports; (...) containing not only
the citizens, but all such borderers and strangers as dwelt near and repaired
to any chief Church or City: and (...) comprising all the villages and
Churches that were dispersed in diverse places, but under the regiment of one
Bishop.

Jerome shows that in his time and long before, not only a city, but also a
Province or Region belonged to each Bishop: in which though Presbyters and
Deacons baptized with his leave; yet he always imposed hands and examined and
confirmed their baptism. Hiero. aduers. Luciferianos.
Tuin eo quod recipis Laicum, vnam animam recipiendo saluas; and ego in
recipiendo Episcopum, non di^am vnius ciuitatis populos, sed vniuersam cui
praeest Prouinciam ecclesiae socio. You, in admitting a Lay man (to repentance)
save one soul by receiving (him;) I, in receiving a Bishop join to the
Church, I say not the people of one City, but the whole Province (or Dioecese)
which is under him. Then Bishops had not only the people of one City, but of
one Province or Country committed to their charge and subject unto them, and
their di^ceses did reach even to far towns and villages where Presbyters and
Deacons had cure of souls under them, as Ierom elsewhere remembers. Hiero.
aduers. Luciferianos.
Non abnuo hanc esse ecclesiarum consuetudinem, vt ad eos, qui long in
minoribus vrbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt, episcopus ad
inuocationem Spiritus sancti manum impositurus excurrat. I deny not (says
Jerome) but this is the custom of the Churches, that the Bishop shall go even
to those, that a far off in lesser Towns were baptized by Priests and
Deacons; and impose hands to invoke the holy Ghost on them. But this
imposition of hands on parties baptized, Jerome says was reserved to the
Bishop rather for the honor of his priesthood, then for necessity of their
salvation. Ibidem.
Otherwise, if the holy ghost come only at the Bishops prayers; lugendi sunt,
qui in vinculis, aut in castellis aut in remotioribus locis per Presbyteros and
Diaconos baptizati ante dormierunt, quam ab Episcopis inuiserentur; Their case,
says he, were lamentable, that being baptized by Priests and Deacons in
villages, castles and places far distant, die before the Bishop can visit
them. No Bishop might order or confirm but in his own diocese. to do any such
thing in an other man's diocese, was no custom of the Church but repugnant to
all the Canons of the Church. There belonged therefore to the Bishops, not
only the Cities where their chief Churches were, but also Uillages, Towns,
Castles, and remote places in which Priests and Deacons discharged divine
service and Sacraments; and those places the Bishop (under whom they were) did
at certain times visit, to examine the faith of the baptized, and the manner
of their baptism, lest to Churches and Chappelles far distant, heresy might
have the easier access by the bishops absence. Clergy men then there were in
every diocese, that ministered the word and sacraments in villages and smaller
Towns; but none were of the Presbytery that assisted and advised the Bishop in
Ecclesiastical causes, save only the Clergy and Priests of that City, where
the Bishop had his Church and Seat.

The rural Bishops (for such you confess there were) had they no Presbyteries
to assist them in ecclesiasticallactions and censures?] They needed none; for
they were Bishops in word, but not in deed; they enjoyed the name, not the
power and preeminence of Bishops; but were in all things restrained as other
Priests were, and subjected to the Bishop of the City, in whose circuit they
were. The Council of Antioch says of them: Concilii Antioch^nica. 10.
Those that are in Towns and Villages, called rural Bishops, though they
have received imposition of hands, as Bishops; yet it seems good to this
sacred Synod, they should acknowledge their (degree or) measure, and content
themselves with the care of their own churches, and not to presume to impose
hands on a Priest or Deacon without the Bishop of the City, (...), to which
both himself and his charge are subject. The Council of Laodicea commanded
the rural Bishops, Council. Laodiceaica. ^6.
to do nothing without the liking of the Bishop of the City. So that they
were in all things ruled and governed by the Bishops of their Cities under whom
they were, and not directed by any Presbyters of their own.

If it seem strange to any, that the ancient Councels should endure the name
and title of a Bishop, to be given; to whom the power and office of a bishop
was not given, he must consider for what causes they first permitted rural
Bishops to be made. The one was, to supply the wants that often happen in the
absence or sickness of the Bishop. In which cases being but vicegerents in
some things, there was no reason they should have the same power and
prerogative the right Bishops had, without their leave or liking. For that had
been to erect another Bishop in the same Diocese besides, and against the true
Bishop; and not to place a substitute under him. The next cause was, to content
such as were Bishops amongst Schismatikes, who would rather persist in their
factions, then return to the catholic church with the loss of that honor
and calling they had before. And therefore to such the Bishop of the city
might either allow the name and title of Bishops, if it so pleased him, or
else appoint them the places and charges of rural Bishops. And so the council
of Nice decreed: Council. Nie. ^* ca 8.
If any of the Nouatians will return to the Catholic Church either in Village
or City where there is already a Bishop, or Priest of the Catholic Church; it
is clear that the Bishop of the Church shall have the authority and dignity
of the Episcopal function; and he that was reputed a Bishop amongst the
Nouatians, shall retain the honor of a Priest, unless it please the Bishop
(of the Church) to imparte with him the honor of that title. If he like not
so to do, let some place of a rural Bishop or Priest be provided for him,
that he may seem to continue in the Clergy, and yet not be two Bishops in
one City.

Touching Presbyteries then, though they were needful for greater cities,
where they might well be maintained; yet in villages and smaller Towns, there
was neither use of them, nor provision for them; by reason the country
churches were small and could not find many; and the parties that lived in such
places, were subjected to the bishop of the diocese, and in all things directed
by him. The city of Rome at the first had under one Eusebius. lib. 6. ca. 43.
Bishop, 46. Priests, 7. Deacons, 7. Subdeacons, 42. Acoluthes* Exorcists,
Readers and Sextens 52. (in the whole 155.) all found through the goodness
and grace of God, at the charges of the church there, besides 1500. widows and
afflicted persons, in like sort sustained by the oblations of the people. The
number of Priests so increased afterward, that Jerome says of them: Hiero. in
epist. ad Euagrium t^mo 2.
Diaconospaucitas honorabiles, Presbyteros turba contemptibiles facit: The
scarcity of Deacons makes them to be more esteemed, the multitude of Priests
causes them to be less regarded. In Constantinople the number of the Clergy
was grown so great, y^ the church was not able to maintain the^; and
therefore the Emperor by his laws was forced to limite how many there should be
of every degree; and so he Nouella constitutione 3. vt determinatu^ si^ numerus
cleric^rum.
appointed 60. priests, 100 deacons, 90. subdeacons, 110. readers, 25. singers,
100. sextens, in sum 485. Clergy men to attend the service of the Church
under the bishop. The number of Clergy men that were in other Cities is not so
precisely described, but the proof of their Presbyteries is every where
occurrent.

The Presbyteries of Alexandria Hiero. ad Euagrium.
from Mark the Evangelist to the Euagrius lib. 2. ca. 8: and lib.
killing of Proterius after the great Council of Chalcedon, and of Antioch,
from the preaching of Paul to the 5. ca. 9.
burning of the said city by the Persians, are often remembered in the
Ecclesiastical Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 2. and ca. 42. lib. 7. ca. 11. and 29. and 32.
histories, and diverse Presbyters of either Church that were famous men and
writers in the Church of God named by Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 5.
Eusebius, Hiero. de scriptoribus ecclesiast.
Jerome and Gennadius de viris illustribus.
Gennadius; as in the Church of Alexandria amongst others, Clemens, Origin,
Heraclas, Hiro. Magno tom. 2. sol. 327.
Pierius; in the Church of Antioch, Geminus, Hiro. Magno tom. 2. sol. 327.
Malchion, Hiro. Magno tom. 2. sol. 327.
Lucianus, Chrysostom and diverse uch. The Church of Carthage had Hiero.
descriptoribus ecclesiast.
Tertullian and Hiero. descriptoribus ecclesiast.
Cyprian, who being after made Bishop of the same City and forced to be
absent, wrate Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 6. 10. 14. 17, 18. 19. 21. 22. 24.
many Letters to the Presbyters and Deacons of Carthage. In the Church of Lions
in France was Irenaeus a Presbyter under Pothynus, whom he succeeded in the
Bishopric. At Hippo Saint Austen was first August. epist. 148.
a Presbyter under Talerius, and being Bishop himself had under him 137.
a number of Presbyters that were 110.
Colleagues and Clearkes. Ignatius remembers the Presbyteries of Smyrna,
Philodelphia, Philippi, Magnesia, Trallis and Ephesus, in his Epistles to the
same Churches. Of other Cities and ages the like might be showed: but because
it is a thing rather urged then doubted by you, I will spare that pains as
superfluous. He that reads either the Councels or the Stories of the Church,
shall soon perceive every Bishop had Presbyters and Deacons in the same City
with him and under him.

We be far from denying there were Presbyteries in every Church; but that they
consisted only of Clergy men, neither do we believe it, nor can you prove
it.] We never learned to prove the negative; we affirm they were Clergy
men, and that we prove; you think there were also Lay men amongst them, which
we deny; that must you prove. Your want of proof in that point, makes our
assertion good. You have all this while scanned the Fathers, and ouer-looked
the Councels; bring now but one for lay Elders, we give you the rest. Their
general silence is a full inference against you, which a^ouch they had such,
and can not show where they mention any such. Yet this will I do; name me but
one father or Council that speaks of the office and duty of Presbyters;
and you shall presently see, he means Clergy men. Or if that please you not,
look to the manner of ADMITTING Presbyters into the Church, their SITTING,
SERVING and CONVERSING in the Church, their MAINTAINING by the Church, and
their REMOVING from the Church, and you shall clearly find there were no
Presbyters ioyued with the Bishop in any Ecclesiastical affairs but Clergy
men. They were ordained by imposition of hands; and so were not Lay Elders:
they sat with the Bishop in the chancels apart from all Lay men: they
baptized, and consecrated the Lords Supper; and so might not Lay men: they
lived under stricter rules then Lay men did, as not to have strange women about
them, not to change Cities, not to resort to spectacles or vittailing houses,
not to travel without letters of license and such like (which al lay men were
free from:) they were maintained at the charges of the Church; and so were not
Lay men: and when they were deprived of their honor and office, they were
suffered to communicate amongst Lay men. These were the Presbyters of the
Primitive Church; other then these, no Council, no Father does any where
mention, that were united or associated unto the Bishop; and these in sight
could be no Lay men. Proofs if you require, I protest without vaunting, a
whole volume might soon be made of them. Some you had, more you shall have; if
they seem tedious, I must be pardoned: your importunity has thereto forced
me.

Of Origin Eusebius says; the Bishops of Jerusalem and Cesaria, Eusebius. li. 6.
ca. 8.
manus illi ad Presbyterium imposuerunt: had laid hands on him to make him
one of the Presbytery. Cornelius says Nouatus Idem li. 6. ca. 4^
was advanced to the Presbytery by the favor of the Bishop, qui manus ipsi ad
sortem Presbyterij imposuit; that laid hands on him to give him the lot of the
Presbytery. The fourth Council of Carthage shows the manner how a Presbyter
shall be ordained with imposition of hands. Council. Cartha. 4. ca. 3.
Presbyter quum ordinatur, Episcopo benedicente and manum super caput eius
tene^te, etiam omnes Presbyteri ast antes manus suas tuxta manum Episcop^ super
caput illius teneant. When a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop blessing the
party and holding his hand on the parties head, let all the Presbyters that are
present, hold their hands on his head near the Bishops hand. Of Sabatius when
he was advanced to the dignity of a Presbyter, Marcian said; Socrat. lib. 5.
ca. 21.
Satius fuisse^ sispinis manum imposuissem, quam quod Sabbatium ad Presbyterium
euexi. I had been better have laid my hands on thorns, then on Sabbatius
when I made him Presbyter. Ordination the^ with the Latin Fathers imports as
much as laying on of hands does with the Greek; and was an essential
ceremony taken from the Apostles words and used from the Apostles times in
making of Presbyters, and calling any to be of the Presbytery; which if your
Elders must receive, they be no Lay men: if they must not, they be no
Presbyters. More authorities that Presbyters were made with imposition of
hands, if any desire, let him read the 13. Canon of the Council of Ancyra;
the 9. Canon of the Council of Neocefaria, and likewise of the Council of
Antioch, the 6. of the Council of Chalcedon, the 10. of the Council of Sardica,
the 27. and 56. of the Affricane Council.

In sitting in the Church, the Presbyters were like wise severed from the
people. For they had a place enclosed from all the Laity, where the Lords
table standing in the midst, the Bishops chair and the Presbyters seats
were round about. This place Sozomene calls So^om. li. 7. ca. 24.
(...), the Sacrarie, which divided the Bishop and Presbyters from the people;
and of this Cyprian says, Cypr. lib. 4. epist. 10.
Let Numidicus be ascribed to the number of the Presbyters of Carthage, and sit
with us amongst the Clergy. The council of Laodicea calls it (...), by
reason it was somewhat higher then the rest of the church that all the people
might behold it; and says Council. Laodie. ca. 55.
The Presbyters must not go and sit in their stalles, before the Bishop come;
but enter in with the Bishop, unless the Bishop be sick or from home. The
Canon Law calls it De ^onsecrat. distinct. 2. Sacerdotum.
Presbyterium, the place for Presbyters. Into this place when Theodosius the
Emperor would have entered to receive the communion, S. Ambrose then busy in
divine service sent him this word; Theodoret. lib. 5. ca. 18.
(...), These enclosures, O King, only Priests may enter; they are shut up and
exempted from all others. Council. Nicen^ ca, 18.
The Deacons might not sit amongst the Presbyters, but stand, as the general
council of Nice tells us; much less was there any place there for Lay
Elders.

The service of the Presbyters in the Church declares also there were no Lay
men amongst them. For they blessed, baptized, and ministered the Lords Supper
in the absence of the Bishop, and assisted him being present in those actions.
Council. Nicen^. ca. 18.
It is come to the hearing of this sacred and great Synod, says the council
of Nice, that in some places and cities the Deacons deliver the sacraments to
the Presbyters. This neither the Canon nor custom allows, that they which
have no power to offer the sacrifice, should give the body of Christ to the^
that offer. Hiero. Euagri^.
I hear (says Ierom) that some are grown so senseless, that they prefer
Deacons before Presbyters. What means the servant of tables and widows to
extol himself above them, at whose prayers the body and blood of Christ are
consecrated? To all Lay men the Deacons might deliver the Sacraments, to
Presbyters they might not; the Presbyters therefore were no Lay men. And if
Presbyters were therefore better then the Deacons, because they did offer the
sacrifice at the Lords table, which the Deacons might not, it is evident the
Presbyters were no lay men.

Besides this, the Presbyters were tied to many rules, to which no Lay man was
tied. For example, no Presbyter might go from his own Church and City to any
other place, by the great council of Nice ca. 15. and the council of Antioch
ca. 3. but Lay men, I trust, might change their dwellings. Again, Council.
Nicen^. ca. 3.
no Presbyter by any means might have any strange woman in his house, that was
not his mother, sister, aunt, or such like; but Lay men in that case were left
to their liberty. There are a number of such rules, to which all Presbyters
were bound, and from which all Lay men were free. The councils therefore never
comprised any Lay m^n under the name of Presbyters.

For their maintenance, the case was first rule^ by Saint Paul, as I have
touched before; and after duly observed in the primitive Church, as we may
perceive by the allowance yielded to Presbyters in Cyp. li. 4. epist. 5.
Cyprians time; by Eusebius, l 6. ca. 43
Cornelius letters reporting the number of Presbyters that were maintained in
the Church of Rome; and likewise by y^ Emperors Nouella const^tutio. 3. vt
determina^^^^ (...) morus Clericoris.
Laws limiting what number should be maintained in the Churchs of
Constantinople. This main^enance since all the Elders of (...) ^ie Church had,
(...) Lay men neither by the Canons of the Church had, nor by Gods law could
have; it is certain the ancient Councels and Fathers did not attribute the
honor and place of Presbyters to lay Elders. And when Presbyters were deprived
of their office and function for any fault committed; they might upon their
submission be received amongst Lay men to the communion, as Cypr. li. 2.
epist. 1. and lib. 4 epist. 2
Cyprian and Athanas. Apo. logia 2.
Athanasius testify, but in no wise be restored to the degree and calling of
Presbyters; and consequently they might be Lay men, when they could not be
Presbyters by the Canons.

But why labor I so much to exclude Lay Elders from the Presbyters of the
Primitive Church, when as you have neither reason nor authority to include
them: It may suffice any sober mind, that where Presbyters are so many
thousand times named in Councels, Fathers and Stories; and so sundry Rules and
Canons extant describing and limiting every part of their vocation and
conversation, you have not for all this so much as one circumstance to prove
there were Lay Elders amongst them, nor a sentence or syllable of any ancient
Writer to justify your assertion.

If we mistake the use of the word Presbyter, many learned-men have mistaken it
before us.] There is no man less willing then I am, to decrease the fame, or
discredit the judgment of any late Writer, that has otherwise well deserved
of the Church of God; but an evident truth I must prefetre before the opinions
and commendations of men, be they never so learned, if they be otherwise
minds. And in this case the truth is so ^leere, that I must needs say, not
their learning, but their affection carried the to the contrary part. For who,
that has but opened the Fathers, does not find, that Presbyters were Clergy
men, not Lay men; and in the middle between the Bishops and the Deacons,
underneath the one and above the other^ and that the very word Presbyter
without any other addition amongst Ecclesiastical Writers, does distinguish a
Clergy man, from a Lay man: Ignatius, which you so much esteem, because he
names the Presbytery so often, does he noti divide the Church, into Ignat.
in epist. ad Smyrne^^ and ad Magni^ies.
Lay men, Deacons. Presbyters, and Bishops. This partition standing good, Lay
men, were neither Deacons, nor Presbyters, (...) the part must be (...) (...)
the rest; much less might Presbyters be Lay men, to whom as well the Deacons,
as all the Laity must be subject. Tertullian obiecting to the heretics, that
their order and government was rash, light and unconstant, for proof thereof
says; Tertull. de pr^scripti^, aduers. haretices.
hodie Presbyter, quicras Laicus, amongst you, to day a Presbyter, to morrow a
Lay man. If one man might be both, as you make your lay Presbyters to be; that
could not be absurd and strange in heretics, which was perpetual as you
think, and general in the Church of Christ. He also makes the same partition
of the Church that Ignatius does, into Lay men, Deacons, Presbyters, and
Bishops; and expressing the same parts in two words; he calls them Idem
defuga in persecutione and de baptism^.
Grex and duces, ecclesia and Clerus, the flock and the Leaders; the Church
(or assembly) and the Clergy; and elsewhere Idem in exhortatione ad
castitat^^n.
ordo and plebs; the order and the people; and de monogamia.
Ecclesiae ordo and Laici, the order of the Church and the Laity. And showing
that Presbyters were no Lay men, but chosen and taken out of Lay men, and so
made Clergy men; he says, In exhortat. ad castitatem.
Nisi Laici ea obseruent, per quae Presbyteri allegantur? quomodo erunt
Presbyteri qui de Laicis alleguntur: unless Lay men observe those things which
must be respected in the choice of Presbyters; how shall any Presbyters be
chosen out of Lay men? Presbyters were of the order of the Church, Lay men were
not: yea Presbyters were opposed to Lay men: in the division of the Church, and
to be taken from the number of lay men, before they could come within the
order of the Church to be Presbyters. Your lay Presbyters then make a plain
contradiction to the Fathers words, and a confusion of the parts, which they
distinguish.

The Fathers in those places by Presbyters meant Priests.] In deed they could
not mean your lay Presbyters whom they never knew: but had there been lay
Presbyters in their times, as you imagine there were; how ^r^uolous, confused,
and repugnant to themselves were not only these partitions and conclusions of
theirs, but even the Rules and Canons of all the Councils: for what word does
any Council or Father use for a Priest, but Presbyter? Nay, what one word
could they have to distinguish those that had charge of the word and Sacraments
from Bishops and Deacons, but only by calling them Presbyteros? Wherefore all
Councils provincial and general do by that name without any other adiection
sever them from Bishops and deacons; and wheresoever we find Presbyteros in any
ecclesiastical writer, we presently know, they were neither lay men nor
deacons. For proof hereof take what Council or Father you list, that makes
mention of them; and see whether you shall not confound all their writings, if
you observe not this rule.

The Council of Nice decreeing that none should immediately upon their
baptism be admitted to the office of a Bishop, Nice. Council. ca. 2.
(...), or to the Presbytery, gives this reason. The Apostles precept is
evident, that he should not be (...) newly converted (to the faith) or newly
inserted into the Church. For there is need of time that he should be
catechized, and after baptism (another time) of long trial. In which time, if
any fault be proved against the man (...), let him be kept from the Clergy.
By these words he which was admitted to the Presbytery, was admitted to the
Clergy, and he that was kept from the Clergy, was likewise kept from the
Presbytery. Then had lay men no places in the Presbytery. Again, speaking
of such as were Bishops amongst the Nouatians, and content to return to the
Catholic Church, the same Council says, Let the Bishop Ibidem ca. 8.
provide such a one (...), the place of a Presbyter, that he may seem still to
remain in the Clergy. The Nicene Council made account, if he were a
Presbyter, he must needs be a Clergy man; they never heard of Presbyters in
the Church of Christ that were Lay men. The Council of Antioch. Council.
Antioch. ca^o. 1.
If any dissolve the rule of the great Nicene Council for the feast of Easter,
let them be excommunicated; thus we decree touching Lay men. But if any
(...), of the Governors of the Church, either Bishop Presbyter or Deacon
(where a Deacon is expressly contained in the word (...) used by Paul)
celebrate Easter with the Jews, he shall be deprived of his office, and banished
from the Church, Lay men had neither the same preferment nor punishment that
Presbyters had. For Presbyters were Rulers of the Church, lay men were not;
Presbyters were deprived of their Ministry and removed from the Church, Lay
men were only excommunicated. Presbyters then were no lay persons. Sometimes
one penalty served for both Lay men and Presbyters; and yet then were they
severed by two diverse names. Council. Antioch. ca. 6.
If any be excommunicated by his Bishop, let not others receive him, till he be
reconciled to his own Bishop; or make his answer at a Synod: This definition
to be in force for Lay men, Presbyters, Deacons and all others under the Canon.
The Council of Laodicea. Council. Laodic. ca. 24.
The sacred or priestly men from the Presbyter to the Deacon, and so along the
Ecclesiastical order must not enter into tippling houses. Then Presbyters were
sacred, and within Ecclesiastical orders; and before any such might be lay
men, you must have a new Metamorphosis for them. The Council of Africa;
Council. Africa. ca. 27.
Presbyters and Deacons deprehe^ded in any grievous crime, which necessarily
depriueth the^ of their function, shall never have hands imposed on the^ as
Poenitents or lay persons. All lay persons upon repentance might be reconciled
with imposition of hands; No Presbyters deprived for any grievous sin might be
reconciled with imposition of hands, therefore no Presbyter was a Lay person.
The fifth general Council kept at Constantinople; Conc. Constan. 2. ca. 3.
He that takes a second wife after baptism, or marries a widow or a woman
divorced, or a bond woman, cannot be either Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, or in
any other sacred order, No lay Elders were tied to these rules; all Presbyters
were: there was great odds then between lay Elders and Presbyters.

If you trust not these Councils for y^ use of the word Presbyter, the laws
imperial will direct you. The Christian Emperors giving many privileges to
Clergy men, do likewise express who shall enjoy them, Novel. constit. 123
de sanctissi. episcopis.
Presbyteros, and Diaconos, and Subdiaconos, Cantores, and Lectores, quos omnes
Clericos appellamus: Presbyters, Deacons, Subdeaco^s, Singers and Readers; al
these we call Clergy me^; and all these accordingly had the prerogatives and
immunities of Clergy men, by the Roman laws. Now if no lay Elder could
claim any Clericall privilege in the Roman commonwealth under the name of
Presbyter, as undoubtedly he could not; I much marvel how by force of y^ very
same word in y^ Fathers, who use it as strictly as the Emperors do, Lay men
should claim to have y^ government of y^ church. But indeed it is a mere
conceit of our age; transforming Clergy men into lay men, contrary to y^ words
and meaning as well of Fathers as of laws and canons, rather then they will loose
their hold of the Lay Presbytery, which they have framed after their own
fancy, and not by the direction or deposition of any Council or Father. For
they all with one consent use the word Presbyter, as the civil Laws and
sacred Canons do.

In what sort Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian and Athanasius use the word
Presbyter, we have seen before; the rest do fully concord with them.
Irenaeus: Irenaeus lib. 4. ca 43. and 44.
We must obey those Presbyters in the Church, which have their succession from
the Apostles; and with the order of their Presbytery yield wholesome doctrine
to the information and correction of others. Such Presbyters the Church does
nourish. Origin. Origin. 24. tractar. in Matthew. ca. 23.
There are in the Church of Christ that love the chief places, and labor
much, first to be Deacons, not such as the Scripture describes, but such as
devour widows houses under pretense of long prayer. And such Deacons covet to
attain the chief chaires of those, that are called Presbyters. And some not
there with content, practice many ways to be called bishops by men; which is as
much as Rabbi. Howbeit he that exalts himself, shall be humbled. Which I wish
al would mark, but specially the Deacons, Presbyters and Bishops, which think
these things are not written to them. A Deacon being already in sacred orders
could by no means become alay Elder; the roumes therefore which they aspired
unto, were the chaires of Clergy men, and these were called the Presbyters of
the Church. Of these he says elsewhere, Idem homil. 7. in lib. Iosuae.
Though I be taken for a right hand, and be called a Presbyter, and seem to
preach the (true) word of God; yet if I do anything against the Discipline of
the Church, or rule of the Gospel, the whole Church with one consent must cut
me off being their right hand, and cast me from them. Then were Presbyters not
only right hands in the Church, but also preachers of the word; and that not
some, but all. Idem homil. 1. in psalm. 37.
All Bishops, and all Presbyters or Deacons do teach us, and in teaching do
reprove and sharply rebuke. Optat. lib. 2. ad Parme ^ianum de sc^^smat^
Donatistarum.
Quatuor genera capitum sunt in ecclesia; Episcoporum, Presbyterorum,
Diaconorum and fidelium. There be four sorts of men in the Church (says
Optatus) Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons and the believers. Out of which of these
four will you fetch your lay Elders: From the believers: Then were they no
Presbyters. will you comprise them in Presbyters? Then were they no Late men.
For Optatus in the same place charge the Donatists with subuerting of souls
for making Presbyters to be Lay men. Ibidem.
In^enistis Diaconos, Presbyteros, Episcopos: fecistis Laicos. Agnoscite vos
animas ouertisse; you found Deacons, Presbyters and Bishops: you made them Lay
men. Acknowledge then you subverted souls. If you doubt I force his words
against his meaning, hear what himself says touching those four parts of
the Church. Optat. ad cundem lib. 1.
Quid commemorem Laicos, quitunc in Ecclesia nulla fuerant dignitate suffulti?
Quid Ministros plurimos? Quid Diaconos in tertio, quid Presbyteros in secundo
sacerdotio constitutos? Ipsi apices and principes omnium aliqui Episcopi
instrumenta de^inae legis impie tradiderunt. What shall I reckon Lay men, which
were then advanced with no dignity in the Church? What (need I repeat) the
Seruitours (of the Church?) The Deacons in the third, the Presbyters in the
second degree of Priesthood? The chief and top of all, even many Bishops
wickedly delivered the instruments of Gods Law (to the fire.) Lay men had no
degree nor dignity in the Church; much less the honor or office of
Presbyters. For they were plainly Priests. Had you but one such place for Lay
Elders as here is against them, we would never strive with you about them.

Nazianzene telling how the goodness and providence of God brought that learned
and famous man Basil, Nazianz. in laudem Basil. magni.
(...), to the sacred seats of the Presbytery, (...), by the order and course
that should be observed in spiritual climing, says; Nazianz. in laudem
Basil. magni.
He first read the sacred books to the people, and expounded them, not
disdaining this place of the Chancel, and so (came) to the chair of the
Presbyters, and after of the Bishops. The Seats then of the Presbytery in
Nazianzens time, were not only sacred and severed from the people, but the
right orderly way to ascend unto them, was first to pass through other
Ecclesiastical Cypr. lib. 4. epist. 2.
Degrees and Offices, as Cyprian calls them, and so to rise to the highest,
and no^ for Lay men to sit in them as fellow Presbyters with the Bishops.
Athanas. Apo^log. 2.
No Presbyteris quidem adesse permittitur in mysterijs, quum tamen ipsi quoque
sacrorum administri sunt. The Presbyters themselves are not permitted to be
present in the mysteries, and yet they do administer the Sacraments; says
Julius to the Bishops at Antioch. Hilari^^ in lib^. quem ipse tradi^ dit
Constant.
I am a Bishop (says Hilarie to Constantius) continuing in the Communion of
all the Churches and bishops of France though I be in banishment, and ecclesiae
adhuc per Presbyteros meos communionem distribuens, and still distributing by
my Presbyters the communion of the Church (or to the Church.)

Ambros. in 1. Timoth. ca. 3.
Presbyteri and Episcopi vna est or dinatio, vterque enim sacerdos est. The
ordering of a Presbyter is the same that a Bishops is, says Ambrose, for both
are Priests. Hiero. ad Euagrium.
Aut igitur ex Presbytero ordinetur Diaconus, vt Presbyter minor Diacono
comprobetur, in quem crescit ex paruo: aut si ex Diacono ordinatur Presbyter,
nouerit se lucris minorem, sacerdotio esse maiorem. Either let a Deacon be made
of a Presbyter (says Jerome) that he may be proved to be lesser then a Deacon,
to whose place he rises as from the lower degree; or if a Presbyter be made of
a Deacon, then is he inferior to the Deacon in gain, but in Priesthood
superior. Hiero. ad Nepotianum de vita clericorum.
Quod Aaron and filios eius, hoc Episcopum and Presbyteros esse nouerimus. What
Aaron and his sons were, that we must remember the Bishop and Presbyters are.
There is but one Lord, one Temple, one Ministry. And answering this objection
of Iouinian; that Hiero. lib. 1. aduers. Iouinianum.
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons were appointed by the Apostle to be the
husbands of one wife and to have children, he says; In appointing the
ecclesiastical order, because the church of the Gentiles was yet raw, (the
Apostle) gave lighter Precepts to those that were lately converted, lest being
terrified (at the first) they should not be able to endure it. And expounding
the same words of Paul to Tite; he says, Idem in epist. ad Tit. ca. 1.
The Apostle commanding this to Bishops and Presbyters (that they should be
the husbands of one wife) no doubt released it unto others. Al Lay men might
take a second wife, but no Presbyter by Ieroms constructio^: there were
therefore no Lay men that were Presbyters in his time.

When 6. of the bishops came from Tyrus, to examine matters against Athanas.
the Presbyters of Alexandria perceiving their malice protested against their
proceedings, and wrate their Letters unto them subscribed with their names, in
this wise. Athanas. Apol^gia. 2.
I Dionysius Presbyter send these letters; and I Alexander Presbyter, and so
with 18. more names, 14. of them having the title of Presbyters, and 4. of
Deacons. Whereupon Athanas. says, Ibidem.
Literae and nomina Clericorum ci^itatis haec sunt. The letters and names of
the Clergy men of the city are these. The Clergy of Mariot wrate in this manner,
To he holy Synod of Bishops of the catholic church, all the Presbyters and
Deacons of Mariot send greeting. Then all the Presbyters of Mariot were Clergy
men by Athanas. own words, as also the Presbyters of the city. The Comment.
upon Mat. joined with Chrysostoms, in applying ye parable of y^ talents,
affirm that Presbyters have 5. talents; Deacons 2; the people 1. The 5.
talents of the Presbyters he reckons thus; Homil. 53 ex 25. ca. Matthew.
Been viuendo, solicit praesidendo ecclesiae, verbum veritatis sincere
praedica^do, baptizando, offere^do. Good life, careful ouerseeing the Church,
sincere preaching the word of truth, baptizing according to Christ's rule, and
offering an undefiled sacrifice and praying for the sins of the people. But if a
Presbyter or Deacon be found a sinner, he is accounted as a lay man that has
but one talent. Good life is that talent which is common to al me^, be they lay
or Clergy; but Presbyters had 4. other talents proper to their calling, and so
linked together, that they may not be severed. To whom the^ preaching,
baptising and offering at the Lords table do belong; to the^ also careful ruling
and governing the church does appertain. Now your secular Elders if they be
Presbyters, they must undertake al 5. talents: if they be lay, they must
neither preach, baptize, nor administer the Lords supper, nor consequently be
Presbyters, or govern the Church. For all Presbyters received those 5. talents
or services in the church from their lord and master, but no lay man received
them at Gods hand; I conclude therefore no lay men were Presbyters in
Chrysostoms age.

August. de M^ribus ecclesia catholica l. 1. ca. 32.
How many bishops (says S. August.) do I know that are most holy and godly
men, how many Presbyters, how many Deaco^s, and such like Ministers of the
divine sacraments? And speaking of his own Presbytership, says, August. epist.
148.
Nothing is in this life, and specially in this time more hard, laborious and
dangerous, the^ the office of a bishop, or a presbyter, or a deaco^n: but with
God nothing more blessed, if it be in such sort discharged, as our chief ruler
wills. The way I could not learn, either in my childhood or youth; and when
I began to learn, violence was offered me for my sins; (what else should I
think?) that the second place of government should be committed unto me, who
yet knew how to hold an oar: and now finding what is necessary for him,
which ministers the word of God and Sacraments to the people, I am not
suffered to attayhe it, (for want of ^yme.) Presbyters in Austens time had
their office in the Church, to minister the Sacraments, and propose the word to
the people; and to such Presbyters, was the second place of government
committed. Lay Elders had neither to do with the one, nor with the other part
of that charge.

Socrates recording that the Council of Nice inclined to make a Law for the
restraining of Clergy men from their wives, says; Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 11.
It seemed good to the Bishops to bring a new Law into the Church, (...),
that consecrated men, I mean Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons should not
sleep with their wives which they had married whiles they were lay men. But
Paphnutius standing up contradicted with a loud voice, that this heavy yoke
ought not to be laid on the sacred men. It shall not need to prove unto such
as be learned, that (...) is to be consecrated a Priest unto God; (...) is the
plainest word the Grecians have for a Priest, and (...) for one that is
consecrated to that service. Those Socrates most evidently divides into these
three, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons; and says by way of restraint, (...), I
mean namely and specially these three degrees. The purpose was that they
should not sleep with their wives which they had married, (...), when as yet
they were Lay men, that is as Sozomene expounds it, Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 23.
(...), which they had married before they were consecrated. Now set this
together, and you shall find they were lay men, (...), before they were
consecrated; and therefore (...) once being consecrated they ceased to be Lay
men any longer, but Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons were (...) men consecrated,
they were ergo no Lay men. Much more might be said; but this may suffice for
those that have not wedded their judgments to their appetites: as for such,
nothing will serve, except it please their humors; and therefore I leave them.

You prove that Lay Elders were not called by the name of Presbyters in the
Primitive Church, but that no such were admitted to govern the Church, you do
not prove.] Give me leave to tell you what I prove, repel it if you can. I
prove that you greatly deceive your selves and abuse the fathers, when you
make the world believe they had Lay Presbyters joined with the Bishops to
govern the Church. for it is apparent by their writings they had no Presbyters
but Clergy men, and of such their Presbyteries consisted, and not of any Lay
men, whom they particularly and perpetually exclude not only from the name,
but also from the order, office, seats, power and honor of Presbyters.

Though they were not known by that name, yet were they called Seniores, the
Elders of the Church, as Tertullian, Jerome, Ambrose, Austen and Gregory do
witness; yea, though we should grant the Church had no such lay Elders in
Ieroms and Ambroses days, yet they both confess there were such in the first
Age of the Church, and that the Church should be governed by their advise and
counsel. Their words are so plain, they cannot be shifted. And thence I make
this demonstration. Lay Elders in Ambroses time were out of use, as himself
affirms, through the sloth, or rather pride of Bishops; but Clergy
Presbyters were not out of use in Ambroses time; there were therefore lay
Elders in the first Churches, without whose advise nothing was done, besides
the Presbyters that continued in Ambroses days. this Argument is insoluble.]
You are used to make few good Arguments, that take this to be so strong. The
force of these places I have examined before; and there showed that they were
wrested clean against the intent of the writers; but because I am to end the
discourse of lay Elders, and so to relinquish them to their inuenters, I will
not be grieved to recapitulate the strength of your authorities, and search
out the surenesse of this last syllogism.

The first thing that I observe in your authorities, is this; that with your
own proofs, you overthrow your own purpose. To convince that lay Elders
dured in the Church til Gregory's time, which was 600. years after Christ, you
produce amongst others S. Ambrose, who says that in his time 230. years
before, such Elders were out of use. If there were no such Elders in Ambroses
age, how could they dure till Gregory's days, that lived more then 200. years
after him: This knot is more insoluble then your syllogism.

Another of your witnesses, I mean, S. Jerome, in the very same place that
you cite, lays the whole plot of your lay Elders in the dust. for both
touching the persons that ruled the Church, and the time which they continued,
be crosses all your assertions. The persons by whose common advise the Church
at first was governed, were Presbyters, and those by your own confession were
no lay men. Or if you make any bones to confess so much, S. Jerome will
avouch nolesse. I must allege his words once again, and some of them in
Latin, because you shall the more sensibly see your error, and the rest not
distrust my translation. Hiero. in 1. ca. epist, ad Titum.
Antequam fierent studia in religione, and diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli,
ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae; communi Presbyterorum consilio ecclesiae
regebantur. Postquam vero vnusquisque eos quos baptizauerat, suosesse putabat,
non Christi; in toto orb decretum est, vt vnus de Presbyteris electus
superponeretur, caeteris ad quem omnis ecclesiae cur a pertineret, and
Schismatum semina tollerentur, etc. Before there were factions in religion, and
the people began to say, I hold of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas; the
Churches were governed by the common advise of the Presbyters. But when every
man thought those, whom he had baptized, to be his own, and not Christ's; it
was decreed in the whole world, that one chosen out of the Presbyters should be
set above the rest, to whom all the care of the Church should appertain, and
the seeds of division rooted out. These words are so plain, they need no
demonstration to help them. Before Schisms grew in religion, the Churches
were governed by the common advise of Presbyters; but when the baptizers drew
the people into factions, Bishops were throughout the world elected, and
advanced above Presbyters to take the whole care of the Church. They were both
Presbyters and baptizers that governed the Church, before Bishops were decreed;
ergo, they were no lay Elders. This were enough: but Jerome to show what
Presbyters they were, alleges four places of the Scripture, and thereby
proves they were Teachers and Pastors. I must set down his words; but as
short as I can, that men may be persuaded, or ashamed of their error in this
part committed.

The very next words in Jerome, ensuing the former, are these; Hiero. in 1. ca.
epist. ad Tit.
Putat aliquis non Scriptur arum, sed nostram esse sententiam, Episcopum and
Presbyterum vnum esse? relegat Apostoli ad Philippenses verba dicentis, etc.
Does any man think this is not the position of the Scriptures, but ours; that
a Bishop and Presbyter are both one? Let him read the words of the Apostle to
the Philippians, where he says; Phil. 1.
Paul and Timothy to all the Saints that are at Philippi, together with the
Bishops and Deacons. In one City there could not be many Bishops as we name
them: but because they called the same men Bishops that were Presbyters,
therefore he speaks of Bishops as of Presbyters, without any difference. In
the Acts the Apostle at Miletum Act. 20.
sent to Ephesus, and called the Presbyters of that Church, to whom he said;
Look to your selves, and to all the flock where the holy Ghost has made you
Bishops to feed the Church of God. Here mark diligently, how calling for the
Presbyters of Ephesus only, he afterward termed them Bishops. In the epistle to
the Hebrews, the care of the Church is equally divided amongst many for he
says to the people, Hebr. 13.
obey your Rulers and be subject to them; they are those that watch over your
souls. And Peter in his epistle says; 1. Pet. 5.
The Presbyters that are amongst you I beseech, my self being your fellow
Presbyter, feed ye the Lords flock that is with you. These things I bring
to show, that anciently Presbyters were all one with Bishops, and that in
tract of time, to pluck up the roots of dissension, all the charge (of the
Church) was committed to one. The Presbyters that governed the Church in the
Apostles times, did ATTEND and FEED the flock, and WATCH OVER SOVLES, as those
that should give account for them, and had all those qualities that the Apostle
required in Bishops. The same charge, and the same grace conclude the same
function. And therefore, if any were Clergy men in the Apostles times, these
Presbyters were not Lay men. But these governed the Church as Jerome says;
Lay men therefore they were not, by Ieromes own confession, that did then
govern the Church.

The persons we see, who they were; now for the time how long they continued
Governors of the Church. Before schisms did arise, the Church was governed by
their common advise; but schisms and divisions grew even in the Apostles
times, as it is evident by 1. Cor. 1. 11. and ca. 11. 18.

Romans 16. ^gio. and


Paul's own report, and by Saint 1. Ioh. 2. 1
John's like wise. Wherefore Ieromes words do not infer that Presbyters
ruled the Church any longer then the Apostles times, nor so long neither. If I
seem to take a nice advantage of the time, let Jerome express his own
meaning. In his epistle to Euagrius, debating at large that bishops and
Presbyters were all one in the Apostles time; and alleging both the same and
sundry other proofs for his intent, he adds; Hiero. Euagri^. ^^. 2. fol. 329.
Quod autem postea vnus electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur, in Schismatis
remedium factum est, ne vnusquisque ad se ^rahen^ Christ's ecclesiam rumperet.
Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Euangelista vsque ad Heraclam and Dionysium
Episcopos, Presbyteri semper vnum exse electum in excelsiori graducollocatum,
Episcopum nominabant. That after one was elected and advanced above the rest,
this was to remedy Schisms, least every man drawing the Church of Christ to
himself, should rent it in pieces. So at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist,
to Heraclas and Dionysius Bishops there; the Presbyters always chose one of
themselves, and placed him in an higher degree, and called him a Bishop. Lay
Elders Jerome never knew any to be Governors of the Church: the Pastors and
Teachers that under the Apostles governed the Church by common advise, were
forced for the preventing and repressing of schisines, to transfer the whole
care of the Church to one, whom they called a Bishop. this began at Alexandria,
even from Mark the Evangelist.

Ieromes testimony you have heard. Now choose whether Ambrose shall contradict
him, and give him the lie; or rather be reconciled and expounded by him.
Ambrose says the Church had Ambros. in. 1. Tim. 1.
Seniores quorum sine consilio nihil ag^batur in ecclesia, Elders without whose
counsel nothing was done in the Church. These, say you, were lay Elders. If
we ask you how you prove they were Lay, you be at a non plus. They were
Pastors and Teachers say we. If you ask how we prove our assertion; we
first show you the judgment of Ambrose else where, that in Ambrose li. 5.
epist. 32.
matters of faith, or any ecclesiastical order, Lay men should not judge and
govern Priests, which yet the Governors of the Church must do. I speak
still of the private regiment of Elders, not of the public power of the
Magistrate. Next we show you the verdict of Jerome, confirming his resolution
by many places of the Scriptures, that the Churches at the first were governed
by Presbyters, which were Pastors and Teachers. Made we no further proof then
this, I convent your own consciences, which of our auouries stands on the
surest ground; yours that leans only to your own wills and words; or ours,
that besides the confession of the same father, has a most evident attestation
of another father as ancient and learned as the former. You would seem to be
religious and wise; craze not your credites, with a non obstante, that your
fancies must prevail, whatsoever Councils or fathers say to the contrary.

For the rest we need no better expositor then Jerome, in the very place which
your selves allege. Hiero. in Esaia, ca. 3.
Nos habemus in ecclesia Senatum nostrum, coetum Presbyterorum. We have in the
Church our Senate, even the assembly of Presbyters. Else where he says; Idem
in Michea, ca. 3.
Iudices dom^s Israel non sunt alij nisi Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diaconi. The
Judges over the house of Israel are none other, but the Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons. And these three words when they come together, import the order
and degrees of ecclesiastical offices. Idem aduers. Iouimanum, li. 1.
Episcopus, Presbyter and Deaconus non sunt meritorum nomina, sed officiorum
Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, are not names of deserts, but of offices; and
those Clericall, not Laicall. Idem in epitaph. Nepotian^.
Fit Clericus, and per solitos gradus Presbyter, says Jerome of Nepotianus.
He became a Clergy man, and so a Presbyter by the accustomed degrees. And
again, Idem in Ier^miae ca. 6.
Qui pascitis greges, Episcopi and Presbyteri, and omnis ordo ecclesi^sticus.
You Bishops and Presbyters, and all the ecclesiastical order, which feed your
flocks. If therefore Gregory call the Presbyters Seniores ecclesiae, the
Elders of the Church, in respect of the rest of the Clergy; or if Austen write
unto them, Clero and Senioribus, to the Clergy and Elders; or if Tertullian
writing to the Ethnikes, who understood not the order and offices of the
Church, say in commendation of the Christian meetings, Praesident probati
quique Seniores, The Rulers of our assemblies are certain approved Elders;
what inference can hence be made, that they meant lay Elders, since they use
neither words nor circumstances, but such as will agree to the grauer, wiser,
and Elder sort of the Clergy, otherwise called Presbyters? Yea, Ambrose
himself will tell you, that amongst the Clergy the Presbyters were called
Seniores, the Elders, as next in honor, age and judgment to the Bishop.
Speaking of ecclesiastical officers and ministers, he says; Ambros.
officiorum, li. 1. ca. 20.
Viduarum ^^ virginum domos, nisi visit and gratia, I^n^^tos adire non est
^p^is and hoc cum Seniori^as hoc est cum Episcopo; vel, sigrauior est causa,
cum Presbyteris. Quid necesse est vt demus obtrectandi locum Secularibus? There
is no cause for the yongers to resort to the houses of widows and virgins,
except it be to visit them; and that with the Elders, I mean with the
Bishop, or if the matter be urgent, with the Presbyters. What need we give
occasion to secular (or Lay) men to backbite? How think you? were there not
Elders amongst the Clergy, and those the same men that were otherwise called
Presbyters?

Yet my demonstration is unanswered.] Your mistaking of Ambroses both meaning
and words, is a very simple kind of demonstration; you do not mark the Text
which you bring. Ambrose does not say, the Church had once Elders, which now
are vanished; but nothing at the first was done in the Church without their
advise, which now is out of use, whiles the Pastors will seem alone to be
wise. The men remained that were before, but less regarded, and less
consulted then at first. And so your demonstration is nothing else but a
misconstruction of your Authors words.

Since you leave me no better handfast in Jerome and Ambrose, for lay Elders,
I will requite you with the like for Bishops, which is this, that as the Church
at first was governed by Presbyters without lay Elders; so was it likewise
without Bishops. If I forgo the one, you must also forgo the other; and then
gain you little if Bishops must be removed from the government of the Church
as well as late Elders. And this is so clear, that no cunning can obscure it.]
I did all this while look when you would revive your spirits with this Mythr^
date; you were even at last cast with your lay Elders. But if we cannot
justify the state of bishops by the Scriptures and Fathers, better then you
do lay Elders, we will quietly disclaim them.

Ieromes words are wonderful plain, that Bishops in the Apostles times did
not differ from Presbyters; and are now above them rather by the custom of
the Church then by the truth of the Lord disposition, and ought to rule the
Church in common.] I am so far from rejecting or declining Ieromes authority
in this point, though he seem very favorable to you, that if you will stand
to his censure, I will do the like; but before we wade deeper, let us lay
forth the state of the question, that we may thereby perceive what the sacred
Scriptures and ancient Fathers do confess or confute.

CHAP. XII. To whom the Apostles departing or dying, left the government of
the Church; whether equally to all Presbyters, or chiefly to some; and how
far the conceits of late writers herein, vary from the ancient Fathers,
whose words they pretend to follow.
THat order and discipline are not only profitefull, but also needful in the
Church of God; and as well amongst Pastors and Teachers, as learners and
hearers, might many ways be confirmed, if it were not on all sides concorded.
They that most dissent in the kind of government, do first agree on the use
of government; they would else not strive for that which might still be wanted,
and never missed in the Church of Christ. Nazianz. d^ moderatione in
disputationibus seruanda.
(...). Order, says Nazianzene, is the mother and preserver of all things.
The utility and necessity whereof, as in all states and creatures, so
specially in the Church of God, and in the Pastors and Governors thereof, he
that likes at large to examine, let him read Nazianzens oration plentifully
and purposely written of that Argument. Only I advise with him, that under a
show of religion and zeal; Nazianz. vt supra.
No man be wiser then he should, no man vprighter then the law, clearer then
the light, straighter then the rule, nor forwarder then the commandment. If
order and discipline be necessary for all persons and ages in the Church of
Christ; the gouermnent of the Church must not cease with the Apostles, but dure
as long as the Church continues, that is, to the worlds end; and consequently
so much of the Apostolic power, as is requisite for the perpetual regiment of
the Church, must remain to those that from time to time supply the Apostles
charge, and succeed in the Apostles rooms.

Before we enter to entreat of the first institution of Bishops, we must
carefully distinguish these there points. The things which must be derived from
the Apostles to their helpers and successors in all Ages and Churches; the
persons to whom they were committed; and the times when. If we wander in these,
we shall never get any certain resolution of the matter in question.

What the things are which must abide for ever in the Church, I showed Cap. 9.
fol. 107.
before; it shall suffice now to rehearse them; namely, power to preach the
word and administer the Sacraments, the right use of the keys, and imposition
of hands, for the placing of fit men to undertake the cure of souls, and
remoouing of unfaithful and unfit men from infecting and offending the Church.
These must not fail in the Church, so long as there is a Church: for the want
of any one of them, is the confusion, if not subversion of the Church. These
four parts in this chapter for breuities sake, I often reduce to two
branches, which are, Doctrine and Discipline; Comprising in doctrine the
dividing of the word, and dispensing of the Sacraments; and referring the rest,
I mean the public use of the keys, and imposition of hands, to the
discipline or regiment of the Church.

The parties to whom these ecclesiastical duties might possibly be committed,
we then also numbered, and found four sorts of them; the people, the lay
Elders, the Presbyters and the Bishops. The people must needs be excluded from
intermedling with Pastoral duties. for if all should be Teachers, who should
be hearers: if there were none but shepeheards, what should become of the
flock: He that has put a difference betwixt the Math. 24.
Stewards and the household, the Luke 10.
laborers and the harvest, the Ezech 33.
watchmen and the Citizens, the 1. Pet. 2.
builders and the stones, the Math. 13.
Sower and the ground, the 1. Cor. 3.
husbandmen and the tillage, the Hebr. 13.
leaders and the folowers; even the same Lord has prohibited these degrees to
be confounded, which he has distinguished. 1. Cor. 12.
Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all teachers? I think not. If the
whole body were the eye, where were the hearing? if the whole were hearing,
where were the smelling? Intrus^^n upon men, is injurious; upon God, is
sacrilegious. The examples of Number. 16.
Korah, whom the earth swalowed; of 2. Sam. 6.
Vzzah ^^ri^en to death, and Vzziah plagued with the leprosy for affecting and
inuading the Priests office are well known. Chrysostom says of the last,
Chrysostom. homil. 5. de verbis Esaia vidi Dominum.
He entered (the Temple) to usurp the Priesthood, and he lost his kingdom.
He entered to become more ^ener able, and he became more execrable* So evil a
thing it is not to abide within the bounds that God has appointed us, either
of honor or knowledge.

What I say of the people, I say likewise of lay Elders, for so much as they
are but a part of the people; and look what the whole is prohibited, every
part is interdicted. If Lay men may intermeddle with ecclesiastical
functions, why not the people? If the people may not, why should the Elders,
since both are Lay? If they renounce the execution, and challenge the
superuision of ecclesiastical duties; they fly from one Rock, and fall on
another; they clear themselves from the word, and entangle themselves with
the sword. Governors of the Church that be neither ministers nor Magistrates,
I yet conceive none; if any man's skill be so good, that he can describe us a
government betwixt both, that shall wrong neither, I would gladly give him
audience. Howbeit we need not trouble our heads with the manner of government
that lay Elders must have distinct from the Priests and Princes calling,
before we have better proof for the persons, that shall enjoy this privilege.
When you make it appear there were such officers in the Church of Christ, we
will then entreat you to bound out their office by the word of God, or writings
of the ancient fathers; till then we stand resolved there were never such
Governors nor government established by the Apostles, nor acknowledged by
their after-commers in Christ's Church. The places pretended both in Scriptures
and Fathers for such Elders, we have leasurablie perused and examined, and we
find not so much as the footesteps of any Lay Elders. Presbyters we find and
Rulers; but no reason to lead, they were lay Presbyters or Rulers. Against
the^ we find all the Christian and ancient Councils, laws and fathers yt ever
mentioned any Presbyters. If I shuffle any writers words, or dazel the Readers
eyes, show me the place, I will yield to mine error. In the mean time I take
him to witness that is Judge of all secrets, I endeavored to walk soundly and
simply, without swaying or leaning to either side, more then the evidence of
the truth enforced me.

Two sorts are left, (for I still profess that lay Elders were never
admitted to meddle with any such matters) to whom the Apostolic power and
charge, which must always remain in the Church, may be communicated and
imparted; and those are Presbyters and Bishops. By Presbyters, I mean those,
whom all the Catholic Fathers and Councils with one consent call Presbyteros,
placing them in the middle between Bishops and Deacons, when they divide the
Clergy into Episcopos, Presbyteros^ and Diaconos; Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons. Lai^ Elders I ouerskip as mere strangers to all antiquity. So that
when I speak of Presbyteries, I understand thereby the assemblies of such
Presbyters, as were Clergy men, and in every City assisted the Bishop in the
service of God, and advised the Bishop in all other affairs of the Church.
Thus much I premonish, least the often use of the word Presbyter in this
chapter should either perplexe or unsettle the Reader.

The times must like wise be remembered. The Apostles both in teaching and
governing the Churches, when they were present, had helpers; when they were
absent, had substitutes; after their final departures or deaths, left
successors. So that the things originally descending from the Apostles, and
continually remaining in the Church, are the charge of the word and
Sacraments, and the power of keys and hands: the persons to whom they were
committed, either Presbyters or Bishops: the times when, the presence, absence,
departure or death of the Apostles. If we neglect or confound these parts,
we shall but roaue in the air, at the right government of the Church; if we
observe them, we shall force the Question to an Issue that will not deceive
us. And first for the word and Sacraments.

It may not be deuied, but as the word and Sacraments are the most essential
seeds of the Church, so the handling and sowing thereof in the Lords ground
must be the general and principal charge of all Pastors and Presbyters;
that either feed or rule the flock of Christ. for whether they be Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors or Teachers, I mean such as Ephesians. 4.
Paul reckons to the Ephesians, for the work of the Ministry; or as the
holy Ghost in other places calls them 1. Pet. 5.
Bishops and Presbyters, this power is common to them all. Without the word
and Sacraments, the Tit. 1.
Saints are not gathered, the Act. 20.
Church is not edified, Ephesians. 4.
faith is not perfited, heaven is not opened; wherefore in preaching the word
and administering the Sacraments, the Scriptures know no difference betwixt
Pastors and Teachers, Bishops and Presbyters. Had not our Savior delivered
both in one joint Commission to his Apostles, when he willed them to go and
Mat. 28.
teach all Nation, baptizing them; Paul shows that preaching the word, was
of the twain the greater and woorthier part of his Apostolic function. 1.
Cor. 1.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; not that he might
not or did not use both, but the latter was the chiefer. So John Luke 3.
preached the baptism of repentance; not dividing the offer of the word from
the confirmation of the Sacrament, but joining them both together as coherent
and consequent the one to the other. for God does not send his messengers to
make empty promises; but ratifieth the truth of his speech with the seals of
his word, which are the Sacraments. And therefore he that has charge from God
to preach the one, has also leave to perform the other. Whom God has placed
in his church, that by his mouth we should believe, by his hands also we may
be baptized, as appears by Philip converting and baptizing, not only the
Act. 8.
Eunuche, but the whole City of Samaria; and for that cause S. Austen justly
calls as well Presbyters as Bishops, August. epist. 148.
Ministers of the word and Sacraments.

A new distinction is lately devised, that Pastors in Saint Paul were such as
had not only the word and Sacraments, but also the Church and charge of souls
committed unto them; and Teachers those that labored in doctrine, but received
no charge neither of Sacraments, nor souls. In deed Ambrose takes them for
Ambros. in 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
Catechizers of Infants; and at Alexandria there were Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 10
moderators of Schools resembling our Uniuersities, for the training and
instructing of such as in time were likely to profit the Church of God; but
these were not ecclesiastical functions in the Church; they were profitable
members of a common wealth that so did, but no necessary workmen in the
ministry. And though there were such for a season at Alexandria, yet all
other Cities and Churches had not the like; and they that governed those
Schools and taught the Catechumes there as Pantenus, Clemens and Origin, were
Lay men, and never used at Alexandria to teach the people in the Church, as
appears by Demetrius words then Bishop of Alexandria, finding great fault
with the Bishops of Ierusal in and Cesaria, for suffering Origin after he had
been Catechist at Alexandria, to expound the Scriptures before the people in
the Church. His words are these; Eusebius, li. 6. ca. 10
It was never heard, nor ever suffered, that Lay men should teach in the
Church in the presence of Bishops. With no face could the Bishop of Alerandria
have disliked Origens fact, if it had been usual in his own Church: and the
Bishops that wrate in defense of the matter, do not avouch it was a general
or perpetual rule in the Church of Christ for a Catechizer to teach in the
Church; but allege three instances where they saw the like used, and confess
they knew no more. Wherefore, unless their examples and reasons were stronger
and surer, I prefer the judgment of Jerome, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Theodorete and others before this late conceit, who think the Apostle
expressed one office by two names, to show what things belonged to the
Pastoral charge. Austen. Aug. epist. 59.
Pastors and Doctors, whom you greatly desired I should distinguish, I think
to be all one, as you do; not that we should conceive some to be Pastors,
others to be Doctors, but therefore he subioyned Doctors to Pastors, that
Pastors might understand doctrine pertained to their office. Hier. in Ephesians.
ca. 4.
Every Pastor is a Doctor, says Jerome. Chrysoft. in sermo. 11. in Ephesians.
ca. 4.
Pastors and Doctors (says Chrysostom) were (they) to whom the whole
people were committed, and they were inferior to those that went about
preaching the Gospel, because dwelling in more quietness, they were employed
only in one place. (Paul) Theodoret in Ephesians. ca. 4.
calls them Pastors and Doctors (says Theodorete) which were deputed and
fastened to a City or village. Oecumenius: (by Pastors and Teachers) Oecumen.
in Ephesians. ca. 4.
Paul means Bishops to whom the Churches were committed.

But grant Pastors and Doctors were distinct offices in the Church, as you
imagine, what gain you by it? You may thereby prove an inequality of
ecclesiastical functions, you prove nothing else. Hebr. 13.
Obey your Overseers, says Paul, and be subject to them. they watch over
your souls to give account (for them.) Obedience and subjection to the Pastor
is due from the whole flock, and all degrees thereof which are no Pastors;
but Teachers, as you say, were no Pastors; they were therefore inferior to
Pastors, and subject to their oversight. Now take your choice; if Pastors were
all one with Doctors, you have lost one of those offices which you affirm to
be perpetual in the Church: if they were distinct from them, they were
superiors unto them; and so betwixt ministers of the word, (for such were
Teachers by Saint Paul's rule) you establish a difference of degrees.

Thus much for the word and Sacraments; the dispensing whereof no doubt was
common to all Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers; and so
to Presbyters and Bishops, not withstanding the moderation and oversight of
those things were still reserved to the Apostles, as well absent as present,
even when the power and charge thereof was imparted to others.

The discipline and government of the Church, I mean the power of the keys,
and imposing hands, are two other parts of Apostolic authority which must
remain in the Church for ever. These keys are double; the keie of knowledge
annexed to the word; the keie of power referred to the Sacraments. Some late
writers by urging the one, abolish the other; howbeit I see no sufficient
reason to counteruaile the Scriptures and Fathers that defend and retain both.
The keie of knowledge must not be doubted of, our Savior in express words,
names it. Luke 11.
Woe be to you interpreters of the law; for ye have taken away the keie of
knowledge; ye entered not in your selves, and those that were coming in, you
forbade. The keie of power stands on these words of Christ to Peter. Math. 16.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And likewise to all his Apostles, Math. 18.
Whatsoever ye bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And after his resurrection in like manner
to them all. John 20.
Receive ye the holy Ghost; whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted
unto them; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. And least we should
understand these places of the preaching of the Gospel, as some new writers
do; Saint Paul has plain words, that cannot be wrested to that sense.
Speaking of the incestuous Corinthian that was excommunicated and delivered
unto Satan, he says; 2. Cor. 2.
Sufficient for that man is this rebuking of many; so that now contrary wise
ye ought rather to forgive (him) and comfort (him) least he be swallowed up
with too much sorrow. To whom you forgive any thing, I also (forgive:) for if I
forgave ought to any, I forgave it for your sakes in the sight of Christ. As
Paul delivered this offender to Satan, and shut both the Church and heaven
against him; so now upon the detesting and forsaking of his sin, he restored
him to the peace of the Church, communion of the Lords table, and hope of Gods
kingdom, from which before he was excluded. And this Paul did not by
preaching the word unto the penitent; for as then he was absent from Corinth,
but by forgiving him in the sight of Christ and his Church, as by his
Apostolic power he might. Both these keys, the one of knowledge, the other
of power, Ambros. sermo. 66.
Ambrose mentions in his 66. Sermon, and likewise Origin in his 25. tractate
upon Matthew, adding a third keie, where he says; Orige. tract. 25. in
Matthew. ca. 23.
Blessed are they that open the kingdom of heaven, either by their word, or by
their good work. for living well, and teaching rightly the word of truth,
they open the kingdom of heaven before men, whiles they enter themselves, and
provoke others to follow.

The meaning of these late writers it may be, is not wholly to cast away the
keie of power; but only to draw the words of Christ spoken to Peter and the
rest of his Apostles, rather to the preaching of the Gospel, then to excluding
from the Sacraments: and yet to the Church or Presbytery, they reserve the
power of the keys, that is, full authority to excommunicate notorious and
rebellious sinners. These men foresee, that if the power of the keys be given
to the Apostles and their successors; then have lay Elders (who do not
succeed in the Apostles roumes and functions,) nothing to do with the Apostles
keys. Because this was enough, to mar the Lay Pre^^^terie, therefore the
Patrones thereof conueie the words of Christ to another sense, and build the
groundwork of excommunication upon the 18. chapter of Saint Matthewes
Gospel; where the Church is named, and not the Apostles. But this devise is
both a prejudice to the Apostles, and a Preamble to the lay Presbytery; which
all the Catholic Fathers with one voice contradict, as I have Supra ca. 9.
fol. 115.
before at large declared.

Omitting the Lay Burgesses of the Church, as having no interest in the
Apostles keys, it rests in this place to be considered, to whom those keys
were committed; whether equally to all Presbyters, or chiefly to Pastors and
Bishops. The like must be done for imposition of hands; whether that also
pertained indifferently to all, or specially to Bishops. Before we make a
full resolution to these questions; we must search the time when Bishops first
began; and by whom they were first ordained, and authorized. In which
inquisition we will begin with the report and opinion of the ancient Fathers;
and so descend to the positions and assertions of such as in our age impugn
and gainesay the vocation and function of Bishops.

Epiphanius report is this; Epipha. contra Aerium, li. 3. hares. 75.
The Apostles could not suddenly settle all things. There was (present) need
of Presbyters and Deacons; for by those two the necessities of the Church might
be supplied. Where there was none found worthy of the Bishoprike, the place
remained without a Bishop. But where there was need, and fit men found for
the Episcopal function, Bishops were ordained. Every thing was not perfect
from the beginning: but in process of time, things were fitted for the
furnishing of (all) occasions; the Church in this wise receiving the perfection
of her government.

Ambrose somewhat differing from Epiphanius says; (Apostolus) Ambros in
Ephesians. ca 4.
Timotheum Presbyterum a se creatum Episcopum vocat, quia primi Presbyteri
Episcopi appellabantur; vt recedente eo sequens ei succederet. Sed quia
coeperunt sequentes Presbyteri indigni inueniri ad primatus tenendos, immutata
est ratio, prospiciente concilio, vt non ordo sed meritum crearet Episcopum,
etc. Paul calls Timothy created a Presbyter by himself (or with his own
hands) a Bishop, because the first Presbyters were called Bishops: so as (the
first) departing, the next succeeded him. But for that the Presbyters which
followed, began to be found unworthy to bear the chief regiment; the
manner was changed, a Council providing that not order but desert should make
a Bishop appointed by the judgment of many Priests, least an unfit person
should rashly usurp (the place) and be an offense to many.

Ieromes opinion is evident by his words, which I repeated before, and in
effect he affirms thus much; Hiero in ca. 1. epist. ad Tit. and in epistola
ad Euagrium.
Before there were factions in religion, a Presbyter and a Bishop were both
one; and the care of the Church was equally divided amongst many: but when the
Teachers and Baptizers began to draw disciples after them, it was decreed
throughout the world, that to stop the rising of Schisines and divisions; one
of the Presbyters should be elected and exalted above the rest, to whom the
whole care of the Church should pertain; and he was called a Bishop or
Ouerseer. And so by the custom of the Church rather then by the truth of the
Lords disposition, Bishops are greater then Presbyters, with whom they should
rule the Church in common. I have not altered or neglected any word in Jerome
that is material.

Some of our time whom for their learning and pains in the Church of God I
otherwise reverence, though I follow not their judgment in this point, In
responsion^ ad tractationem de gradibus ministrorum Euangeli^ ab Hadriano
Sarauia editam.
collect out of Ambrose and Jerome, that in the Apostles times Bishops did not
differ from Presbyters: only there was in every place a President of the
Presbytery, who called them together, and proposed things needful to be
consulted of; and this kind of Prioritie went round to all the Presbyters,
every man holding it by course for a season, (which some think was a week)
even as the Priests of the law had their weekly courses to serve in the
Temple. This kind of moderating the Presbyteries by course for a week or a
month, they take to be Apostolic; all other sorts of regiment used after in
the Church, they suppose to be men's inventions, and therefore they call the one
form of government divine, the other humane.

I could with that in men of great gifts, affection and prejudice did not
often overrule learning and judgment; but the greatest men in Christ's Church
(excepting always the Apostles) have inclined some to private opinions, some
to known errors: and therefore later writers must think it no dishonor to
have their reasons weighed before they be received. for my understanding I
would gladly learn, where I shall read, that Bishops in the Apostles times
governed by weeks or years; and that this kind of Prioritie went by course in
every place to all the Presbyters. I see it alleged out of Ambrose, but I
find no such thing affirmed by Ambrose. He says, Ambros. in Ephesians. ca. 4.
Primi Presbyters Episcopi appellabantur, vt recedente eo sequens ei
succederet: the first (that is, the chiefest or eldest) Presbyters were called
Bishops, so as he departing (or leaving the place) the next succeeded him. He
does not say, the first departed at the weeks or years end; nor the next
succeeded, and so round every man in his course; but when the first departed
or left his place, (as by death, deprivation, desertion, translation,
persecution, continual sickness or any other occasion) they did not choose
another to succeed him, but the next in order and standing to him that
departed, took his place. By this you may imagine that the Apostles at the
first in every place where they came, took care to order the Presbyteries in
such sort, that every man might be placed according to the measure of the
gifts and graces, which he had received of the holy Ghost, and withal
appointed the eldest or first to moderate their meetings until further order
should be taken: and when the place was void by death or otherwise, the next
to succeed him without any other or further consent or election of the people
or Presbytery. But what can be more against Ambroses words and sense, then
that a weekelie or monthly government went round about to all the Presbyters
by course, since he affirms, that not all, but only the first Presbyters
were Bishops? If all were Bishops by course, how could only the first have
that place: if all were first, who was second or third: By primi Presbyteri,
the first Presbyters, he does not mean all the Presbyters that were in the
first age of the Church under the Apostles; for then they should all be
Bishops, and none Presbyters, which is a contradiction in the very words; but
by primus and sequens, the first and the next, he meant those that were so
placed in order by the Apostles.

Let Ambrose himself tell you so much. Ambros. in 1. epist. ad Timoth. ca. 3.
Hic enim Episcopus est, quiinter Presbyteros primus est; vt omnis Episcopus
Presbyter sit, non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus. Denique Timotheum
Presbyterum ordinatum significat; sed quia ante se alterum non habebat,
Episcopus erat. Vnde and quemadmodum Episcopum or dine^, ostendit. Neque enim
fa^ erat aut licebat vt inferior ordinaret maiorem. Nemo enim tribait, quod non
accepit. He is a Bishop, which is first amongst the Presbyters, so that every
Bishop is a Presbyter, but every Presbyter is not a Bishop. (for example) Paul
signifies that he made Timothy a Presbyter, but because he had none other
before him, he was a Bishop. Whereupon (Paul) she weth him how he should
ordain a Bishop: for it was neither meet, nor lawful, that the inferior
should ordain the greater (or superior.) No man can give that which he has
not received. Every Presbyter was not a Bishop, says Ambrose, ergo, that
office went not round by course along all the Presbyters. Again, Timothy was
therefore a Bishop, because he had none other before him; but if they went
round by order, Timothy had many weeks another above him, and before him, and
then Timothy was no Bishop, but when his course came. Thirdly, if every
Presbyter were a Bishop in his turn; how fond a reason were this, which
Ambrose makes, that Timothy must be a Bishop before he could impose hands to
ordain a Bishop; since it is not lawful for an inferior to ordain his
superior, and no man could give that which he had not received: For if that
office went by order, every man received Episcopal power to impose hands in
his course, and consequently might give it. Wherefore it is no part of Ambroses
meaning or saying, that the Episcopal honor and dignity was in the Apostles
times imparted to all the Presbyters of every Church in their turns; each of
them enjoying it a week or a year; it is a dream of yours, and so far from
all proof and likelihoode, that for your learning and credites sake you
should not father it on Ambrose. What Ambrose proves for us against the
maine grounds of your new Discipline, in place where, we will not forget.

To return to the ancient Fathers, and sincerely to views their reports
without shortening or lengthening them for either side, Epiphanius speech is in
partcleere, in part obscure. I observe three points in him that appear to be
true, and accord with the judgment of the rest of the Fathers. The first is,
the Apostles could not at the new planting of the Churches settle and dispose
all things in such perfection, as in time they did. So says Ambrose,
Ambrosin Ephesians. ca. 4.
Postquam omnibus locis Ecclesiae sunt constitutae and officia ordinata, aliter
composita res est, quam coeperat: After that Churches were established in all
places; and offices (distinguished or) digested, they took an other order then
at beginning. And why: The first regard the Apostles had, was to gain
unbelievers to Christ; the second, to govern such as were gained. And these
two respects might best be performed by two contrary courses. To increase the
Church, the more workmen, the better. For when the Harvest is great, if Luc.
10.
the Laborers be few, the roumes can not be filled. To guide the Church, the
fewer, the better; except it be with counsel to advise. For diverse men have
diverse minds, and diverse meanings, and in a multitude of Governors, emulation
and dissension are no rare springs. Wherefore no marvel though the Apostles
took besides themselves as many helpers as they could to convert the world
unto Christ; and yet took not unto themselves as many Rulers as they could in
every place to govern the believers. By order of nature men must be gotten
together, before they need be governed; and so in the building of the Church
the number of Preachers at the first was more requisite then the choice of
Governors. And for that cause Epiphanius second position is very true, That
Presbyters and Deacons (the one to labor in the word and dispense the
Sacraments, the other to relieve the poor and attend to divine Service) were
every where appointed by the Apostles. These were sufficient to begin the
Churches, and these were fittest to increase the Church. And therefore in many
places, the Apostles left none other but these. If you ask, who then governed
the Churches in those beginnings, I answer, the flock was both augmented and
directed by the Presbyters that labored in the word. The chief government
to impose hands and deliver unto Satan rested yet in the Apostles, who often
Act. 15. and 14.
visited the Churches which they planted, and ordained Presbyters (as they
passed) to supply the wantes of every Church. The third point in Epiphanius
report is this; that although it be not extant in the Apostles writings, that
in every place where they came at first they left Bishops; yet the Scriptures
do witness that Paul furnished some places with Bishops, as Ephesus and Creete
with Timothy and Tite. Thus far I see not what you can refell in Epiphanius.

Perchance you will deride Epiphanius simplicity, that could not discern
betwixt an Evangelist and a Bishop; for (as you maintain) Timothy and Tite
were Evangelists and not Bishops, and had an extraordinary and no ordinary
calling. You can not charge Epiphanius with ignorance in this behalf, but you
must do the like to the eldest and best learned Fathers of the Primitive
Church, namely, Eusebius, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, Oecumenius, Primasius
and others; which affirm as Epiphanius does, that Timothy was a Bishop
ordained by S. Paul. but thereof anon; as also whether an Evangelist might be
a Bishop or no; which conclusions of yours, though they be most feeble and
unsure, yet they be lately taken up for Oracles.

That which may be doubted in Epiphanius, is this. The cause why Bishops wanted
in some places was, says he, the lack of fit men to bear the office. It may
be some will think it strange, that amongst so many Prophets, Pastors and
Teachers as were in most of those Churches which Paul planted, not a fit man
could be found for the Episcopal function, and yet afterward meet men were
found for all the Churches in the world: but as that which Epiphanius says,
might be some cause of wanting Bishops at the first; so, if I be not deceived,
there were other causes that moved the Apostles not straight ways to place
Bishops in every Church where they preached, which I will specify, when the
testimonies of Ambrose and Jerome be thoroughly perused.

Ambrose at first sight seems somewhat to dissent from Epiphanius, in that he
thinks the Churches had both Presbyters and Bishops left them by the
Apostles; and the Presbyters were placed in an order, according to the deserts
and worthiness of each man, by the Apostles and others that founded the
Churches; and this rule delivered, that as the first and chiefest Presbyter
(who was Bishop in name, and superior in calling to the rest) failed, so the
next should succeed in his room, and enjoy the Episcopal chair and power
after his departure. And when some Presbyters did not answer the expectation
which was had of them, but scandalized the Church, that course of standing in
order to succeed was changed, and Bishops were chosen by the judgment and
liking of many Priests, to cut off unworthy and offensive men from the place.
I could admit this report of Ambrose, but that he expresses not when, and by
whom this change began, he says, Prospiciente Concilio, A Council (fore
seeing or) providing, that not order, but merit should create a Bishop; but
what Council: If he meant a Council of the Apostles, which is not expressed,
but may well be intended; (for the words stand indifferent to any Council,)
no testimony can be weightier for Bishops then this of Ambrose; which is
brought against them. If he meant others after the Apostles deaths, what
authority had they to change the Apostolic government; or by their decree to
bind the whole world: But this I reserve till Ieromes witness be repeated and
examined.

Ierom in his words page 215.
before cited avouches three special things. first, that til dissentions
sprang in the Church, Bishops and Presbyters were all one, and the Churches
were governed by the common advise of Presbyters, amongst (whom) the care of
the Church was equally divided. Next, that to root out schisms rising very
fast through the Preachers and Presbyters factions, by a decree throughout the
whole world, one of the Presbyters was chosen in every Church, and set over
the rest, and to him the whole care of the Church did ever after appertain.
Thirdly, that this subjection of the Presbyters under the Bishop, and maioritie
of Bishops above Presbyters grew rather by the custom of the Church, then by
the truth of the Lords disposition, for they should rule the Church in common.

These words of Jerome may be either very true according to the time that
they be referred unto, or very false. If you so conster Jerome, that all the
while the Apostles lived, Bishops were al one with Presbyters, and had no more
charge nor power in the Church then Presbyters; you make Jerome contradict the
Scriptures, himself, and the whole array of all the ancient Fathers and
Apostolic Churches, that euerwere since Christ's time; for all these affirm
and prove the contrary. But if you so expound Ierom that the Apostles for a
time suffered the Presbyters to have equal power and care in guiding the Church
(themselves always sitting at the stern, and holding the helue whiles they
were present in those parts of the world) till by the factions and divisions
of so many governors the Churches were almost rent in pieces; and thereupon
the Apostles forced, did set an other order in the Church then was at first,
and with the good liking of all the Churches, (either troubled with
contentions, or justly fearing the like events in time to come) did commit each
place to one Pastor, leaving the rest to consult and advise with him for the
health and peace of the people, and by this example taught the whole Church
what perpetual rule to observe after their deaths; Jerome says as much as I
can, or do desire. I come now to the quick; let the Christian Reader mark
this issue well in Gods name, and what side brings soundest and surest
proofs, there let the verdict go.

Jerome proves by many Scriptures, that a Presbyter and Bishop were names
indifferent, and often used to the same persons. Paul calling for the
Presbyters of Ephesus said unto them; Act. 20.
Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, in which the holy Ghost
has set you (...) (Overseers or) Bishops to feed the Church of God.
Inscribing his Epistle to the Philippians, he says, Philipp. 1.
To all the Saints which are at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons. And so
to Tite. Tit. 1.
I left thee in Creete to ordain Presbyters in every City, if any be
unreprovable for a Bishop must be unreprovable. Peter like wise writing to
the Jews dispersed, says, 1. Pet. 5.
The Presbyters which are amongst you I beseech, which am also a Presbyter,
feed the flock of God committed to you, (...), ouerseeing it, not
constrainedly, but willingly.

All the Presbyters that fed the flock are in these places called Bishops: I
grant it fully; the words are clear. What hence conclude you? ergo, the
offices were then all one? Nay, ergo, the names then were common. Otherwise,
how think you by this argument? Peter calls himself 1. Pet. 5.
(...), a fellow Presbyter with the rest; are therefore the Apostleship and the
Presbytership both one office? Of Judas Peter says in the Acts Act. 1.
(...), his Bishoprike let an other take* Will you grant, that an Apostle does
not differ from a Bishop? Admit you the one, and I will receive the other.
Names may be common, though offices be distinct.

There were then at Ephesus, and amongst the dispersed Jews no Bishops, but
such as were Presbyters; and they many, not one.] Distinguish the times, and
the Scriptures will agree. There was a time, (as Jerome tells you) when the
Churches were governed by the common advise of the Presbyters. In this time
spoke Paul to the Presbyters of Ephesus, in this time wrate Peter to the
Presbyters amongst the Jews. After this the factions of the Teachers caused
the Apostles to establish an other kind of government, and to commit the
chief care of each Church, which they had planted, to some chosen person that
should ouersee the flock as Pastor of the place, the rest being his helpers
to disperse the word, and aduisers to govern the Church. If you prove that,
you say somewhat to the matter.] If I prove it not better then you do your
Lay Elders, I am content to renounce the one, as I do the other. Will you
prove it by the Scripture?] I will so prove it, as you shall not refuse it,
unless you reject both the Book and Church of God. What will you prove?]
That the Apostles in their life time did institute one Pastor to take the
chief care of one Church; and consequently the change which Jerome speaks
of, from the common and equal regiment of Presbyters, to the particular and
preeminent moderation of the Churches in each place by Bishops, was not made
after the Apostles were dead, but whiles they lived; and then of force by their
decree. for during their times none might interpose themselves to change and
alter the form of the Church Discipline settled by them, without their leave
and allowance.

If it were ever decreed by them, it would be found in their writings; and
that it can not. Besides, had it been their doing, it might justly be called
Gods disposition and ordinance, which Jerome says it may not.] Their doctrine
in deed does plainly appear by their writings; their successors do not.
For how should the Apostles declare by their pens, who succeeded them after
their deaths: Is not the whole Church of Christ a lawful and sufficient
witness in that case: If we believe not the Churches, that were directed and
ordered by the Apostles preaching and presence, nor their Scholars that lived
with them, and next succeeded in their rouines; who that wise is, will believe
our bare surmises and seely conjectures, of things done 1500. years before we
were borne: Yet if the Scriptures do not signify so much, we will loose it. But
before I enter to prove it, I will search out the right cause why the Apostles
did not not in every place where they came presently erect Bishops to govern
the Churches which they planted.

The reasons why the Apostles did not at the first preaching of the Gospel
commit the Churches to the regiment of Bishops, I find were these three.
First; they reserved the chief power of imposing hands, and punishing
notorious offenders to themselves, whom Christ made bishops and overseers of
his Church. For though to feed, lead, and attend the flock, they took the
Presbyters to be their helpers; yet the weightiest matters of the church, as
giving the graces of Gods spirit, and delivering unto Satan, they retained in
their own hands, so long as they were in those places or parts of the world.
The second is that which Epiphanius noted, that although there were many endued
with excellent gifts to preach the word, yet the Apostles would trust none with
the chief charge of the Churches, till they had fully seen, and perfectly
tried, as well the soundnes of their minds, as greatness of their gifts.
Thirdly, lest they should seem to seek the advancing of their followers, more
then the converting of unbelievers; they suffered the Churches to take a trial
what equality of many Governors would do; and when the fruits thereof
proved to be dissension and confusion, the Apostles were forced to commit the
Churches at their departures to certain tried and approved men to be chief
Pastors of the several places; and the Churches were all as willing to
receive them, finding by experience what continual schisms and heresies grew
by the perverseness of Teachers, and could not be repressed by the confused
government of the Presbyters, which were many in number, and equal in power.

None of these things are expressed in the Scriptures.] If the fathers alone
did witness them, say we not much more for Bishops, then you do for Lay
Elders? but you shall see the grounds of their reports testified even in the
Scriptures. That the Apostles at the first planting of the Churches, kept to
themselves the power of imposing hands and delivering unto Satan, which the
Fathers call Episcopal power, is no news in the Scriptures; they could not
loose that, unless they lost their Apostleship withal: you must show by the
Scriptures where they committed this power to the Presbyters of every place; or
else our assertion stands good that they retained it to themselves. For of
their having it, there is no doubt; of their committing it to the Presbyters of
every Church, there is no proof. And therefore the Fathers do utterly deny,
that the Apostles delivered that power to any but to Bishops. Their proofs be
stronger then you take them for, howsoever you will shift them.

There were Presbyters at Ephesus, besides Timothy, and in Creete, besides
Tite; and yet Paul left the one at Ephesus to impose hands, and the other in
Creete to ordain Presbyters in every City. If without them the Presbyters of
either place might have done it; superfluous was both Paul's charge they
should do it, and direction how they should do it. But his committing that
power and care to them, proves in the judgment of the ancient Fathers, that
the Presbyters without them could not do it. Evangelists you say they were;
and not Bishops. Admit they were. Then as yet neither Ephesus, nor Creete had
any that might impose hands, and yet had they Presbyters; And consequently
this power to impose hands was at that time reserved from the Presbyters to
the Apostles and their deputies.

Saint Paul says most apparently the Presbytery might impose hands. for
Timothy received from them imposition of hands.] I have told you already,
that take the word how you will, you can prove no such thing thence. If it
signify there the degree of a Presbyter which Timothy then received, as
Jerome expounds the place; it comes nothing near your purpose. If you take
it for the assembly then gathered, when Timothy was ordained, Chrysostom
tells you, they were more then Presbyters; for otherwise they could not lay
hands on Timothy to make him a Bishop. Chrysostom, you think, erred in not
expounding the place as you do. Then give Saint Paul leave to tell you that
he was present in the Presbytery, when Timothy was ordained, and that he
imposed hands on Timothy. But this I have handled before, to which I refer
you; I only now put you in mind, that place will be are no such conclusion.

And as the Apostles reserved imposition of hands from the Presbyters to
themselves, so did they keep the delivering of offenders unto Satan in their
own power. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
If any obey not our sayings, note him by a letter, says Paul, and keep no
company with him. To what end should they note him by a letter unto Paul,
unless Paul had reserved the punishing of such offenders unto himself? 1. Corinthians. 4
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in the spirit of meekness? 2. Cor.
12. and 13.
If I come again, I will not spare (such as) have heretofore sinned, and not
repented. I trust this be plain enough to prove, that the Apostles kept the
punishing of sins to themselves, and referred them not over to the Presbyters.

The Apostles having of this power does not exclude the Presbyters from having
the same; for at Corinth Paul not only wills the Church to excommunicate
that incestuous sinner, but rebukes them for not doing it before he wrate.]
Paul does not reprove them for not 1. Corinthians. 5
delivering that sinner unto Satan, but for not sorrowing that he might have
been put from among them. Had they written of this notorious offense when they
wrate of other things to the Apostle, that he might have considered of the
offenders punishment; they had done their duties. they could maintain
factions, and swell one against another through pride of their gifts; but they
did not sorrow, to see so grievous a crime committed and continued in the eyes
both of believers and Infidels, nor so much as signify the same by their
letters, as desiring to have such a one excluded from their Christian
fellowship. This the Apostle charge them with; he goes no further. They
should have 2 Thessalonians. 3.
noted him by a letter unto Paul, and kept no company with him, til the
Apostle had decreed what to do with him.

All this does you no good; for the Apostles neither were, nor could be
Bishops.] I am sure all the Fathers with one mouth affirm the Apostles both
might be and were Bishops. Cyprian, Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 9.
Apostolos, idest, Episcopos, Dominus elegit. The Lord himself chose the
Apostles, that is, the Bishops. Ambros. in Ephesians. ca 4.
Apostoli Episcopi sunt. The Apostles are Bishops, says Ambrose. Epiphan.
contra haeres. lib. 1. haeres. 27.
Romae fuerunt primi Petrus and Paulus Apostoli ijdem ac Episcopi. At Rome the
first were Peter and Paul, both Apostles and Bishops, says Epiphanius.
Chrysostom. homil. 3. in acta Apost.
James, says Chrysostom, had the office of a Bishop at Jerusalem. And so
Eusebius. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 5.
James, was the first, that after the ascension of our Savior had the
Episcopal seat (at Jerusalem.) Jerome himself that is thought to speak much
against the state of Bishops, says; Hiero. de scriptor. ecclesiast. in Pet.
Peter after the Bishop^ike of Antioch held the Sacerdotall chair at Rome.
And again. Ibidem in Jacob.
James called the Lords brother after the Lords passion was straight ordained
Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles. Theodoret. (Paul) Theodoret. in Philipp.
ca. 1.
shows plainly, that (Epaphroditus) had the Episcopal function committed to
him, by calling him an Apostle. What need we more? I remembered you before,
Peter himself calls the Apostleship, Act. 1.
a Bishopship. And why not? if (...) be to ouersee the Lords flock; who better
deserved that name then the Apostles?

They were more then Bishops.] So were they more then Presbyters, and yet Saint
Peter could tell how to speak, when he called himself (...), a Presbyter,
as well as others. Bishops are overseers but of one place, Apostles of many.]
Bishops were fastened to one place, not by the force of their name, but by the
order of the holy Ghost, who sent Apostles to ouersee many places, and
settled Pastors to ouersee one: but he that is ouerseer of twenty Cities, is
ouerseer of every one. And therefore the Apostles were Bishops, and more then
Bishops, even as John was Matthew. 11.
more then a Prophet, and yet Matthew. 21. Luc. 1. ver. 76.
a Prophet. Confound you their offices?] I keep them distinct, in that I say,
every Apostle was a Prophet, a Bishop, and a Presbyter; but not every
Presbyter, Bishop, or Prophet, was an Apostle. They were all 1. Corinthians. 4
the Ministers of Christ, feeders of his flock, and stewardes of his
mysteries; but the Apostles in a greater measure of grace, higher manner of
calling, and mightier force of Gods Spirit then the rest. And whatsoever
becomes of the names, it can not be denied, but the Apostles had that power
of imposing hands, and delivering unto Satan, which they after imparted unto
Bishops. And therefore whiles they remained in or near the places, where they
planted Churches, there was no such need of Bishops; the Apostles always
supplying the wantes of those Churches with their presence, Letters or
Messengers, as the cause required. But when they were finally to forgo those
parts, then began they to provide for the necessity and security of the
Churches, and left such fit men as they had, with Episcopal power, as their
substitutes to guide the Churches which they had founded.

The second cause, why Bishops were not every where trusted with the Churches
at the first erecting thereof, is that which Epiphanius remembers, and Paul
touches in many places. Philip. 2.
I trust to send Timotheus shortly unto you. I have no man like minded, who
will faithfully care for your matters. For all seek their own, and not that
which is Jesus Christ's. And to Timothy; 2. Timoth. 1.
This thou know, that all they which are in Asia, be turned from me.
Timoth. 4.
At my first answering no man assisted me, but all forsook me. Demas has
forsaken me and embraced this present world. Wherefore Epiphanius surmise,
that the scarcity of tried and approved men, was some cause why every place
was not furnished at the first with a Bishop; is neither unlikely nor
vnpertaining to the purpose.

The third reason I take to be this; that as Presbyters to labor in the word
and augment the Church were presently needful, the harvest being no less
then the whole world; and Bishops to moderate the number of Teachers, and to
ouersee as well the feeders as the flock were not so requisite whiles the
Apostles (who took care of those things themselves (preached in or near the
places; so the wisdom of God would not impose that form of government on
the Church, but after long trial and good experience, what need the Churches
should have of it. This course he observed with the people of Israel, not
straightway to associate the seventy Elders unto Moses; but to let them alone
until Moses was wearied with the burden, and the multitude grieved for want of
dispatch, and Iethro seeing the Judge afflicted with pains and the people
discontented with delays, advised an other way; which the whole assembly
liked, God confirmed, and Moses executed. In like manner Christ suffered his
Church to try, whiles his Apostles yet lived, what equality and plenty of
Governors would work in every place; and when it fell out in proof, upon
the Apostles absence, that so many leaders, so many followers, so many Rulers,
so many factions out every Church in sunder; the Apostles were forced (the
world, as Ierom faith decreing it, that is, the faithful throughout the world
being therewith contented and thereof desirous) to commit their places and
Churches not to Presbyters in common and equal authority, but to their
Disciples and followers (whom afterward they called Bishops) in a
superiority, leaving unto them as unto their successors the chiefest honor and
power of imposing hands and using the keys, and resting specially on their
care and pains to ouersee both Teachers and believers, though the Presbyters
were not excluded from helping and assisting them to feed and guide the flock
of Christ.

This you say: but Jerome says, It was not the Lords dis^osition by his
Apostles, but rather a decree and custom of the Church that first made Bishops
to differ from Presbyters.] Jerome says it was decreed throughout the world,
to change the equality of Presbyters into the superiority of Bishops: by
whom it was so decreed, he does not mention in this place; but if I prove,
as well by the Scriptures, as by Jerome himself, and the rest of the Fathers,
that this change began in the Apostles times, and was both seen and approved
by them; I euince it to be an Apostolic ordinance. Then must it also be
divine, which Jerome denies.] What Ierom means by the truth of the Lords
ordinance, I will after examine; I must prove in order, I shall else but
confound both myself and the Reader. In the mean time I make this reason out
of Jerome. When the schisms of Presbyters began dangerously to tear the
Churches in pieces, then were the Churches committed to the chief and
preeminent charge of one; but those schisms and factions troubled all the
Churches even in the Apostles times; under them therefore began the change of
government, which Jerome speaks of.

At Corinth indeed there were contentions, who were baptized of the greatest
men, which Jerome does exemplify; but the factions must be more general and
deadly that should cause an alteration of government throughout the world.] So
there were even in the Apostles times. To those of Corinth he says, 1. Corint.
11.
When you come together in the Church I hear there are dissentions amongst
you, and I believe it in part. for there must be heresies even among you, that
they which are approved amongst you might beknowen. And when he says, there
must be heresies amongst you to manifest the good from the bad, he means not
only at Corinth, but every where; which came to pass accordingly. To the
Romans he says; Romans 16.
Mark them diligently, which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Amongst the Galathians were
Galat. 1. and 3.
some that intended to pervert the Gospel of Christ, and to carry them into an
other doctrine, bewitching them that they should not obey the truth. To the
Philippians; Philipp. 3.
Beware of dogs, beware of evil workmen. many walk, (of whom I told you
often, and tell you now weeping) that are enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and glory to their shame,
which mind earthly things. With the Colossians were some that Coloss. 2.
burdened the Churches with traditions, even with the commandments and
doctrines of men, and holding not the head advanced themselves in those things
which they never saw, and rashly puffed up with fleshly minds (beguiled the
simple) with a show of humbleness and worshipping of Angels. At Thessalonica,
the resurrection of the dead was impugned; and some 1 Thessalonians. 4.
troubled the people with visions, with fained messages, and forged letters in
the Apostles name, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
as if the day of Christ were at hand. It came to pass in every place which
Paul foretold the Presbyters of Ephesus. Acts 20.
This I know (says he) that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in
amongst you, not sparing the flock. Yea of your own selves shall rise men
speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them. Neither were the
Gentiles only subject to this danger, but the Jews also as Peter forewarned
them. 2. Pet. 2.
There shall be false teachers amongst you, which privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and many shall follow
their damnable ways; and through covetousness with fained wordsshal they make
merchandise of you. And so John. 1. Ioh. 2. and
Even now there are many Antichrists. 4.
many false prophets and epist. Ioh. 2.
deceivers are gone out into the world.

To prevent these deceivers, and repress these perverse Teachers; Paul was
forced, whiles he lived and labored in other places, to send special
substitutes to the Churches most endangered; and by their pains and oversight
to cure the soars and heal the wounds, which these pestilent and unquiet
spirits had made. So at Ephesus, when the teachers and doctors began to 1. Tim.
1.
affirm they knew not what, even 1. Tim. 4.
profane and doting fables, 2. Tim. 2.
whose word did fret as a canker, and 2. Tim. 3.
crept into houses leading captive simple women laden with sins, and led with
diverse lusts; and others 2. Tim. 4.
having itching ears gate them teachers after their own lusts and turned
their ears from the truth to fables; Paul sent Timothy thither to 2. Tim. 2.
stay these profane and vain bablings, to 1. Tim. 1.
command that they taught no strange doctrine, to 1. Tim. 5.
impose hands on such as were fit, to 1. Tim. 5.
receive accusations against sinful and ungodly Presbyters, and to 1. Tim. 5.
rebuke them openly according to their deserts, to 1. Tim. 5.
reject young and wanton widows, and to see true Verse 17.
Laborers in the word honored and cherished, and finally to ouersee the whole
house of God and every part thereof as well Teachers and Presbyters, as
Deacons, widows and hearers. And not only instructed him how he should 1.
Tim. 3.
behave himself as a Governor in the Church, but 1. Tim. 5.
charged him before the living God and his elect Angels, that he observed
those things without respecting persons, or any inclining to parts. Likewise
in Creete, when Tit. 1. verse 10.
many vain talkers and deceivers of minds, Verse 11.
subverted whole houses, and loaded the Church with Verse 14.
Jewish fables and commandments of men; Paul left Tite there to Verse 5.
redress things amiss, to Verse 11.
stop their mouths that taught things which they ought not for filthy lucres
sake, to Tit. 3. verse. 9.
stay foolish questions and contentions about the Law, Verse 10.
to reject heretics after one or two admonitions, and Tit. 2. verse 15.
sharply to rebuke with all authority, not suffering any man to despise him;
as also to Tit. 1. ver. 5.
ordain good and religious Presbyters and Bishops in every City, that
should be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improoue gainesayers. And
here first did Paul by writing express, that he placed substitutes where need
was, with Episcopal power and honor to guide and rule the Church of God.

These examples make nothing to your purpose. for first they did none of these
things, but with the advice and consent of the Presbytery; which Bishops do
not. Next, they were Evangelists and no Bishops, and in that respect might have
this special deputation from the Apostle.] It may be your learning will serve
you to say, that Paul left both these to rule the Church in Creete and at
Ephesus for a week, and in their order, as the rest of the Presbyters did; but
such tests if you dare adventure them will crack both your cause and your
credit. Paul belike prayed Timothy to stay at Ephesus to call the Presbytery
together and to ask voices, and to do just what pleased the rest to decree;
but if you elude and frustrate the words of the Apostle with such additions,
not only besides, but against the Text, you can deceive none save such, as
will not believe Saint Paul himself if he should speak against the Lay
Presbytery. For our parts we take the words as they stand, and so did the
Catholic Fathers before us; being persuaded that Paul had wit enough to
discerue to whom he should write for the performaunce of these things, and
not to mistake Timothy, for the Presbytery. If Timothy had nothing else to
do, but to consult what pleased the Presbyters to determine in every of these
points; how childish an oversight was it for Paul to skip the whole bench of
them; and to charge and adjure him to see these precepts inuiolably kept
without sparing or fearing any man:

For thus you must expound, or rather imprison and fetter every word that
Paul speaks in those three Epistles. Command with all authority; receive
not an accusation against a Presbyter, but under two or three witnesses; rebuke
them that sin; reject heretics after two warnings; refuse yoonger widows;
stay vain contentions and unprofitable questions, ordain Elders in every
City; impose hands hastily on no man; that is as you interpret, call the
Presbytery together, and ask them whether they be contented it shall be so or
no. And so, I adjure and charge thee before God and Christ, and the elect
Angels, that thou observe these precepts inviolable and unblameable, that is,
observe them if the Presbytery will consent and agree unto thee, else not. But
I think you dare not stand to these mockeries of the Scriptures; and therefore
you will rather fly to the second part of your answer, that they were
authorized to do these things, as Evangelists, and not as Bishops.

We expressed so much, that they were Evangelists, and no Bishops.] Evangelists
you should say and Bishops. for when they left following the Apostles and were
affixed to certain places with this power and authority which I have
mentioned, what else could they be but Bishops? They assisted the Apostles
present, and supplied their absence, and did continue the Churches in that
state in which the Apostles left them. Now if the Apostles in respect of this
power and care, were Bishops when they stayed in any place; much more the
Evangelists. If the same ^idelitie and authority be still needful, and
therefore perpetual in the Church of God; they did these things not by their
Euangelisticall calling, which is long since ceased, but by their Episcopal,
which yet does and must remain. for if this power and pre-eminence descended
from them to their successors; it is evident this commission and charge was
Episcopal, since no part of their Euangelship was derived to their
after-commers.

We cannot endure to have them called or counted Bishops.] In deed if
succession of Episcopal power came from the Apostles to them, and so to their
successors; we shall soon conclude that Bishops came from the Apostles, and
therefore you do wisely to resist it: but by your patience you must endure it,
the best Stories and Writers of the Primitive Church, do make them Bishops,
and likewise Paul's precepts to them, the very paternes of Episcopal charge and
duty. Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 4.
Timothy, says Eusebius, (...), is by the stories reported to be the first
that took the bishoprike of Ephesus, as Tite also did of the churches in
Creete. Jerome, (whose words you strongly press to prove there were no
Bishops in the Apostles times, but such as were equal with Presbyters and not
superiors unto them;) says, Hiero de script^ribus ecclesiasticis.
Timothy was ordained Bishop of Ephesus by blessed Paul; and Tite Bishop of
Creete preached the Gospel there, and in the Islands round about. Ambrose.
(Paul) Ambrosii prafatio in epistolam 1. ad Tim.
by his epistle instructs Timothy, now created a Bishop, how he ought to
order the Church. And so of the other. and ad Tit.
The Apostle had consecrated Tite to be a Bishop, and therefore he warns him
to be careful in ecclesiastical ordination. Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in
epistolam ad Philippens. hom. 1.
Paul says in his epistle to Timothy, Fulfill thy ministry, when he was
now a Bishop. for that (Timothy) was a Bishop, (Paul) declares by his writing
thus unto him, Lay hands hastily on no man. And again, which was given thee
by the imposition of hands of the Presbytery. for by no means Presbyters
could ordain a Bishop. And showing how Evangelists might become Bishops, he
says. Chrys^st praefatio^^ l epistolam ad Timotheum.
Why does Paul write only to Timothy and Tite, where as Silas and Luke were
(also his Disciples and) endewed with marvelous virtues? Because he had now
delivered to them the government and charge of the Church; the others as yet
he did carry about with him. Epiphanius. Epipha. haeres. 75.
the divine speech of the Apostle teaches who is a Bishop, and who a
Presbyter; in saying to Timothy a Bishop, Rebuke not a Presbyter, but exhort
him as a father, How could a Bishop rebuke a Presbyter; if he had no power over
a Presbyter? as also; Receive not an accusation against a Presbyter, but under
two or three witnesses. Theodoret. Theodoret. apud Oecumenium in praefatione
epist. ad Titum.
Titus was a notable Disciple of Paul, and ordained by Paul Bishop of Creete,
and authorized to make the Bishops that were under him.

Vincentius Lirinensis writing upon some words of Paul to Timothy says,
Vincentius centra haereses.
O Timothy, (that is) O Priest, O Teacher, if the divine grace has made thee
meet for wit, exercise and learning, be thou Beseleel, (that is, a most
skillful workman) of the spiritual Temple. Augustine instructing all Pastors
by Paul's words to Tite, adds, August. de pastoribus. ca. 4.
Was it said in vain to the servant of God now eminent amongst the members of
the chief Pastor, Show thy self an example of good works to all? Gregory.
Gregor. in Pastoral. part. 2. 61. 11.
Paul admonishes his scholar (Timothy) now Prelate of a flock, saying;
Attend to reading til I come. Primasius. Primas. ad Timotheum. ca. 4.
Timothy had the grace of prophecy, cum ordinatione Episcopatus, together
with the order of a Bishop. And (that grace was) and 2. ca. 1.
the blessing which Timothy at the time of his making Bishop received by the
imposition of (Paul's) hands. Oecumenius interlacing the words of Paul to
Timothy, says, Neglect not the gift which is in thee. Occumenius. ea 9. in
1. ad Timoth. 4.
That is, either Doctrine, or the office of a Bishop. for it was the grace of
God, that being young, he deserved to be made a Pastor. Which was given thee
by prophecy,] for by the commandment of the holy Ghost Bishops were made,
and not at all adventure. With imposition of hands of the Presbytery.] By
Presbyters he means Bishops: for Presbyters did not ordain (him being) a
Bishop. Yea, which of all the ancient Fathers does not with Tertullian
confess that the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Tite, Tertul. contra
Marcionem, li. 5.
were made concerning the ecclesiastical state? or does not with Chrysostom,
Ambrose, and Oecumenius apply the words and precepts of the Apostle written to
them as Chrysostom. homil. 10. in 1. ad Timoth.

Ambros in 6. ca. 1. ad Timoth.

Oecumenius in

ad Timoth. ca. 5.


spoken to all Bishops? You say Evangelists could be no Bishops: ye whole
Church of Christ with one resolution said they were bishops; and whatsoever
Paul speaks to them pertains to all Bishops and Pastors: and of al others
Ieromes confession is most clear in that behalf. How then could Ierom doubt
but the vocation and function of Bishops was an Apostolic ordinance, and
consequently confirmed and allowed by the wisdom of Gods spirit in his
Apostles:

Saint John in his Revelation will assure you, that the Son of god willed him
to write to the Reave. 1. 2. and 3.
seven stars and Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, that is, to the seven
Pastors and Bishops of those seven places. Whereby it is evident, that not
only the Apostles were living, when one superior governed the Churches; but
the Lord himself with his own voice confirmed that kind of regiment, I do
not fear lest with Origin, you will wrest the place to the Angels in heaven,
and say that Orig homil. 13. in Lucam.
in every Church there were two Bishops, one visible another invisible; S.
Augustine has learnedly quenched that error. August. epist. 162.
If (the Lord) would have had those words understood of the Angels of the
higher heavens, and not of the Rulers of the Church, he would not have
afterward added, But I have some what against thee, because thou have left thy
first love: remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent. This can not
be spoken of the heavenly Angels, who always retain their love, whence they
that fell are the Devil and his Angels. Therefore by the divine voice, under
the name of an Angel, the Ruler (or ouerseer) of the Church is praised. And
again. Idem homil. 2. in Apocal.
The Angels of the Churches (in the Apocalypse) ought not to be understood to
be any but the Bishops or Rulers of the Churches. If John in his time saw
those seven Churches governed by seven Pastors or Bishops; then was the common
and equal government of Presbyters before that time changed. If Christ called
them Stars and Angels of the Churches, they were no humane invention after
the Apostles were dead and buried.

You see Jerome says, the regiment of Bishops came not into the Church by the
truth of the Lords disposition.] You do not allege Ierom, because you admit
or regard what he says; you only snatch at some words in him, which seem to
serve your humors; otherwise, you receive no part of his report. In the place
which you bring against Bishops, Jerome says; that at the first when
Presbyters governed, Hiero. in ca. 1. epist. ad Tit.
Ecclesiae cura aequaliter inter plures diuidebatur, the (charge or) care of
the Church was equally divided amongst many. You say no; there was never any
such time, it were lack of wisdom so to think. Your words be, Ad
tractation^m de gradibus min strorum Euangelii in ca. 23.
Neque enim ille quum diceret Ecclesias initio fuisse communi Presbyterorum
consilio gubernatas, ita desipuisse existimandus est, vt somniaret neminem ex
Presbyteris illi coetui praefuisse. (Jerome) when he said the Churches were at
the first governed by the common advise of the Presbyters, may not be thought
to have been So FOOLISH, as to dream that none of the Presbyters was chief of
that assembly. Jerome says the care of the Church was equally divided
amongst them; you say it were a dream and a folly so to suppose. And thus is
Jerome rewarded for bearing witness to your Presbyterall regiment.

Again, Jerome says that upon the primarie dissentious of Presbyters, it was
decreed in the whole world; Hier. in epistolam ad P^t. ca. 1.
Vt omnis Ecclesiae cura ad vnum pertineret, that the whole care (or charge) of
the Church should pertain to one. This you cannot digest; for if this be
true, your lay Elders had nothing to do with Church matters since Bishops
began. Ieromes whole tale therefore, your selves reject as untrue; only you
hold fast the latter end, which you understand not, and thence you would
prove, that the governing of the Church by Bishops, was man's invention
contrary to Gods institution. In all reason when you impugn the two parts of
your own witnesses deposition, we might refuse the third; but we will not,
presuming that Jerome would not so grossly contradict himself, as to say the
superiority of Bishops above Presbyters was, and was not an Apostolic
ordinance.

Ieromes words then, that the Bishops maioritie above Presbyters came In ca.
1. epist. ad Tuum.
rather by the custom of the Church, then by the truth of the Lords
disposition, may be two ways construed. First, that by the truth of the
Lords disposition, he means a precept from Christ's mouth; and by the
custom of the Church, he understands a continuation of that regiment even
from the Apostles. For Vide Tertul. de c^rona M^lais.

Cyprianum contra S^ephom.

Concilium Carthag. de baptizand. heretic.


Veritas is often taken with the ancient Fathers for a truth written in the
Scriptures, and Vide Tertul. de c^rona M^lais.

Cyprianum contra S^ephom.

Concilium Carthag. de baptizand. heretic.


consuetudo for a thing delivered by hand from the Apostles, which otherwise
thep call a tradition. And so though there be no precept from Christ in
writing for that kind of government; yet the perpetual custom of the Church
proves it to be an Apostolic ordinance. August. contra Donatist. li. 4. ca.
24.


Another sense of Ieromes words may be this. At the first for a time the
Presbyters with common advise and equal care guided the Church under the
Apostles; Hiero. in 1. cap. epist, ad Titum.
paulatim vero ad vnum omnem sollicitud^nem esse delatam; but (after Bishops
were appointed) the whole care (thereof) was by little and little derived unto
one; and so at length by custom, Presbyters were utterly excluded from all
advise and counsel (whereof Ambrose complains,) and Bishops only intermedled
with the regiment of the Church. This manner of subjection in Presbyters, and
prelation in bishops grew only in continuance of time, and not by any ordinance
of Christ or his Apostles. At first, y^ Presbyters were left as in part of the
charge of y^ part of the dignity. This seems to be the right intent of
Ieroms speech, by the words y^ follow. for to revoke the sovereignty of
Bishops over Presbyters to the truth of y^ divine ordinance, he says;
(Nouerint) Hiero in epist. ad T^t. ca. 1.
in communi debere Ecclesiam regere, imitantes Mosem, qui cum haberet in
potestate solus praeesse populo Israel, septuagintaelegit cum quibus populum
iudicaret. Let the Bishops know, that (according to the truth of the Lords
disposition, howsoever the custom of the Church now be to the contrary) they
should rule the Church in common (with the Presbyters) after the example of
Moses, who when it lay in his power to be Ruler alone over the people of
Israel, he chose seventy to help him judge the people. What they ought to
do, that was the truth of the Lords disposition. now they ought to do as
Moses did. What? to have all Governors equal? no; but when they might rule
alone, to join with them others in the fellowship of their power and honor,
as Moses did. Moses did not abrogate his superiority above others; but took
seventy Elders into part of his charge. This says Jerome was the truth of
the Lords ordinance, although by the custom of the Church, as it then was,
(which grew paulatim, not when Bishops were first ordained, but by degrees in
decurse of time) they had the whole charge of the Church without aduising or
conferring with the Presbyters. For Hiero. aduers. Luciferianos, and ad
Nepotianum.
the Presbyters might neither baptize without the Bishops leave, nor preach in
the Bishops presence: which subjection, Jerome says, was not after the truth
of the Lords ordinance, howsoever the custom of the Church had then
strengthened it.

This to be Ieromes true meaning in this place his own words elsewhere do
fully prove, which are these. Hiere. ad Euagnum.
Vt sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento; quod Aaron
and filij eius at que Leuitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri
and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. To make us understand that the Apostolic
traditions were taken out of the old Testament; what Aaron, and his sons,
and the Levites were in the Temple, that let the Bishops, and Presbyters, and
Deacons challenge to themselves in the Church. The high Priest I hope was
superior to his sons, not only as a Father, but as having the chiefest
place and office about the Arc, and after in the Temple. And as it was there,
so the Apostles ordained, says Jerome, that Bishops and Presbyters should
differ in the Church of Christ. Scanne this place a little, I pray you, and
tell me whether Jerome avouch, that Bishops should be superior to
Presbyters by the tradition and ordinance of the Apostles, or no; If that
point be clear, add these words of Master Beza (which are very sound) to
Saint Ieromes, to make up the Syllogism. Ad tractationem de gradibus
ministorum in ca. 23.
Certe, si ab ipsis Apostolis esset profecta (haec mutatio) non vererer illam,
vt caeteras Apostolic as ordinationes, diuinae in solidum dispositioni
tribuere. If this (change to theregiment of Bishops) proceeded from the
Apostles, I would not doubt thoroughly to ascribe it to divine disposition, as
I do other ordinances of the Apostles; but Jerome expressly confesses it was
an Apostolic ordinance; ergo, without any staggering or doubting, it must be
acknowledged by you, that it was Gods disposition. Thus much for Jerome. Now
for Ambrose (before we go to further proof;) because some strange fancies of
this fresh Discipline are fastened on him; let us likewise examine what he says
for either side.

There is one thing in Ambrose barely surmised, but no way proved, and that is
eagerly caught up by the Disciplinarians, and made a shipmans hose for their
new devises: there are four other points in the same places, that have surer
ground and more agreement with the rest of the Fathers; and those are
positiuelie repelled as frivolous and false by the principles of this pretended
Discipline. Ambrose imagines, (for no proof can be made thereof, either by
Scripture or Story) that the first Bishops were for a while made by order as
they sat in the Church, so as the place falling void by the death or
departure of the first, the next succeeded in his room. This course was
afterward changed into elections; but when, or by whom, he neither does, nor
can tell. from this supposall these three conclusions are drawn, but all three
far from Ambroses speech or meaning. First, that this prioritie of place went
round the Presbytery; every man taking it in order for a season, when his
course came. Next, that the Priour or President for the time, which they call a
Bishop, or Superuisour for his week, differed not in degree from the rest, but
only in this honor to have the chief place. Thirdly, that his office was to
call the rest together, and to guide their meetings that they should be
orderly; and to propounde matters for the whole Presbytery to consult and
conclude with the consent of the greater number; himself having but a voice as
one of the rest, neither negative nor affirmative in any thing, but as the most
part did resolve. This is the Bishop which they have framed us out of Saint
Ambroses words; and this Bishop they are content shall be perpetual in the
Church of Christ, and an essential part of Gods ordinance. This is the right
description of the Mayor and Aldermen of a City, or Bailiffe and Burgesses of
a lesser Town with us in England; but this is no description of a Bishop in
the Church of Christ. For how long will it be before ye be able to prove, I
say not all, but any one of these assertions? What Scripture ever mentioned,
what Father ever imagined any such Bishop?

The fathers you will say, were all infected with humane inventions; and Gods
institution has ever since the Apostles time been neglected in all the
Churches, and of all the persons in the world, till of late. I hear what you
say; and did I not read it with mine eyes, I should think they were deeply
asleep, that dream so well of themselves; but since it is printed, I would
gladly see how it can be proved.

Ambrose you say, leads you so to think; for he affirms that every
Presbyter was a Bishop when it came to his course, and their courses went round
by order. Ambrose contradicts it as plainly as he can speak; and says,
that Ambros in 1. ad Tim. ca. 3.
not every Presbyter was a Bishop, but he only was a Bishop which was primus
inter Presbyteros, the first (or chiefest) amongst the Presbyters.

Nay, first in order; in whose place when he departed, the next succeeded.]
They were capable of the Bishoprike, as they stood in order. Now that order
must go either as they were eldest in standing, or worthiest in gifts. Which
of these two orders did the Presbyters keep, can you tell? [Not I.] Nor
Ambrose neither. He supposest that to sit in the Church, and in other their
assemblies, they had an order, and so no doubt they had; but whether they were
placed by the Apostles according to their merits; or kept their places by
senioritie, as they were ordained, or cast lots amongst themselves for avoiding
of ambition and contention, neither Ambrose, neither any man living could, or
can tell. But the first always was the Bishop; and consequently they differed
not in degree, but in order.] How now masters, will you cross S. Paul's words
so flatly, who says that God has ordained; 1. Cor. 12.
first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers? Are these diverse
degrees or no? [What else.] And were not all these, when they taught in any
place, of the Presbytery? [They were.] Then did the Presbyters differ not in
order only but in degree also.

We speak not of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, when we say the
Presbyters differed one from an other only in order, and not in degree; but of
Pastors that had their charge in that place where they lived.] The question is
not of whom you speak, but of whom Ambrose spoke; we examine his words, not
yours; and he clearly accounts them all to be Presbyters. For example,
Timothy that you say was an Evangelist, Ambrose reckons him for a Presbyter,
and says he was a Bishop, though he were a Presbyter, because there was none
other before him. And had not Ambrose specially named him, I hope you will
exclude neither Apostles, nor Prophets, nor Evangelists from the number of In
Ephesians. ca. 4. and 1. ad Tim. ca. 3.
Presbyters, wheresoever they were present. Now choose you whether you will
say, all these were no Presbyters, 1. Pet. 5.
Saint Peter expresselie saying the contrary; or else admit, that in the order
of Presbyters there were diverse degrees of ecclesiastical functions, and so
your distinction of ordo and gradus, to be nothing near Saint Ambroses
meaning. for he by ordo, understands the ORDER OF their DESERT or
SENIORITIE, and either of those orders does evidently admit many diverse
degrees of ecclesiastical callings.

If Ambrose do not affirm it; we do.] I can soon admit you to affirm what
you list: for when you have done, except you prove it, I will not believe it,
but I see no cause why you should ground that distinction on Ambroses words.
In place convenient you shall have leave to say what you can to maintain your
distinction; in the mean time I would have you mark, that you take Ambroses
mere ghesses, which can not be justified, for your greatest grounds. For tell
me, when ever, or where ever were Bishops chosen by order as they were eldest?
Again, was Timothy chosen Bishop by his standing at Ephesus? or did Paul
leave him there for the great affiance he had in his sincere and upright
dealing? When the Apostle first wrate to Timothy how to behave himself in the
house of God, and on whom to impose hands; did Paul will him to take them as
they stood in order, or to choose men answerable to those conditions which he
prescribed? The first rules that were given in the Scriptures for the creation
of Bishops and Presbyters, were by choice, not by order; before those, how can
Ambrose or any man else prove, that Bishops were ordained in order as they
stood, without choice? Now if you could show any such thing, which I am assured
you cannot; yet this change from order to choice is the manifest commandment
of Gods spirit, witnessed by Paul both to Tite and Timothy. and therefore
your kind of going in order to make Bishops, was, and is repugnant to the
Apostles general and Canonical rule of choosing the fittest men to be
Bishops, which ever since has dured in the Church of Christ as a special and
express part of Gods ordinance confirmed by the Scriptures.

But do you your selves admit this imagination of Ambrose, which you fortify
against Bishops? are not you the first men that check your own witness, and
thereby show, that though you allege Ambrose, you do not believe Ambrose in
this very point which you bring him for: A great learned man of your side
says, and in my judgment says truly, Responsio Bezae ad tractationem de
ministrorum Euangelii grad^bus.
Aliud est electionis mandatum, quod immatum non tantum in Diaconis, sed etiam
in sacris, functionibus omnibus serua^um oportet; aliud electionis modus. The
commandment of election which must be kept unchanged not only in Deacons,
but in all sacred functions is one thing; the manner of electing is another
thing. Then is there a commandment no doubt of Christ by his Apostle, (it
could not otherwise be inviolable,) that to all sacred functions men should
be taken by election, and not by order of standing. If Ambrose spoke of the
time before this commandment; when that was, no man knows. And therefore I
have reason to say, it was never prescribed in the Scriptures, nor used in any
Church or age that we read, but only surmised by Ambrose, because he did not
find who were Bishops in every Church, before Paul wrate to Timothy and Tite,
to make choice of meet men to be Bishops and Presbyters.

Least you mislike that I say Ambrose roaueth at some things which can not be
proved, and need not be credited; tell me your selves what you say to these
reports of Ambrose in the same place; Ambros. in 4. cap. ad Ephesios.
Primum omnes docebant, omnes baptizabant. Inter initia omnibus concessum est
and euangelizare, and baptizare, and Scriptur as in ecclesia explanare. Nunc
neque Diaconi praedicant in populo, neque Clerici, vel Laici baptizant. At the
first, all men did teach, and all men did baptize. At the beginning, every man
was suffered to preach, baptize, and expound the Scriptures in the Church: Now
neither Deacons preach to the people, neither do (inferior) Clerks or Lay
men baptize. Believe you that all men, or Lay men did preach and baptize at
the first spreading of the Gospel: I know you do not; your positions are most
direct against it. Yet Ambrose avouches it; and the proof he brings for it,
is as slender as the report. Because Peter commanded Cornelius and those that
were with him to be baptized; and there came with Peter none from Ioppe but
Act. 10. v. 23.
certain brethren; he concludes that those were Lay men, because they are
called brethren, and did baptize Cornelius and the rest, Peter looking on and
willing them to do it. How weak this collection is, I doubt not but you
quickly find: and the words which you bring, are the next to these, and
proceed from the very same persuasion that this did; which was, that all
things at the first erecting of the Church, were permi^ed and confused, the
paucitie of the persons and necessity of the times so requiring, and then it
skilled not who were Presbyters, and who were Bishops. Yet if you press
Ambrose, I will not reject him; for he says no more, but that the next
Presbyter was to succeed after the place was void: But that either they went
round by course, or did govern by weeks or months, or that a Bishop should
not differ from a Presbyter by power to ordain others, which are the things
that you affirm to be Gods ordinance; in any of these if you prove that
Ambrose makes with you, we will give you the whole.

Besides this, Ambrose has four special points in these very places,
(which you allege against Bishops,) so contrary to your new discipline, as
high noone is to midnight. The FIRST is, where he shuts your lay
Presbyters out of doors, in saying; Ambresin 1. ad Tim. ca. 3.
A Presbyter and a Bishop have all one ordination, for either is a Priest, and
so neither is Lay. The NEXT, that he says; Idem in Ephesians. ca. 4.
Paul made Timothy the Evangelist, both a Presbyter, and a Bishop, neither of
which your discipline can abide, that either Evangelists should be Bishops,
or that Paul should at any time consecrate Bishops. The THIRD; Idem in 1. ad
Tim. ca. 3.
It is neither right nor lawful, says he, for (a Presbyter which is) an
inferior to ordain (a Bishop which is) a Superior; and consequently, your
Presbyters may not impose hands on a Bishop, as Chrysostom also tells you.
The last is, that where you say the people must have the election of their
Bishop or Pastor by Gods law, Ambrose says it must be done Idem in Ephesians.
ca 4.
by the judgment of many Priests, and not by the verdict of the people or lay
Presbyters.

Thus see you that the ancient Fathers Jerome and Ambrose, which are alleged
so constantly not only for the Lay Presbyters, but for the equality and
Idemtitie of Bishops and Presbyters in the Apostles time, come nothing near
your new discipline. The names were common, but their callings different; the
words were not then severed, as now they be, but even then Presbyters might
not impose hands to ordain Ministers: that was reserved to some special and
chief men trusted with the government of others, as well Teachers as hearers,
and appointed to succeed in the Apostles places, as shall appear in the
chapter next ensuing with more evidence.

CHAP. XIII. That some chief Pastors, in, and ever since the Apostles times
have been distinguished from the rest of the Presbyters by the power of
ordination and right of succession, and placed in every City, to preserve the
external unity and perpetuity of the Church, whom the ancient Fathers did,
and we after them do call by the name of Bishops.
BEfore I demonstrate the vocation and function of Bishops to be Apostolic,
the ambiguitie of the name of Bishop, and community of many things incident
and appertinent both to Bishops and Presbyters, urge me to lay down and
deliver certain peculiar marks and parts of the Bishops power and office,
whereby they are always distinguished from Presbyters, and never confounded
with them either in Scriptures, Councils or Fathers. Prerogatives there were
many appropriate unto them by the authority of the Canons and custom of the
Church: as reconciling of penitents, confirmation of Infants and others that
were baptized by laying on their hands, dedication of Churches, and such like:
but these tended as Jerome says; Hiero aduersus Luciferianos.
ad honorem sacerdotis potius quam ad legis necessitatem, to the honor of
their Priesthood, rather then to the necessity of any law. The things proper
to Bishops, which might not be common to Presbyters, were singularity in
succeeding, and superiority in ordaining. These two, the Scriptures and
Fathers reserve only to Bishops; they never communicate the^ unto Presbyters.
In every Church and City there might be many Presbyters; there could be but
one chief to govern the rest: the Presbyters for need might impose hands on
Penitents and Infants; but by no means might they ordain Bishops or Ministers
of the word and Sacraments.

Neither are these trifling differences, or devised by me. The external unity
and perpetuity of the Church depend wholly on these. As to avoid schisms,
Bishops were first appointed; so to maintain the Churches in unity, the
singularity of one Pastor over each flock is commended in the Scriptures.
And as Bishops preserve the unity of each Church, in that there may be but
one in a place; so they continue the same unto perenuitie, by ordaining such as
shall both help them living, and succeed them dying.

De vnitate ecclesiae velde singularitate pralacorum.
Cyprian has written an whole book to prove that the unity of each Church
rests on the singularity of the Pastor, whither I remit him, that is
desirous to read more at large; as also to his first book and third epistle,
entreating of the same matter, and written to Cornelius. The effect of all is
contained in these words; Cypria. de vnitate ecclesia.
Who is so wicked and perfidious, who so mad with the fury of discord, that
believes the unity of God, the Lords vesture, the Church of Christ, may be
torn in pieces, or dare tear it? Himself in his Gospel warns and teaches
(us) saying, There shall be one flock, and one shepeheard. And does any man
think there may be in one place, either many shepeheardes, or many flocks?
In the foresaid Epistle speaking of himself, not of the Bishop of Rome, as
fondly and falsely the Papists conceive, he says; Idem li. 1. epist. 3
Heresies have sprung, and schisms risen from none other fountain then this,
that Gods Priest is not obeyed, nor ONE PRIEST in the Church acknowledged for
the time, to be judge in Christ's stead; to whom if all the brethren would be
subject according to the divine directions, no man would after the divine
judgments, after the suffrages of the people, after the consent of other
Bishops, make himself judge now, not of the Bishop, but of God. Jerome says
as much. Hier ad Rusticum Monachum.
The dumb beasts and wild herdes do follow their leaders, the Bees have
their kings, the Cranes fly after one like an Alphabet of letters. One
Emperor, one Judge of each Province. Rome, as soon as it was built, could not
have two brethren to be kings. Jacob and Esau fought in one womb. Every Church
has but one Bishop, one chief Presbyter, one chief Deacon, and each
ecclesiastical order rests on their Rulers. In a ship is but one that
directs the helue; in an house but one Master; in an army never so great,
the sign of one General is expected. Yea Idem aduers. Lu^ifer^^nos.
the very safety of the Church depends on the dignity of the chief Priest
(or Bishop,) cui si non exors and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in
ecclesijs efficien^ur schismata, quot sacerdotes; to whom if there be not
given a peerless power and eminent above all others, there will be as many
schisms in the Church as there be Priests. thence is it, that except the
Bishop give leave, neither Presbyter nor Deacon have right to baptize.

The singularity of one Pastor in every place, preserves the Peace and
Unity of the Churches, and stops Schisms and dissentions, for which cause
they were first ordained by the Apostles. And therefore is the conclusion
general, both with Councils and Fathers, that there could be but one Bishop
in one City, where the Presbyters were many.

Cornelius Bishop and Martyr, long before the Council of Nice reporting to
Fabius Bishop of Antioch, the original of Nouatus schism, says; Eusebius. li.
6. ca. 43.
This iollie inquisitor of the Gospel understands not that there ought to be
but one Bishop in (that) Catholic Church in which he knows there are 46.
Presbyters. The great Nicene Council took special care; Raffi. ecclesiast.
hist. li. 1. ca. 6.
Ne in vna Ciuitate duo sint Episcopi; that there should not be two Bishops in
one City. Chrysostom, when Paul writes to the Bishops and Deacons of
Philippi, asks this question: Chrysostom. hem. 1. in epist. ad Philip.
What means this? were there many Bishops of one City? and answers, By no
means: but by this title he designeth the Presbyters. for then the name was
common, in so much that a Bishop was called a Deacon or Minister. Afterward,
each had his proper name, and one was called a Presbyter, the other a Bishop.
Theodorete. Theodoret. in 1. ca. ad Philip.
Ne fieri quidem poterat vt multi Episcopi essent vnius Ciuitatis Pastores. quo
fit vt essent scilicet Presbyteri quos nominauit Episcopos. In no case many
Bishops could not be Pastors of one City. Wherefore they were Presbyters,
whom he called by the name of Bishops. Oecumenius; Oecumen. in 1. ca. ad Philip.
Non quod in vna Ciuitate multi essent Episcopi, sed Episcopos vocat
Presbyteros; tunc enim nominibus adhuc communicabant. Bishops Saint Paul
names; not that there were many Bishops in one City, but the Presbyters he
calls Bishops: for as yet the words were common to both. The Latin Fathers
give the like testimony. Optatus. Optat. contra Parmenian^^n. li. 2.
Schismaticus and peccator est qui contra singularem cathedram alteram
collocat. He is a schismatike and a sinner, that against one (Episcopal)
chair erecteth an other. Hierome. Hiero. in 1. ca. ad Philipp.
Hic Episcopos Presbyteros intelligimus: non enim in vna vrbe plures Episcopi
esse potuissent. Bishops here we understand to be Presbyters. for in one
City there could not be many Bishops. Ambrose refers those words of Saint
Paul to the Bishops that were with him and Timothy, and not at Philippi. With
the Bishops Ambros. in 1. ca. ad Philip.
which were (says he) with Paul and Timothy, who themselves were Bishops.
for had he written to Bishops, he would have named them; and he must have
written to the Bishop of the place, as he did to Tite and Timothy, and not to
two or three. For as he says elsewhere, Ambros. in 3. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Aliquantos esse Presbyteros oportet, vt bini sint per ecclesias, and vnus in
Ciuitate Episcopus. The Presbyters must be some in number, that there may be
two in each Church, and but one Bishop in a City.

This is a certain rule to distinguish Bishops from Presbyters; the Presbyters
were many in every Church, of whom the Presbytery consisted. Bishops were
always singular; that is, one in a City and no more, except an other intruded,
(which the Church of Christ counted a Schism, and would never communicate with
any such) or else an helper were given in respect of extreme and feeble age;
in which case, the power of the latter ceased in the presence of the former.
And this singularity of one Pastor in each place, descended from the Apostles
and their Scholars in all the famous Churches of the world by a perpetual
chair of succession, and does to this day continue, but where abomination or
desolation, I mean heresy or violence interrupt it. Of this there is so
perfect record in all the stories and Fathers of the Church, that I much muse
with what face men that have any taste of learning, can deny the vocation of
Bishops came from the Apostles. for if their succession be Apostolic, their
function cannot choose, but be likewise Apostolic; and that they succeeded the
Apostles and Evangelists in their Churches and chaires, may ineuitably be
proved, if any Christian persons or Churches deserve to be credited.

The second assured sign of Episcopal power, is imposition of hands to
ordain Presbyters and Bishops. for as Pastors were to have some to assist
them in their charge, which were Presbyters; so were they to have others to
succeed them in their places which were Bishops. And this right by imposing
hands to ordain Presbyters and Bishops in the Church of Christ, was at first
derived from the Apostles unto Bishops, and not unto Presbyters; and has for
these fifteen hundred years without example or instance to the contrary,
till this our age, remained in Bishops and not in Presbyters. Philip Acts. 8.
preached and baptized at Samaria; but he could not give the graces of the holy
Ghost by imposition of hands to make fit Pastors and Teachers for the work of
the ministry; the Apostles were forced to come from Jerusalem to furnish the
Church of Samaria with meet men to labor in the word and doctrine. The like
we find by Paul and Barnabas in the Acts; who visited the Churches where
they had preached, and supplied them with Acts. 14.
Presbyters in every place that wanted. Paul Tite 1.
left Tite to do the like in Creete; and Timothy was sent to Ephesus 1. Tim.
5.
to impose hands, notwithstanding the Church there had Presbyters long before.
Jerome where he retcheth the Presbyters office to the uttermost, of purpose to
show that he may do by the word of God as much as the Bishop, he excepteth
this one point as unlawful for Presbyters by the Scriptures. Hiero. ad
Euagrium.
Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod Presbyter non faciat? What
does a Bishop save ordination, which a Presbyter may not do? He says not
what does a Bishop, which a Presbyter does not? for by the custom and Canons
of the Church, very many things were forbidden Presbyters, which by Gods word
they might do: but he appealeth to Gods ordinance, which in his Commentaries
upon Tite he calls the divine institution; and by that he confesses it was
not lawful for Presbyters to ordain any. And why: That power was reserved to
the Apostles, and such as succeeded them, not generally in the Church, but
specially in the chair.

Thence does Chrysostom infer very precisely against your new Discipline,
that in Paul's words to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.
Neglect not the gift that was given thee, with imposition of hands of the
Presbytery, by the word Presbytery in that place of Scripture must be
understood Bishops, not Presbyters, and gives this reason. Chrysostom. homil.
13. in 1. ad Timoth ca. 4.
(...) for Presbyters (in the Apostles time) did not impose hands on a Bishop.
Yea, says he, and homil. 1. in epist. ad Philipp.
(...), Presbyters (then) could not impose hands on a Bishop. Chrysostom
does not reason from his own age unto the Apostles, and conclude, because
they might not do it in that world, wherein he lived by a custom of the
Church, ergo, they could not do it in Paul's time; that were a very
senseless and unsavory collection; but he urges that in Paul's time
Presbyters might not ordain a Bishop; and therefore those words must be
understood of Bishops, which by the Apostolic rules might impose hands,
whereas Presbyters might not. The very same point he repeateth and presses
when he gives a reason why Paul in his Epistle to Timothy went from
describing Bishops straight to Deacons omitting clean the order of Presbyters.
Chrysostom. homil. 11 in 3. ca. 1. ad Timoth.
(...). The difference betwixt (Bishops and Presbyters) is not great; for they
also were admitted to teach and rule the Church. and what Paul said of
Bishops, that agrees unto Presbyters. Only in laying on of hands (Bishops) go
beyond them, and have that Only thing more then Presbyters. Theodoret.
Theodoret. in ca. 4 epist 1. ad Tim.
The Presbytery (Paul) calls here such as had received Apostolical (or
Episcopal) grace: for by Theodorets opinion Bishops were then called Idem. in
ca. 1. ad P^^l^ppens.
Apostles, and Presbyters called by the name of Bishops. Oecumenius. Oecumenius
in ca. 5. 1. ad Timot.
Lay hands hastily on no man (...). Paul treats of imposing hands, for he
wrate to a Bishop.

Ambrose renders the same reason why Paul mentioning Bishops and Deacons, did
clean ouerskip Presbyters; and notes the same difference betwixt Presbyters
and Bishops that Chrysostom does. Ambros. in 1. ad Tim. c. 1. 3.
Timothy, because he had none other before him, was a Bishop. Wherefore Paul
shows him how he shall ordain a Bishop. Neque enim fas erat aut licebat, vt
inferior ordinaret maiorem. Nemo enim tribuit quod non accepit. For it was
neither lawful nor permitted that the inferior should ordain the greater. No
man gives that which he has not received. That Timothy was a bishop, is
confessed by the rest of the Fathers, I alleged them Tag. 233.
before; Paul calls him Romans 16. 1. These. 3.
(...), his Copartner in the Gospel, and joins Timothy with himself in
writing to the 2. Cor. 1.
Corinthians, Philippians, Colossians, and 1. These. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
Thessalonians: thereby to show that he had received Timothy, not only into
the fellowship of his Ministry, but given him part of his authority, and
made choice of him to abide at Ephesus to establish and confirm the Church
when he thus wrate unto him. Wherefore Timothy had not this prerogative by
order or senioritie; he was no Presbyter of Ephesus, but there left with
Episcopal authority, which he had by the laying on of Paul's hands before
he stayed at Ephesus. But howsoever he came by it; by Paul's choice or
otherwise; Ambrose acknowledges he was a bishop, and therefore superior to
Presbyters; because he was invested with power to ordain bishops, which
Presbyters had not. His words be full. Ambros. in 1. ad Timoth. ca. 3.
Neque fas erat, neque licebat, vt inferior ordinaret maiorem, It was neither
lawful, nor agreeable to religion, (for fas is that which is consonant to the
service of God, as ius expresses that which is right amongst men) for the
inferior to ordain the superior, to wit, that a Presbyter should ordain a
bishop.

We greatly care not who should ordain Bishops; for as we think there need
none in the Church of Christ: but touching Presbyters, that is, Ministers of
the word and Sacraments, the fourth Council of Carthage is very clear, they
may be ordained by Presbyters. Their words are these. ^^^cil. Cartha. gi^ens.
4. ca. 3.
Presbyter quum ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente and manum super caput eius
tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui presents sunt, manus suas iuxtamanum
Episcopi super caput illius teneant. When a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop
blessing him, and holding his hand on the parties head, let all the Presbyters
that are present hold their hands near the Bishops hand on his head, (that is
ordered) Presbyters are sufficient to create Presbyters, and they may discharge
all Ecclesiastical duties in the Church. for Bishops let them care that like
them.] The Council of Carthage does not tell you, that Presbyters might
ordain Presbyters without a bishop; look better to the words; such
Presbyters as were present must hold their hands on the parties head, near
the bishops hand; but without the bishop they had no power of themselves to
impose hands. Now to what end they imposed hands; whether to ordain and
consecrate as well as the bishop; or because the Action was sacred and public,
to consent and bless together, with the bishop, this is all the doubt. If they
had power to ordain as well as the bishop, and without the bishop, all the
Fathers which I before cited, were utterly deceived. For they say no. Yea,
Jerome, that neither could forget nor would suppress (being one himself)
any part of their power, knew not so much. For he confesses that bishops
might ordain by imposing hands, Presbyters might not. And therefore though
they held their hands near the bishops hand, yet did they not ordain, as the
bishop did.

How know you to what end they joined with the Bishop in imposing hands?
The action was common to both, and no difference is expressed in that Council
between their intentes.] Unless you be disposed to set Councills and Fathers
together by the ears, you must make their imposition of hands, to be a
consent, rather then a consecration; and so may the authorities of all sides
stand upright. otherwise by an action, that admittteth diverse ends and
purposes, you overthrow the maine resolution, not only of other Councils and
Fathers, but of the same Synod which you allege: for that gives Presbyters
no power to ordain without the bishop, but to conioyne their hands with his.

Many things were interdicted Presbyters by the Canons, which were not by the
Scriptures; but you must show us that Presbyters and Bishops differ by the word
of God, before we can yield them to be diverse degrees.] If Presbyters by the
word of God may ordain with imposing hands as well as Bishops, howsoever by
the custom of the Church they be restrained or subjected under Bishops, they
be all one in degree with Bishops, though not in dignity; for all other
things as Jerome avouches are common unto them: but if that power be granted
by Gods Law to Bishops, and denied to Presbyters; then struggle whiles you
will, you shall find them in the end to be distinct and diverse degrees. That
Bishops may ordain, the Apostles words to Timothy and Tite exactly prove. 1.
Tim. 5. Tit. 1.
Lay hands hastily on no man. for this cause I left thee in Creete, that thou
should ordain Presbyters in every City. You must now prove by the sacred
Scriptures that Presbyters may ordain as well as Bishops: if not, they be
distinct degrees, that have by Gods Law distinct powers and actions.

Our proofs are clear. 1. Tim 4.
Neglect not the gift, which was given thee with imposition of hands of the
Presbytery; and this right for Presbyters to impose hands jointly with the
Bishop, dured no long time in the Church as we show by the fourth Council of
Carthage.] I have often told you that place of Saint Paul concludes nothing
for you, it has so many answers. Jerome gives you one, Chrysostom an other,
and Saint Paul himself a third. If you like not with Jerome, Ambrose and
Primasius, to take the Presbytery for the function which Timothy received,
which Calvin well allows; nor with Chrysostom. Theodoret, and the rest of
the Grecians, to apply it to Bishops, for so much as Presbyters by their
judgments could not impose hands on a Bishop; yet remember Saint Paul was
present and did the deed; and therefore without some succeeding and supplying
the Apostles ro^^e as Timothy and Tite did, your Presbyteries have no warrant
to impose hands. And so much is evident by that very Council which you bring.
for the Bishop must first bless the party and impose hands on him; and then
the Presbyters there present must lay their hands near the Bishops in sign of
consent. But without the Bishop no Presbyters did bless or impose hands to
ordain any that ever we read either in Scriptures or Stories. And because you
shall not say, I speak without Book, as I see many do in our days, mark
well these examples, and tell me what you think of them.

The Council of Hispalis, understanding that a Bishop in ordaining Presbyters
and Deacons, because he was pained with sore eyes, only laid his hands on
them, and suffered a Presbyter standing by to read the words of their
consecration, and to bless them, rejected the whole action as unlawful, with
these words. Council. Hispalens. 2. ca. 5.
Propter tantam praesumptionis audaciam poterat iudicio praesenti damnari si
non fuisset morte preuentus; sed ne sibi licentiam talis vltra vsurpatio
faciat; decreuimus, vt qui ab eo non consecrationis titulum sed ignominiae
elogium perceperunt, agradis sacerdotalis vel Leuitici ordinis quem perverse
adepti sunt, depositi aequo iudicio adijciantur. Tales enim merito iudicati
sunt remouendi, quia praue inuenti sunt constituti. The Presbyter that did it,
if he were living, might for so bold a presumption have been condemned in
this present judgment; but because he is prevented with death, lest the same
usurpation should enterprise to do the like, we decree that they which received
of him no title of consecration, but a monument of reproach, shall be removed
and abiected by a righteous judgment from the degree of sacerdotall and
Leuiticall order, which they have peruersely gotten. for such are woorthely
adjudged to be cast off, because they are found to be wrongfully made. The
Bishop being present and imposing hands; and not able to read for the
impediment of his sore eyes, a Presbyter blessed them, that is, pronounced the
words of their consecration, this the Council calls bold presumption, and
usurpation against the Ecclesiastical rule; and removed the men as peruersly
and unlawfully made. What think you would they have said, if they heard of
Presbyters that had taken upon them, as men do in our days, to impose hands,
and bless, and give sacred orders, not only in the absence, but in defiance
of all Bishops:

Colluthus was a Presbyter in Epiphanius haeres. 69.
one of the Churches of Alexandria, and falling away from the Bishop there for
some mislikes, ordained certain Presbyters, himself being but a Presbyter.
For this, Colluthus was conuented Athanas. Ap^log. 2. in liter^ Presbyteror.
Mariticorum. ad Curiosum and Philagriu^.
in the general Council before Hosius and the rest of the Bishops; and
commanded to carry himself for a Presbyter as he was before; and all those
that were ordained by him to return to their former state. It after fell out
that one Ischyras pretending himself to be a Presbyter of Colluthus making,
accused Macarius of sacrilegious violence offered unto him, then ministering at
the Lords Table, as he said, and having the mystical cup in his hand. an
hundred Bishops assembled at a Council in Egypt, or near that number, to
convince Ifchyras of alie, prove that Ischyras was no Presbyter, and so could
not be assaulted whiles he was handling the divine mysteries. Their words be
these. Athanas. Apologia 2.
Quo pacto igitur Presbyter Ischyras? aut quo tandem authore constitutus?
Numquid scilicet a Collutho? idenim restat. Atqui Colluthum in gradu
Presbyterij mortuum, omn^mque eius manuum impositionem rescissam, omnesque ab
eo constitutos, in Laicorum ordinem redactos esse, and sub nomine Laicorum ad
Synaxim admissos, adeo apud omnes constat, vt nemo ea de re dubitandum putet.
How then is Ischyras a Presbyter? or by whom was he made? What, by
Colluthus? That is all which can be said. But Colluthus himself died in the
degree of a Presbyter, and all his imposition of hands was reuersed, and such
as were made by him were cast back into the order of Laymen, and admitted to
the Communion as Laymen, which is so clear that no man ever doubted of it.
They conclude that Ischyras, if he were made by Coluthus, could be no
Presbyter, for so much as Coluthus was a Presbyter and no Bishop; and all his
impesition of hands frustrated, and all the persons ordained by him, neither
accounted nor admitted into the Church but under the name of Laymen. And this
reuersing of Coluthus orders, and agnising none that he ordained but for
Laymen, was so clear a case, and uncontrolled with all men, that no man ever
made any scruple of it. You shaldo well considerately to read the place; it
imports the universal consent of the Primitive Church to have been this,
that no Presbyter could ordain a Presbyter; but those that received imposition
of hands from any such, were throughout the Church of Christ esteemed and
reputed mere Laymen, and not otherwise accepted to the Lords Table.

Maximus that was very familiar and inward with Gregory Nazianzen, whiles he
lived at Constantinople and obtained at his hands to be Gregor. in vita
Nazianzeni.
taken into the Clergy, and placed with the Presbyters of that City, finding
that Miletius Bishop of Antioch, and others had translated Gregory from
Nazianzum to Constantinople without a full Synod, somewhat contrary to the
Canons, procured Peter bishop of Alexandria to send some bishops of Egypt that
did consecrate him bishop of Constantinople. When this came to be debated in
the second general Council, the whole Synod not only rejected Maximus as no
bishop, but all that took any imposition of hands from him in what degree of
the Clergy soever they were; by reason they found him a Presbyter and no
Bishop; and so without all power to impose hands. Council. Constantinopolitan.
1. ca. 4.
Concerning Maximus and his disorder at Constantinople (we resolve) that
Maximus neither presently is, nor hereafter shall be made a Bishop; neither any
that received imposition of hands from him, shall remain in any degree of the
Clergy, all that was done either to him, or by him being wholly frustrate,
(or disallowed,) If Presbyters might impose hands, Maximus was lawfully called
to that degree by Gregory Nazianzen, and then had the Council no cause to
mislike such as were ordained by him. but they lay this for their ground, that
he was never a lawful bishop; and therefore all that he did in imposing
hands, was utterly void. By this I trust you see it pertained only to
Bishops to ordain by imposition of hands, and not to Presbyters; you have the
clear decision of the Primitive Church, that Presbyters might not ordain
Presbyters, much less might they lay hands on bishops.

Their meaning is, that Presbyters without a Bishop could not impose hands;
but with the Bishop they might, and did, as the Council of Carthage which we
brought you, confirms. And as they might not do it without a Bishop, so the
Bishop might not do it without them.] It is well yet we have obtained thus
much, that without a bishop there can be no imposition of hands to make
Presbyters; how think you then: must there be bishops in the church of Christ
or no: and are they all one with Presbyters, or a several degree from them:

They both concur in ordaining; and neither may impose hands without the
other.] You must for sake this fort, as well as you did the former. for in that
Cou^cil of Carthage, which you cite, neither is there any number of Presbyters
prefired, nor their presence required; only this is prescribed, if any be
present, they shall approve the bishops doings with laying their hands next
his. The bishop imposes not hands, either in their names, or at their perils,
if any thing be done against ye Canons; but as he alone blesses and
consecrateth y^ person that is ordered to the service of God, so if ought be
otherwise then well, he alone is in danger for it. The Council of Hispalis
says, Council. Hispalens. 2. ca. 6.
Episcopus Sacerdotibus ac Ministris solus dare honorem potest, solus auferre
non potest. The Bishop alone may give Priests and Deacons their honor, but he
can not alone take it from them. Neither had Bishops always such store of
Presbyters either present, or pertaining to the^ as you imagine. In greater
churches they had greater numbers; in smaller they had often two, somwhere one,
and sometimes none; and yet for all this defect of Presbyters, the Bishops there
did not refrain to impose hands without them.

The number of Presbyters in many places were 1. ad Tim. ca. n 1
two in a Church, as Ambrose writes, sometimes but one. In the third Council
of Carthage, when it was agreed that the Primate of that City might take the
Presbyters of every Diocese, and ordain them Bishops for such places as
desired them, though the Bishop, under whom the Presbyter before lived, were
unwilling to spare him; Council. Carthaginens. 3. ca. 45.
Posthumianus a Bishop demanded. What if a Bishop have but one only Presbyter,
must that one be taken from him? Aurelius (the Bishop of Carthage) answered.
One Bishop may ordain many Presbyters, but a Presbyter fit for a Bishopric
is hardly found. Wherefore if a man have but one only Presbyter, and fit for
the room of a Bishop, he ought to yield that one to be ordained. Posthumianus
replied. Then if an other Bishop have a number of Clearks, another store
should relieve me. Aurelius concluded. Surely as you helped an other church, so
he that has many Clearks shall be driven to spare you one of them to be
ordained by you. Three things are evident by the purport of this speech; first,
that some bishops had oftentimes but one Presbyter; and he might be taken from
them. Next, that a Bishop having no Presbyter left, might make many when he
would, if he had fit men of his own for the place. Thirdly, that if he wanted
meet men, another Church should allow him, according to his loss, some to be
ordained by him. A Bishop then having no Presbyter left to join with him,
might alone ordain both such of his own church as were meet, and such as were
sent him from other places.

Again, when any thing was done in ordering of Ministers against the Laws or
Canons; not the Presbyters, but only the bishop was punished for imposing his
hands, and transgressing the discipline of the Church. Now had the Presbyters
been Agents in ordaining, as well as the bishop; no reason to let them go free
that were parties to the contempt as well as the bishop. but for that his
hands did ordain and authorize, theirs did nothing but allow his fact, which
by dissenting they could not hinder; therefore the Laws and Canons, as they
did charge the Bishop and not the Presbyters to see those rules observed, that
were required for the making of Ministers; so they did challenge the Bishop and
no man else for violating the same with imposition of his hands, if ought were
otherwise then well. And for that cause both Laws and Canons speak singularly
to one, not plurally to many, when they repress disorders in creating
Presbyters and Deacons; to show there was one chief and principal Actor
amongst them in those cases, whose fact it was; the rest only following and
witnessing his doings.

For the Clergy of the Paulianists, when they returned to the Church, if they
were without fault, and blameless, the Council of Nice thus decreed, (...),
Council. Nice^. ca. 19.
Let them receive imposition of hands from the Bishop of the Catholic Church.
The Council of Antioch. Council. Antioch. ca. 9.
Every Bishop shall have power in his Dioecese (...), to ordain Presbyters
and Deacons. Council. Chalcedonens ca. 2.
If any Bishop, says the Council of Chalcedon, shall for money ordain,
either Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, or any other reckoned amongst the Clergy;
he shall being convicted thereof endanger his own degree. And again: Eiusdem
Council. ca. 6.
None, neither Presbyter, nor Deacon, nor generally any within the
Ecclesiastical order, must be ordained (...), that is, affixed to no certain
place. If any be so made, the sacred Council has decreed their ordination
shall be void; but it shall not return to the reproach (or detriment) (...),
of him that imposed hands. Hiero. ad Pannachium aduers. errores Iohannis
Hierosolym^tani.
If thou speak of Paulinianus (says Jerome against the errors of John of
Jerusalem) thou see him subject to his own Bishop living in Cyprus; and
coming now and then to visit us; not as any of your, but of another
(Bishops) Clergy; eius videlicet a quo ordinatus est, even his, of whom he
was ordained. Hiero. ad Pannachium aduers. errores Iohannis Hierosolym^tani.
We permit not any Clergy man of what degree soever (says the Emperor)
dare aliquid ei a quo ordinatur, to give any reward to him of whom he is
ordained. And so generally for the breach and neglect of any of the Imperial
Laws prescribed for the ordering of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, the
Presbyters were not punished which joined with the Bishop, but Nouella
constitutio 123. ca. 160.
qui ordinat, Nouella constitutio 6.
or qui ordinationem imponit, (the bishop) that ordained them was punished;
because it lay in him alone by withholding or unposing his hands to frustrate
or finish the whole action.

Wherefore I see no cause, why some Writers in our days should discredit the
report and reason, which Epiphanius makes against Aerius, that a Presbyter
could not be equal with a Bishop; for so much as the order of Bishops Epiphan.
haeres. 75 contra Aerium.
engenders Fathers unto the Church; and the order of Presbyters (...), not
able to beget Fathers; by the regeneration of baptism begets children unto
the church, but not fathers or teachers, and so no possibility to make a
Presbyter that has not received power to impose hands equal with a Bishop.
For what does Epiphanius avouch in these words, which Athanasius, Ierom,
Chrysostom and Ambrose do not like wise avouch? or what says he more then
the Primitive Church in her general and Provincial Councils decreed against
Colluthus, Maximus and others; and observed without alteration ever since the
Apostles died? If we reject this assertion of Epiphanius, that only Bishops
should impose hands to ordain, and not Presbyters, we reject the whole
church of Christ, which interpreted the Scriptures in this behalf as
Epiphanius did; and confirmed the very same resolution with the continual
practice of all ages and countries where the Gospel has been preached and
believed. for by power to ordain, the christian world, has always
distinguished bishops from Presbyters, as it is easy to be seen by all the
monuments of antiquity, that are extant to this day, either of Councils,
Stories or Fathers.

And as by imposing o^ hands, so by succeeding in the chair, have Bishops ever
since the Apostles times been severed from Presbyters in the Church of Christ:
which to all, that do not eagerly seek to captiuate the truth to their own
desires, is an argument vnrefellable, that the first placing of Bishops above
Presbyters was Apostolic. Tertullian says; Tertul. aduers. Mareionem lib. 4.
Constabit id esse ab Apostolis traditum, quod apud ecclesias Apostolorum
fuerit sacrosanctum. It is certain, that came from the Apostles, which is
sacredly observed in the Churches of the Apostles. And Austen. August. de
baptism. contra Dona^ist. li. 4. ca. 24.
Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec concilijs institutum sed semper retentum
est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditu^ rectissime creditur. That which
the whole Church keeps, and was not appointed by Councils, but always
retained, that is most rightly believed to have descended from the Apostles.
Now that in the Churches planted by the Apostles and their coadiutors, one has
been severed from the rest of the Presbyters, and placed above the rest in the
honor of yt Episcopal chair, before there were any general Councils to decree
that manner of government; and so continued even from the Apostles persons and
hands to this present age: the perpetual succession of bishops in those
principal Churches where the Apostles and their helpers preached and governed,
and like wise in all other churches of the world following their steps, will
strongly and fully confirm. If the Apostles placed bishops with their own
hands; if departing ordying they left bishops to succeed them; if their
Disciples and Scholars embraced and used that course to set bishops above
Presbyters for saving the church from schisms, and left it to their
aftercommers; I trust there are few men so deeply drowned in their own
conceits, or wholly addicted to their fancies, but they will acknowledge the
first distinction and institution of bishops from and above Presbyters was, if
not commanded and imposed by the Apostles precepts on the Church; yet at least
ordained and delivered unto the faithful by their example, as the best way to
maintain the peace and unity of the Church; and consequently the custom of
y^ church (which Austen speaks of) that the bishops office should be greater
the^ the Presbyters; and the the decree of the whole world (which Jerome
mentions) were derived from the Apostles and confirmed by them, and may not
be reuersed and re^ealed after 150. years, unless we challenge to be wiser and
better able to order and govern the Church of Christ then the Apostles were.

Eusebius the first and best collector of ancient and Ecclesiastical
momunents (Egesippus and Clemens being lost) deriueth the successions of
bishops in the four principal churches of the world; Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome
and Alexandria, from the Apostles age unto his own time. by which, as by a
line we may be directed to see what manner of Episcopal successions the rest of
the Churches had; and from whom the first original of bishops descended. I will
set them down as it were in a Table even from the Apostles and their
followers, unto the time they met in the great Council of Nice, about 320.
years after Christ; and then examine more exactly whence they took their
first beginning.

In the Church of Jerusalem.
James the Apostle. Simeon Iustus Zacheus Tobias Benjamin Johannes Mathias
Philippus S^nnecas Iustus Leui Ephrem Joseph Judas Marcus Cassianus Publius
Maximus Iulianus Caius Symmachus Caius Iulianus Capito Maximus Antoninus
Valens Dolichianus Narcissus Dius Germanion Gordius
Narcissus iterum. Alexander Mazabanes Hymeneus Zambdas Hermon. Macarius
Maximus Cyrill^s. Johannes Iuuenalis.
In the Church of Antioch.
Peter the Apostle. Euodius Ignatius Heroes Cornelius Eros Theophilus Maximinus
Serapion Asclepiades Philetos Zebinus Babilas Fabius Demetrius Paulus
Samosatenus Domnus Timeus Cyrillus Tyrannus Vitalius Philagonius. E^stathius
Paulinus and Miletius. Flauianus Porphyrius Alexander Johannes.
In the Church of Rome.
Peter and Paul Linus Anacletus Clemens Euaristus Alexander Sixtus Thelesphorus
Higinus Pius An^cetus Soter Eleutherius Victor Zepherinus Calixtus Vrbanus
Pontianus Ant^rus Fabianus Cornelius Lucius Stephanus Xistus Dionysius Felix
Eutichianus Caius Marcellinus Marcellus Eusebius Meltiades Syluester. Marcus
Julius Liberius Damasus Siricius Anastasius.
In the Church of Alexandria.
Mark the Evangelist. Anianus Abilius Cerdo Primus Iustus Eumenes Marcus
Celadion Agrippas Iulianus Demetrius Heraclas Dionysius Maximus Theonas Petrus
Achilles Alexander. Athanasius Petrus Timothius Theophilus Cyrillus.
These Catalogues of the Bishops of Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome and Alexandria,
Eusebius pursues unto the beginning of his own time; leaving off at Eusb.
lib. 7. ca. 31.
Hermon Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusb. lib. 7. ca. 31.
Tyranous bishop of Antioch, Eusb. lib. 7. ca. 31.
Marcellinus bishop of Rome, and Eusb. lib. 7. ca. 31.
Peter Bishop of Alexandria; the rest are supplied out of others, as in the Sea
of Alexandria Socrat, lib, 1. ca. 5. and
Achilles, Socrat, lib. 1. ca. 5. and
Alexander, 15,
Athanasius and lib. 4 ca. 20.
Peter out of Socrates. Theodor. lib. 1. ca. 3. and
Vitalius, Theodor. lib. 1. ca. 3. and
Philagonius and 7.
Eustathius out of Theodoret, as also Optatus contra Parmenianum lib. 2.
Macarius for Jerusalem. In the Sea of Rome Marcellus and those that follow out
of Optatus contra Parmenianum lib. 2.
Optatus and August. epist. 165.
Augustine. The four bishops of these Churches that met and sat in the
Council of Nice were Syluester for Rome by Vitus and Vincentius his
Presbyters, (Sozomene faieth it was Julius,) Alexander for Alexandria, Macarius
for Jerusalem, and Eustathius for Antioch, as appears by their subscriptions
unto the said Council. Now when these successions began, and who were the
first Authors and ordainers of them, let us see what proof can be brought.

That James the Apostle was the first bishop of Jerusalem; Clemens, Egefippus,
Eusebius, Jerome, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Ambrose and Augustine confirm.
Clemens in his sirt Book Hypotyposeon writes thus. Apud Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 1.
Peter, James and John after the Assumption of our Savior, though they were
preferred by the Lord before the rest, yet did they not challenge that glory to
themselves, but made James the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem. Eusebius. Idem lib.
7. ca. 19.
The feate of James the Apostle which was the first that received the
Bishopric of the Church of Jerusalem, from our Savior himself and the
Apostles, whom also the divine Scriptures call the Lords brother, is kept to
this day, and evidently showed to all men by the brethren which have followed
him in ordinary succession. Jerome. Hiero. de scriptoribus ecclesiast. In
Jacob.
James the Lords brother surnamed Just, straight after the Lords passion
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles, wrate one only Epistle, which is
(one) of the seven Catholic (Epistles.) Egesippus that lived near to the
Apostles times in the fifth Book of his Commentaries speaking of James, says;
Egesippus (...) Hierony. Ibidem.
James the Lords brother surnamed Just, received the Church of Jerusalem (in
charge) after the Apostles. Chrysostom writing upon these words of the
fifteenth Chapter of the Acts, After they held their peace, James answered,
says; Chrysostom. homil. 33. in 15. cap. Actor.
Hic erat Episcopus ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae. This James was Bishop of the
Church of Jerusalem. Epiphanius. Epiphan. lib. 2. to. 2. ^ares. 66.
James called the Lords brother was the first Bishop in Jerusalem, Ambrose.
Ambros. in ca. 1. epist. aa Galat.
Paul saw James (the Lords brother) at Jerusalem, because he was made Bishop
of that place by the Apostles. Augustine. August. contra Cresconium lib. 2. ca.
37.
The Church of Jerusalem, James the Apostle was the first that governed by his
episcopal office. From James to Macarius that sat in the Council of Nice,
were forty bishops of Jerusalem, succeeding each other in a perpetual descent,
and sitting each for his time in that chair, in which James the Apostle sat
when he taught and governed the Church of Jerusalem. Their order and succession
from James is collected by Eusebius. lib 4. ca. 5. and lib. 5. ca. 12.
Eusebius and Epiphan. haeres. 66.
Epiphanius, out of elder and former Writers which now are perished by the
injury of time.

The succession of Bishops at Antioch and Alexandria began in the Apostles
time, as we find testified by ancient and incorrupt witnesses. Euodius was the
first that succeeded at Antioch after Peter's departure, of whom Ignatius that
was next to him, writes in this wise to the Church there. Ignat. epist. ad
Antiochenos.
Remember Euodius your blessed Pastor, (...), which first received from the
Apostles, the chief oversight (or regiment) of us. So says Eusebius. Eusebius. l. 3
ca 22
Of those (that were bishops) at Antioch, Euodius was the first that was
appointed, Ignatius the next, who not only Socrat. lib. 6. ca. 8.
conuersed with the Apostles, but also saw Christ in the flesh after his
resurrection when he appeared to Peter and the rest of the disciples. His own
words as Ierom alleges them, are; Hierony. in Ignatio.
Ego vero and post resurrectionem in carne ^um vidi, and quando venit ad Petrum
and ad eos qui cum Petro erant. I saw (Christ) in the flesh after his
resurrection, when he came to Peter and those that were with Peter, and said to
them, handle me and see. Ignat. in epist. ad Smyrneos.
A spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have. Of him Origin says.
Orig. in homil. 6. in Lucam.
Ignatium dico, episcopum Antiochie post Petrum secundu^. I mean Ignatius, the
2. bishop of Antioch after Peter. Ierom makes Hiero. de scriptoribus
ecclesiastici^ in Ignatio.
Ignatius to be the third bishop of the church of Antioch from Peter the
Apostle, reckoning Peter for the first; after whom succeeded Ignatius in the
second place; as Eusebius writes. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 35.
Ignatius so much spoken by most men to this present day, (...), was the second
that enjoyed the Bishopric in the succession of Peter at Antioch. Touching
the Sees of Antioch, Alexandria and Rome, Gregory says, (Petrus) Gregor. lib.
6. epist. 37.
sublimauit sedem in qua etiam quiescere and praes^ntem vitam finire dignatus
est. ipse decorauit sedem in qua Euangelistam discipulum misit. ipse firmauit
sedem in qua septem annis quamuis discessurus sedit. Vnius atque vna est seeds,
cui ex authoritate diuina tres nunc Episcopi praesident. Peter advanced the
^eate (of Rome) where he thought good to rest, and end this present life. he
also adorned the seat (of Alexandria) to which he sent his disciple, (Mark)
the Evangelist. he fastened the seat (of Antioch) in which he rested seven
years, though with purpose to depart. It is one seat, and of one Apostle, in
which three Bishops now sit by divine authority.

For the first bishop of Alexandria, Ierom and Eusebius concur with Gregory;
Hiero prooemium in commentarios super Matthau^.
Marcus interpre^ Petri Apostoli, and Alexandrinae ecclesiae primus episcopus.
Mark the Interpreter of Peter the Apostle, and the first bishop of the church
of Alexandria; who dying 6 years before Peter, left his church and place unto
Anianus, as Eusebius. writes; Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 24.
Nerone 8. regni annum agente, (...). Nero being in the 8* year of his reign,
Anianus a very godly man and every way admirable, first undertook the public
administration of the Church of Alexandria, after Mark the Apostle and
Evangelist. And as the succession at Antioch began in Euodius that was ordained
by the Apostles; so at Alexandria they continued the same course from Mark
downward, by Ieroms own confession. Hiero ad Euagrium.
Alexandriae a Marco Euangelista vsque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos,
Presbyteri semper vnum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu collo^atum episcopum
nominabant. At Alexandria from Mark the evangelist unto Heraclas and Dionysius,
the Presbyters did always choose one of themselves, who^ being placed in an
higher degree they called (their) bishop.

Of the succession at Rome, Irenoeus says; Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 3.
Fundantes igitur and instru^ntes beati Apostoli ecclesiam, Lino episcopatum
administrand^ ecclesiae tradiderunt. Succedit ei Anacletus; post cum tertio
loco ab Apostolis Episcopatum sortitur Clemens qui and vidit ipsos Apostolos
and contulit cum eis. The blessed Apostles (Peter and Paul) founding and
ordering the Church (of Rome) delivered the (oversight or) charge of governing
the Church to Linus. Anacletus succeeded him, and in the third place after the
Apostles; Clemens, which saw the Apostles themselves and conferred with them,
undertook the Bishops office. Next to this Clement succeeded Euaristus, after
Euaristus Alexander, and then in the sixth place from the Apostles was appointed
Sixtus; then Telesphorus, then Higinus, then Pius, after who^ was Anicetus.
Next to Anicetus succeeded Soter, and now (when Irenaeus wrote) in the 12.
place from the Apostles, Eleutherius has the Bishoprike. And likewise Optatus.
Optat. lib. 2. contra Parmenianum.
Negare non pote^, scire te in vrbe Roma Petro primo Cathedram episcopale^ esse
collocatam, etc ergo Cathedra vnica sedit prior Petrus, cui successit Linus,
Lino successit Clemens, Clementi Anacletus, etc. Thou can not deny (says he
to Parmenian) but thou know that in the city of Rome the episcopal chair
was conferred first to Peter etc. In that chair, which was but one, sat first
Peter, whom Linus succeeded, and after Linus Clemens, after Clemens Anacletus,
after Anacletus Euaristus, then Sixtus, Thelesphorus, Iginus, Anicetus, Pius,
Soter, Eleutherius; and so naming 20. more in order unto Syluester in whose
time the great Council of Nice was kept, and after him five others unto
Silicius; qui body noster est socius; which at this day is our fellow
(Bishop.) And so S. Austen. August. epist. 165.
If the row of Bishops succeeding one an other be to be considered, how much
more certainly and indeed soundly do we reckon from Peter himself? For next
to Peter succeeded Linus, after Linus Clemens, after Clemens Anacletus, then
Euaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Thelesphorus, Iginus, Anicetus, Pius, Soter,
Eleutherius, Victor, and so 25. more unto Anastasius, next after Siricius.

Neither had these 4. Sees only their successions from the Apostles: the rest
of the Churches dispersed throughout the world had the like deriuation and
continuation of bishops from the Apostles or Apostolic men, that these had.
Irenaeus takes the example of the Church of Rome, Irenaus lib. 3. ca. 3.
quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine, omnium ecclesiarum successiones
enumerare, because it would be ouerlong in such a Volume to repeat the
successions of all Churches. Otherwise he plainly says; Irenaus lib, 4. ^^.
63.
Agnitio vera est Apostolorum doctrina, and antiquus ecclesiae status in
vniuersomundo secundum successiones Episcoporum, quibus illi came, quae in
vnoquoque loco est, ecclesiam tradid^runt. The true knowledge is the doctrine
of the Apostles, and the ancient state of the Church in the whole world, by
the successions of Bishops, to whom (the Apostles) delivered the Church which
is in every place. Tertullian says as much; and choketh all the heretics of
his time with that challenge. Tertul. de prascriptionibus aduers. har^ticos.
Edant origines ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per
successiones ab initio decurrentem, vt primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex
Apostolis aut Apostolicis viris habuerit authorem and antecessorem. Hoc modo
ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt; Sicut Smyrneorum ecclesia habens
Polycarpum ab Iohanne conlocatum refert, sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro
ordinatum edit: proinde vtique and ceterae exhibent, quos ab Apostolis in
Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis traduces habeant. Let them show the
originals of their Churches; let them number the order of their Bishops so
derived by succession from the beginning that their first Bishop had one of the
Apostles or Apostolic men for his author and antecessor. After this manner,
(by succession of Bishops running up to the Apostles or their Scholars) do the
Apostolic Churches bring in their accounts; as the Churches of Smyrna having
Polycarpe placed there by S. John; as the Church of Rome shows Clement
ordained by Peter; as the rest of the Churches exhibit what branches they have
of the Apostolic seed, even those that were (first) placed in the Bishops
office by the Apostles. Austen likewise, August. epist. 42
Radix Christianae societatis per seeds Apostolorum and successiones
Episcoporum, certa per orbem propagatione diffunditur. The root of Christian
society is increased and extended throughout the world by the seats of the
Apostles, and successions of Bishops.

The particulars are infinite, if we should reckon all the Churches, that
received Bishops from the Apostles and their folowers; and the names of the men
after so many hundred years, are somewhat buried in oblivion, and razed with
the general rage of ignorance and barbarism, that has seized on the best
places, and perished the best writers before our times. Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 37
It is not possible (says Eusebius in his tune) by name to rehearse them all
that were Pastors and Evangelists at the first succeeding after the Apostles
in the Churches dispersed throughout the world: yet those which are extant,
ma^e proof sufficient for the matter in question; to wit that Bishops were
placed by the Apostles to govern as well the Presbyters as the people of each
place, and succeeded the Apostles in imposing hands, which Presbyters did not.

Of Timothy, Tite, Linus, Clemens and Dionysius named in the Scriptures;
Eusebius writes thus, Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 4.
Timotheus is recorded in the stories to be the first that had the Bishoprike
of Ephesus, as also Titus of the Churches in Creete. Linus, whom Paul in his
second epistle to Timothy mentions as present with him at Rome, was the
first that had the Bishoprike of the Church of Rome after Peter. And Clemens
that was appointed the third Bishop of the Church of Rome, is witnessed by Paul
himself to have been his fellow labourer and helper. Dionysius also the
Areopagite, who as S. Luke in the Acts notes, was first converted by Paul's
sermon at Athens, was likewise the first Bishop of the Church of Athens, as
another Dionysius a very ancient Pastor of the Church of Corinth writes.

Of Caius, Archippus, Onesimus, Polycarpus and others, the like testimonies are
extant in ancient writers. Origin says. Orig. li. 10. in ca. 16. epist. ad
Romanos.
Fert^r traditione Maiorum quod hic Caius Episcopus fuerit Thessalonicensis
ecclesiae. Our Elders have delivered us by tradition, that this Caius (of whom
Paul speaks in the 16. chapter of his epi^^^e to the Romans) was Bishop of
the Church of Thessalonica. Upon Paul's words to the Colossians; Col. 4.
Say to Archippus, take heed to the ministry which thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it. Ambrose writes; Ambros. in 4. epist. ad Coloss.
He warns their ouerseer by themselves to be careful of their salvation.
And because the epistle is written only for the peoples sake, therefore he
directs it to the Church and not to their ruler. For after Epaphras had
instructed the^, Archippus undertook the government of their Church. Eusebius.
li. 3. ca. 35
Ignatius (says Eusebius) being at Smyrna where Polycarpe was, wrate an
epistle to the Church of Ephesus, mentioning Onesimus their Pastor. And of
Polycarpe he says; Ibidem.
There remained yet in Asia Polycarpus that lived with the Apostles, and
received the Bishoprike of the Church of Smyrna from those that themselves saw
the Lord, and ministered unto him. Irenaeus affirms as much; Iren. li. 3. ca.
3.
Et Polycarpus non solum ab Apostolis edoctus, and conuersatus cum multis ex
cis, qui Dominum nostrum viderunt, sed etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in ea quae
est Smyrnis ecclesia constitutus Episcopus; quem and nos vidimus in prima
nostra atat^, hic docuit semper, quae ab Apostolis didicerat, quae and
ecclesiae tradidit. Polycarpus not only instructed by the Apostles, and
co^uersant with many of them which saw the Lord, but also by yc Apostles made
Bishop of the Church of Smyrna; WHOM WE SAW WHEN WE WERE YOUNG, he always
taught that which he learned of the Apostles, and delivered it unto the Church.

If Christian Churches and writers may deserve credit with us, we have the
sincerest and eldest clearly witnessing and confirming unto us, that the
Apostles when they saw their time, placed of their Scholars and folowers, one
in every Church (which they planted) to be Bishop and Pastor of the place; and
that the successions of Bishops so placed by the Apostles, dured in all the
Apostolic Churches even to the times that they wrate and testified thus much.
Neither speak they of these things by hearesay; they lived with the Apostles
Scholars; and received from their mouths the things which they witness to
posterity; and their successors in most churches they same with their eyes,
and conferred with them. Irenaeus that in his youth was Polycarpus Scholar,
says; Iren. li. 3. ca. 3.
Habemus annumerare eos, qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesijs,
and successores eorum vsque ad nos. St recondita mysteria scissent Apostoli,
quae seorsim and latenter ab reliquis perfectos docebant, hijs vel maxim
traderent ea, quibus etiam ipsas ecclesias committebant. Valde enim perfectos
and irr^prehensibiles in omnibus eos esse volebant, quos and successores
relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum magisterij tradentes. We can reck on those
which were ordained bishops in the churches by the Apostles and their
successors even to our age. If the Apostles had known any hid mysteries, which
they taught to the perfect secretly and apart from the rest, they would most of
all have delivered those things to such as they committed the Churches unto.
For they greatly desired to have them perfect and unreprovable in all things,
whom they left to be their successors; delivering unto them their own place
of teaching. Egesippus lived at the same time somewhat elder then Irenaeus, and
traveling to Rome under Anicetus, he conferred with Egesippus ^pu^ Euseb^um.
li. 4. ca. 22.
Primus Bishop of Corinth, and diverse other Bishops as he went, and found them
all agreeing in one, and the same doctrine. (...). In every succession, and in
every City, (says he as I traveled) they kept that truth which the Law
and the Prophets, and the Lord himself preached. And the Church of Corinth
persisted in the right way unto the time of Primus Bishop of Corinth. And
showing how the Church of Jerusalem came first to be troubled with heresies, he
says; Jbidem.
After that James the Just (who was both an Apostle, and the first Bishop of
Jerusalem) was martyred by the same kind of death that the Lord was, Simeon the
son of Cleophas, uncle (to James) was made Bishop, whom all preferred for
this respect, because he was an other of Christ's cosins (as the former was).
That Church, men called a Virgin, for as yet she was not infected with false
doctrine: but Thebulis because he was not made Bishop, was the first that
corrupted her. Dionysius equal in age with Egesippus and Bishop of Corinth
straight after Primus, in his epistle written to the Athenians, puts them in
mind that Dionys apud Eusebium, li 4. ca. 23.
Dionysius the Areopagite converted to the faith by S. Paul, was their first
Bishop, and Publius another of their Bishops, martyred by the persecuters of
those times, and their Church restored by Quadratus (an other of the Apostles
disciples) that next succeeded Publius in the Bishoprike. Clemens Alexandrinus,
who lived in the next age to Saint John the Apostle, reports out of former
stories, that S. John Clemens Alexandrinus, apud Eusebium, li. 3. ca. 23.
returning from his banishment to Ephesus, went to the Churches round about,
being thereto requested, and in some places made Bishops, in other places chose
such into the Clergy, as the holy Ghost signified unto him; and that even then
the Bishop was (...), set over and above all both Clergy and people. Methodius
says, that the Apostle Peter directed Methodius apud M^rianum Scotum, in
annis Christi, 72. 74. 86. and 100.
Eucharius, one of the 70. disciples, with Valerius and Maternus, to preach the
Gospel in Germany and France; and Eucharius planting a Church at Treuers,
held the Bishoprike of that City 23. years, and then dying Methodius apud
M^rianum Scotum, in annis Christi, 72. 74. 86. and 100.
Treuericae ecclesiae culmen Valerio derelinquit, relinquished the chief
dignity of the Church of Treuers to Valerius, who after fifteen years, left
the Pastoral charge to Maternus. Methodius apud M^rianum Scotum, in annis
Christi, 72. 74. 86. and 100.
After Maternus had held the regiment of preaching (the word) 40. years, one
Auspicius sat (in his place.) And so along by lawful successions, many
singular and excellent men for holiness and grace; (namely) Serenus, Felix,
Manscetus, Clemens, Moses, Martinus, Anastasius, Andreas, Rusticus, Fabricius,
Fortunatus, Cassianus, Marcus, and many others.

About Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 5.
Irenaeus time, who succeeded Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 5.
Pothynus Bishop of Lions in France, that was martyred when he was Eusebius. li.
5. ca. 5.
90. years of age, we find Idem li. 5. ca. 24
Thraseas Bishop of Smyrna after Polycarpe, li 4. ca. 21.
Apollinarius Bishop of Hierapolis after li. 3. ca. 35.
Papias another of Saint John's Scholars, li. 5. ca. 22.
Banchillus Bishop of Corinth, after Primus and li 4. ca. 21.
Dionysius, Idem li. 5. ca. 24
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus succeeding some of his kinsmen in the same seat,
li. 4. ca. 22.
Theophilus Bishop of Cesaria, to have been renowned, and the most of them
writers in the Church of Christ. Of his time Tertullian says; Tertul. de
praescriptionibus aduers hereticos.
Percurre ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc cathedrae Apostolorum
suis locis praesidentur, etc. Surueie the Apostolic Churches, where the very
chaires of the Apostles are to this day succeeded (or continued.) Is Achaia
near to thee? There thou have Corinth. If thou be not far from Macedonia;
thou have Philippos and Thessalonica. If thou travel into Asia, thou have
Ephesus. If thou lie near to Italy, thou have Rome. In Cyprians time, who was
Bishop of Carthage, the Bishop of Cesarea was Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 5.
Theoctistus, and after him Ibidem ca. 14.
Domnus, then Ibidem ca. 14.
Theotecnus and Ibidem ca. 32.
Agapius; the Bishop of Laodicea, was Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 5.
Heliodorus that succeeded Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 5.
Thelimydres, and after Heliodorus followed Ibidem ca. 32.
Socrates, Ibidem ca. 32.
Eusebius, Ibidem ca. 32.
Anatolius, Ibidem ca. 32.
Stephanus, and Ibidem ca. 32.
Theodotus. The Bishop of Tyrus was Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 5.
Marinus before whom were Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 5.
Alexander and Ibid. li. 5. ca. 27
Cassius, and after whom came Ide^ li. 8. ca. 13.
Tirammion and and li. 10. ca. 3.
Paulinus; yea, the successions of Bishops in these and other Churches dured
from the Apostles, not only to the Council of Nice, but a thousand years
after Christ; and in many places to this present day. For where S. John the
Evangelist wrate to the Pastors of the seven Churches in Asia; to wit, of Reu.
2. and 3.
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea; their
successors sat in the Council of Nice, retaining the same place and office
of Bishops which their predecessors had in the Apostles time, and there
subscribed with the rest, Vide subscriptiones Concilii Niceni.
Menophantes Bishop of Ephesus, Vide subscriptiones Concilii Niceni.
Eutychius Bishop of Smyrna; Vide subscriptiones Concilii Niceni.
Serras Bishop of Thyatira; Vide subscriptiones Concilii Niceni.
Artemidorus Bishop of Sardis; Vide subscriptiones Concilii Niceni.
Cyrion Bishop of Philadelphia, and Vide subscriptiones Concilii Niceni.
Theodotus Bishop of Laodicea, together with the Vide subscriptiones Concilii
Niceni.
Bishops of Athens, Thessalonica, Hierapolis, and many other places that had
their first Bishops from the Apostles hands. In the 4. 5. and 6. general
Council, which was kept 676. years after Christ; the Bishops that succeeded
in the same seats, did like wise subscribe and so has the succession of
Bishops in many places of Christendom, continued from the Apostles times to
this present age. In some countries where Christianity is decayed, their
succession of Bishops is interrupted; otherwise, throughout the Christian
world; no example before our age can be showed that ever the Church of Christ
in any place or time, since the Apostles died, had any other form of
government, then by Bishops succeeding and ruling as well the Presbyters, as
the people that were under them.

Our answer is easy and ready to all that you have brought; first, the
Bishops of the Primitive Church which succeeded one another in every place,
were all one with Presbyters as Jerome tells you; and then we grant without
exception all that you have alleged out of these ancient Fathers and Writers.
Next, ^hen they make any difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, as
sometimes they do; by Bishops they understand all Pastors and Ministers of
the word and Sacraments, and by Presbyters they mean the lay Elders, which
we seek to restore. Thirdly, if you could prove, that Bishops were above
other Ministers of the word and Sacraments; yet that superiority was nothing
else, but a power to call the rest together, to propose matters in doubt unto
them, and to ask their voices and consents, by which the Bishops of those
times were directed, and from which they might by no means divert to their
own wills and pleasures.]

I know how easy and ready a thing it is with you to say what you list, if
you may be trusted without any further trial; but if it please you
substantiallie to prove these things which you afffirme, or but any one of
them, you shall find it is a matter of greater difficulty and longer study
then you take it for. Did you plead before the poorest Jury that is, for
earthly trifles, they would not credit your word without some witness; and
in matters of religion that touch the peace and safety of the whole Church of
Christ, do you look your voluntary should be received without all authority
or testimony to warrant it? if your folly be such as to expect so much at
other men's hands, their simplicity is not such as to yield it. In deed to my
conceiving, the sum of your answer is very like the form of your discipline,
for neither of the^ has any proof, possibility, nor cohere^cie.

Toprooue the Bishops calling to be different from the Presbyters, that yet
helped in the word and Sacraments; I show that Bishops ordained ministers,
which Presbyters by the judgment and assertion of the Primitive Church might
not do; and that in every Church there were or might be many Presbyters
according to the necessity of the place; but no more then one Bishop in every
Church did or might succeed the Apostles in their chaires. Hence I conclude
that Bishops ever since the Apostles times, were distinguished from those
Presbyters that assisted the Pastor of each place in the word and Sacraments.
You answer that either Bishops were all one with Presbyters; or if there were
any difference betwixt them, Presbyters then were lay Elders. In which words
you close not only a monstrous falsitie, but a manifest contrariety. For in
effect you say, Presbyters were Bishops, and no Bishops; Presbyters were no
Lay men, and yet Lay men. If Presbyters were Bishops, they were no Lay
Elders; if they were Lay Elders, they were no Bishops. You must therefore
choose the one, and refuse the other as false and repugnant to the former. Take
which you will, the choice must be yours, what you will answer.

The Bishops which succeeded the Apostles were the Pastors and ministers of
every parish; the Presbyters were the Lay Elders, that together with the
Bishop governed the Church in common.] Could you make any proof for lay
Elders, either in Scriptures or Fathers; you had some show to mistake
Presbyters for lay Elders; but I have already perused the weakness of your
ghesses; and withal made just and fullproofe for the contrary; that the
Primitive Church of Christ had no Presbyters, but ministers of the word and
Sacraments. If you be loath to turn back to the place, hear what the great
Affrican Council says, wherein sat besides S. Augustine, 216. Bishops.
Africani Concilis, can. 4.
In the former Council, says Aurelius, We thought meet that these three
degrees tied to a kind of continency by reason of their consecration, I mean
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, (...), as becomes Bishops and Priests of God
and Levites, and seruiters about the divine Sacraments, should be continent in
all things. All the Bishops answered, we like well that all which stand or serve
at the altar should be continent.

Then Presbyters were consecrated, and Priests to God, and approached to the
altar, and ministered the divine Sacraments. The Imperial laws say as much;
Nouella constitutione, 123. ca. 2 Reu. rend^ssimi^.
Touching the most reverend Presbyters and Deacons, if they be found to give
false evidence in a pecuniarie cause, Sufficiat pro verberibus, tribus annis
separari a sacro ministeria; it shall suffice for them in stead of whipping to
be three years separated from the sacred ministry: but if in criminal
causes they bear false witness, clero nudato^ legitimis poenis sub di
praecipimus; we command them to be degraded of their Clergy, and subjected
to the penalties of the law. Then Presbyters in the Primitive Church were both
of the Clergy and sacred ministry, as the very laws of the Roman Empire
do testify. Jerome, on whose words you so much depend, says; Hiero. in ca.
1. ad Titum.
Hac vt ostenderemus apud veteres eosdem fuisse Presbyteros quos and Episcopos.
All these places prove, that in ancient times, Presbyters and Bishops were all
one. And again, Idem in 2. ca. epist. ad Titum.
Episcopi, Presbyteri and Diaconi debent magnopere prouidere, vt cunctum
populum, cui praesident, conuersatione and sermon praecedant. Quia vehementer
ecclesiam Christi destruit, meliores esse Laicos quam Clericos. The Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, ought greatly to provide that they excel all the
people which are under them, in conversation and doctrine; because it
vehemently destroys the Church of Christ to have the Lay men better then the
Clergy men. And Augustine. August. hom. 2. in Apocal.
Quicunque aut Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Laicus, etc. Whosoever either
Bishop, Presbyter or Lay man, does declare how eternal life may be gotten,
he is worthily called the messenger of God. Then if Bishops were no Lay men,
no more were Presbyters. You must therefore send your lay Elders to the
Newfound land; the Christian world never heard of any such ecclesiastical
Governors, before some men in our age began to set that fancy on foot.

As for Presbyters that were Clergy men and ministers of the word, we show you
both by the Scriptures and stories, they were many in one Church, and yet was
there in every Church and City, but one of them that succeeded the Apostles,
as Pastor of y^ place, with power to impose hands for the ordaining of
Presbyters and Deacons. Those successors to the Apostles, the Church of Christ
even from the Apostles age, has distinguished from other Presbyters by the two
proper marks of episcopal power and function; I mean Succession and
Ordination, and called them bishops. Thus much is mainlie proved unto you by
all those Apostolic Churches that had many Presbyters as helpers in the word,
and never but one Bishop that succeeded in the Apostolic chair. At Alexandria
this succession began from Mark the Evangelist, and first Bishop of that
church, after whose death (Peter and Paul yet living) Anianus was elected by
the Presbyters there, and placed in an higher degree over the Presbyters, and
called a Bishop. They be Ieromes own words that I press you with. Hiero. ad
E^agrium.
Alexandriae a Marco Euangelista Presbyteri semper vnum ex se electum, in
excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant. At Alexandria from Mark the
Evangelist, the Presbyters always electing one of themselves, and placing him
in an higher degree, called him a Bishop. The like he says was done in the
whole world. Hiero. in 1. ca. epist. ad Titum.
Postquam vnusquisque eos quos baptizauer at suos esse putabat, non Christi; in
toto orb decretum est, vt vnus de Presbyteris electus superponer etur
caeteris, ad quem omnis ecclesiae cura pertineret. After every man began to
take those, whom he baptized, to be his own and not Christ's; it was decreed in
the whole world, that one of the Presbyters should be chosen and set above the
rest, to whom the whole (or chief) care of the Church should pertain. There
were many Presbyters in every Church, and out of them one was chosen, and set
above the rest (of the Presbyters) to repress schisms. He does not say, that
every place had one Presbyter and no more, which was called a Bishop, but one
chosen out of the Presbyters (which were many) was placed in every Church
throughout the world, not over the flock only, but over the rest of the
Presbyters also, which preached and baptized as well as he, and consequently
were ministers of the word and Sacraments, and no lay Elders as you dream.

Wherefore to tell us, that the Bishops which succeeded the Apostles in their
chaires, were the Presbyters and ministers of every parish, is a very jest. Not
only S. Ieromes words, but all the Apostolic Churches and ancient stories
most plainly convince the contrary. At Antioch even as at Alexandria, there
were from the Apostles times a number of Presbyters and laborers in the word;
yet the succession continued always in one and no more. Ignatius the next
bishop of Antioch after Euodius, who received the first charge of that Church
from the Apostles hands, when he was carried prisoner to Rome, writes unto the
Church of Antioch, willing the Ignatius in epist. ad Antiochenos.
Laity to obey the Presbyters and Deacons: and adding, Ignatius in epist. ad
Antiochenos.
you Presbyters foede the flock that is with you, till God show (...), who
shall be your Ruler or Pastor after my death. The like he does to the
Churches of Trallis, Magnesia, Tarsus, Philippos, Philadelphia, Smyrna, and
Ephesus, in every of his epistles to them, remembering the Bishops, Presbyters
and Deacons, that guided them, and naming Polycarpus, Onesimus, Demas, Vitalis
and Polybius as Bishops of Smyrna, Ephesus, Magnesia, Philippos and Trallis,
apart from the Presbyters of the very same Churches: yea, what Church of
account was there in Christendom, that had not at one and the same time, both
Bishops and Presbyters. Uide Hierony^um de scriptoribus ecclesiastici^
Irenaeus was Presbyter under Pothymus Bishop of Lions. At Antioch was Geminus
under Zebenus, and Malchion under Paulus Samosatenus, and Uide Hierony^um de
scriptoribus ecclesiastici^
Diodorus, Et Gennadium deviruillustribus.
Heliodorus, Et Gennadium deviruillustribus.
Theodorus, Et Gennadium deviruillustribus.
Isaac, Et Gennadium deviruillustribus.
Mochinus and infinite others under the Bishops of that See. So at Alexandria
were Uide Hierony^um de scriptoribus ecclesiastici^
Pantenus, Uide Hierony^um de scriptoribus ecclesiastici^
Clemens and Uide Hierony^um de scriptoribus ecclesiastici^
Origin Presbyters under Serapion, Asclepiades, and Demetrius Bishops. And so
Dionysius under Heraclas, and Pierius under Theonas. And under the foresaid
Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 11
Dionysius when he was Bishop of Alexandria, were Eusebius. li. 7. ca. 11
Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, Lucius, Faustinus and Aquila Presbyters,
Hiero^de ecclesiast. scriptoribus.
Tertullian, Hiero^de ecclesiast. scriptoribus.
Cyprian and Hiero^de ecclesiast. scriptoribus.
Cecil^us were Presbyters in the Church of Carthage. Saint Augustine was a
Presbyter under August. epist. 148.
Valerius Bishop of Hippo, and under Augustine was 110.
Eradius that succeeded him and 110.
other more. Chrysostom was first Presbyter under Flauianus Bishop of Antioch,
and after made Bishop of Constantinople. Of Vigilantius a Presbyter in Spain,
Jerome says; Hiero. ad Riparium aduers. V^gilantiu^.
Imaruell the Bishop in whose charge (or Diocese) he is reported to be a
Presbyter, does not break that unprofitable vessel with the Apostolic rod,
even with an iron rod. Of Jerome S. Austen says, August. epist. 19
Although by the names of honor which now have prevailed in the use of the
church, a Bishops place be greater then a Presbyters, yet in many points
Augustine is less then Jerome. The Presbyteries of Basil. epist 4. and
Gregorii. ibidem 30.
Caesarea, Chalcedonens. Concilii, acto 10.
Edissa, Genna^^us de ^^ru illustribus.
Massilia, Genna^^us de ^^ru illustribus.
Vienna, Genna^^us de ^^ru illustribus.
Millan, and of infinite other churches might be likewise proved, but why
should I stand so long in a case as clear as sunshine to those that have
any taste of learning or use of reading. They can light on no ancient Council
nor story of the Church, but they shall find the Clergy of each City distinct
from the Bishop, and subject unto the Bishop. Yea, no Presbyter might depart
from the Church where he was ordained, without the consent of his Bishop, nor
be received in another Church by the Bishop there, without the liking and
license of the Bishop whose Presbyter he was first, as appears by the
Councils of Nice, can. 15. and 16. of Antioch, ca. 3. of Chalcedon, ca. 8. of
Africa, ca. 55. neither might any man be made a Bishop by the Canons, except
he were first a Presbyter, and so did Sardi^ens. Concilii, ca. 10.
rise by every degree unto the height of the Bishops calling. All which, and a
thousand other rules and Canons do exquisitely prove, that every City had
besides their Bishop and under their Bishop, as well Presbyters as other
Clergy men; and so without all contradiction Presbyters were distinct from
Bishops, and a degree beneath Bishops, wheresoever they be reckoned in order
together as Deacons, Presbyters and Bishops.

But aunciently, as Jerome says, Presbyters and Bishops were all one.] Those
names did not differ at first by reason the Episcopal power and honor was in
the Apostles and Evangelists; but when those succeeded that were neither
Apostles nor Evangelists, then began they to be called Bishops. Theodoret. in
ca. 3. 1. epist. ad Tim.
Eosdem olim vocabant Episcopos and Presbyteros; ^os autem, qui nunc vocantur
Episcopi nominabant Apostolos. At the first (faieth Theodorete) they called the
same men both Bishops and Presbyters; and those that are now called Bishops,
they named Apostles. In process of time they left the name of Apostle to those
yt were in deed Apostles, and they called them Bishops whom before they termed
Apostles. And so Ambrose. Ambrosin 4. ca. epist. ad Ephesi^s.
Apostoli sunt Episcopi. Post Episcopum plus esse intelligitur, qui prophetare
dicitur, qui ordo nunc potest esse Presbyterij. The Apostles are (now) the
Bishops. After the Bishop he is greatest, that is said to prophecy, which now
may be the order of Presbyters. Jerome commenting upon these words of David;
Thy children shall be in stead of thy fathers, says; Hiero. in Psalmum. 44.
The Apostles (O Church) were thy fathers, because they begat thee; and now
for that they be departed this world, thou have in their stead children,
(which are) the Bishops created by thy self. for they are (now) thy fathers
because thou art governed by the^. S. Augustine upon the same words, says in
like manner. August. in Psalm. 44.
The Apostles begat thee, they are (thy) fathers. Is the Church forsaken by
their departure? God forbid. In stead of thy fathers, are children borne unto
thee. The Apostles were fathers; in stead of the Apostles, Bishops are
appointed. Those the Church calls fathers, yet those she begat, and those
she places in the ^eates of (her) fathers.

If we should grant you that a difference was observed in the primitive Church
betwixt the Presbyters and Bishops as well for ordination as succession, yet
that difference grew only by the custom and use of the Church, and not by any
divine precept or ordinance. And so much is affirmed both by S. Austen and S.
Jerome in those very places which you allege. for the Church as they say, and
not Christ or his Apostles, placed Bishops in the seats and roumes of the
Apostles.] When S. Austen and S. Jerome do say that the Church creates and
places Bishops in the Apostles seats; they do not mean as you misconster
their words, that the Church has altered the form of the Apostolic
government which she received, and of her self devised an other kind of
regiment by Bishops; that were, to charge the Church of Christ with a
voluntary defection from the Apostles discipline, and an arrogant preferring
of her own invention before Gods ordinance. With which though some in our
times can be content to challenge the whole Church of Christ, and even the
Apostles Coadiutors and Scholars; yet Augustine and Jerome were far from that
humor. Their meaning is, that albeit the Apostles be departed this life, who
were worthily accounted Fathers, because they were called immediately by
Christ himself to convert and congregate his Church; yet the Church is not
destitute, for so much as she has power from Christ to create and appoint
other of her children in their places, which are Bishops. August. in Psalm. 44.
Think not thy self forsaken says Austen to the Church, because thou see
not Peter and Paul by whom thou wast begotten; of thine own offspring a
fatherhoode is grown unto thee. In stead of the fathers, children are borne
unto thee; thou shall make them Rulers over the whole earth. He says not,
the Bishops are strangers or intruders on the Apostles possession: but, they
are lawful children, and rightly placed in their fathers roumes, whose heirs
and successors they are, though their vocation be not immediate from God, as
the Apostles was. And if Saint Austens judgment in this case may prevail; he
applies the next words of the holy Ghost to warrant the placing of Bishops as
Gouerners over the whole earth. And so does Jerome; Hiero. in Psalm. 44.
(Thou shall make them rulers over all the earth:) Christ has appointed his
Saints over all people. for in the name of God is the Gospel spread into all the
quarters of the earth, in which the Rulers of the Church, that is, Bishops are
placed.

And because you shroud your opinion under the shadow of S. Jerome and S.
Austen, hear what account they make of this position, that by Gods law there
should be no difference betwixt Presbyters and Bishops. Jerome rehearsing these
words out of John of Ierusalems letters; Hiero. ad Pammachium aduers. errores
Iohann^^ Hierosolymitani.
Nihil interest inter Presbyterum and Episcopum, etc. There is no (such great)
difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter, their dignity is all one, makes
this answer. Hiero. ad Pammachium aduers. errores Iohann^^ Hierosolymitani.
Hoc satis imperite: in portu vt dicitur naufragium. This is ignorantly enough
spoken; a ship wrack in the haven, as the Proverb goes; that is, an error
in the first entrance. Elsewhere instructing Marcella against the fantastical
novelties of the Montanists, and showing wherein Montanus dissented from the
Catholic Church, Jerome says; Hiero. ad Marcellam aduers. Montanum, 10. 2.
fol. 128.
Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent; apud eos Episcopus tertius est,
atque ita in tertium, id est pene vltimum locum Episcopi de uoluuntur. With us
the Bishops have the place of the Apostles; with them a Bishop is the third
degree, and so the Bishops are tumbled in the third, that is, almost the lowest
place. And giving his censure of this, and the rest of Montanus conceits, he
says; Hiero. ad Marcellam aduers. Montanum, 10. 2. fol. 128.
Haec sunt quae coargutione non indigent: perfidiam eorum exposuisse, superasse
est. These things need no refutation, to express their perfidiousnesse is
enough to overthrow it. S. Augustine makes this report of Aerius. August. de
haresibus hares. 53.
The Aerians have their name from one Aerius, who being a Presbyter, is said to
have taken displeasure that he could not be made a Bishop, and falling into the
Arrian heresy, added certain opinions of his own, (to wit, amongst others)
Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia debere discerni: that a Presbyter
should not be distinguished from a Bishop by any kind of difference. Jerome
says it is a shipwreck; Austen says it is Aerianisme, to say, that there
should be no difference betwixt Presbyters and Bishops.

Austen therein followed the report of Epiphanius, and enquired no further into
the reason of Aerius speech] For matters of fact what particular opinions
heretics held, Austen happily might trust Epiphanius or Philastrius that wrate
before him of the same argument; but whether their opinions were repugnant to
the doctrine of the Church or no, S. Austen had learning and judgment enough
to discern that matter. He is inexcusable if contrary to his own knowledge
and conscience, he pronounce a truth to be an error upon an other man's credit.
And therefore never make S. Austen a pupil under age; and to be miscarried with
Epiphanius false information. He concurred in judgment with Epiphanius and
Philastrius, and repelled that assertion of Aerius as repugnant to the doctrine
and use of the whole church. And that confirms Epiphanius opinion touching
Aerius positions, which were not Christian and Catholic, as some men in our
days begin to maintain, but rather arrogant and erroneous. Indeed Epiphanius
is somewhat vehement and rejects Aerius assertion in this very point,
Epiphanius contra Aerium bares. 75.
as (...), full of folly, nugacitie, error, and a foul fall of one subverted by
the devil. S. Austen puts him and his followers in the rank of false
teachers, for that besides the Arrian heresy, into which he fell, he added
certain positions of his own against fasting upon set days, keeping of
Easter. rehearsing the names of the dead at the Lords table, and distinguishing
of Bishops from Presbyters; which things the whole Church of Christ observed,
and no man ever impeached but Aerius and his Disciples.

Think you, that Aerius was worthily condemned by Epiphanius for denying
prayer for the dead, and not rather that Epiphanius himself erred in that
point?] I distinguish ye public actions of ye whole primitive church from the
private constructions of this or that father. The church had her set days of
fasting, celebrated the memorial of Christ's resurrection, gave thanks to God
in her open prayers at the Lords table for her martyrs and others that died
either constantly for the christian faith, or co^fortably in it she like wise
put a difference betwixt her Bishops and Presbyters. Which of these things can
you challenge as unchristian and unlawful? or what warrant had Aerius to
reprove the whole church of God for so doing? Just as much as you have now to
defend him, which is none at all.

He reproved praying and not thanks giving for the dead.] He reproved the
naming of the dead, and would needs know to what end they rehearsed.
Epiphanius bares. 75.
(...), the names of the dead. To whom Epiphanius answers, Ibidem.
As for the repeating of the names of the dead, what can be better, or more
opportune, then that they which are yet behind in this world, believe the
deceased live, and are not extinguished, but are and live with God, and as the
divine doctrine has taught, that they which pray have hope of their brethren
absent as in a long voyage from them? We also make mention of the just, as of
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops,
and of all sorts, to separate the Lord Jesus from the order of men, and to
give him his due honor and worship. Thus far Epiphanius speaks soundly,
and gives good reasons, why the Church named her dead, even her hope of their
welfare, and faith of their life with God; and separation of al men from the
Lord Jesus the Redeemer and Savior of the world. Chrysostoms liturgy shows
what commemoration of the dead was used in the Greek Church; Liturgis Chrysostom.
We offer this reasonable service (that is, the Eucharist of praise and
thanksgiving) unto thee, (O Lord) for all that are at rest in the faith (of
Christ) even for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops,
Martyrs, Confessors, and every soul initiated in the faith: But chiefly for
the most holy, undefiled, and most blessed virgin Marie. He that thinks all
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Apostles, and the virgin Marie were in
Purgatory, had need of purgation himself to be eased of his melancholy; yet
for these, and specially for the blessed virgin, the Church offered her prayers
and sacrifice to God. It is therefore most evident, y^ church meant the
sacrifice of thanksgiving, howsoever Epiphan. Austen, and some others to extend
the prayers of the Church to all Christians departed, doubtfully suppose their
damnation might be mitigated, though their state could not be altered. But
these private speculations were neither comprised in y^ prayers of the church,
nor confirmed by them: and for that cause, Aerius is justly traduced as
frantikely impugning the religions and whole some customs of the primitive and
catholic Church; of which Saint Austen says; August. epist. 118.
Siquid tota hodie per orbem frequent a^ Ecclesia, hoc quin ita faciendum sit
disputare, insolentissimae insan^ae est. If the whole Church throughout the
world at this day observe any thing, to reason for the reuersing of it, is most
insolent madness.

If you think S. Austens censure too sharp for the matter in question betwixt
us; hear the judgment of the general Council of Chalcedon, where were
assembled 630. Bishops, and mark what they determine of your assertion.
Photius Bishop of Tyrus had ordained certain Bishops within his Province, whom
Eustathius his successor, for some secret displeasure removed from that
degree, and willed them to remain Presbyters. This case coming before the
Council of Chalcedon, the resolution of Paschasinus and Lucentius, was this:
Ex actis Synodi Chalcedonens. de Pho^^o and Eustathi^.
(...). To bring back a Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter, is sacrilege.
Whereto the whole Council answered, (...). We all say the same, the judgment
of the fathers is upright.

You may do well to make more account of the Martyrs and Fathers that were in
the Primitive Church, least if you condemn all men besides your selves;
posterity condemn you as void of all sincerity and sobriety. for my part,
what I find generally received in the first Church of Christ, I will see it
strongly refuted before I will forsake it. God forbid I should think there was
never Church nor faith on the face of the earth since the Apostles times before
this miserable age, wherein though I acknowledge the great blessing of God
restoring us to the truth of his Gospel far above our deserts, yet I cannot
but lament the dangerous factions, eager dissentions, and headie contempts,
whereby the Church of God is almost rent in sunder, whiles every man will have
his devise take place, and when they want proofs they fall to reproaches.

We make that account of the primitive Church, that Calvin and other learned
men before us have done.] You do not. No learned me^ of any age have showed
themselves like to the spiteful and disdainful humors of our times. And of all
others you do Calvin wrong; who though in some things he dissented from the
Fathers of the Primitive Church in expounding some places that are alleged for
this new discipline, yet gravely and wisely he gives them that honor and
witness which is due unto the^. His words treating of this very point are these;
Caluinus Christianarum institutionum, li. 4. ca. 4.
It shall be profitable for us, in these matters (of discipline) to reuiew the
form of the ancient (or primitive) Church, the which will set before our eyes
the image of the divine ordinance. for though the Bishops of those times made
many Canons, in which they seem to decree more then is expressed in the sacred
Scriptures; yet with such wariness did they proportion their whole regiment to
that only rule of Gods word, that you may easily see, they had almost nothing
in their discipline different from the word of God. I could wish that such as
seem to reverence so much his name, would in this behalf follow his steps.
He declared himself to bear a right Christian regard to the Church of Christ
before him; and therefore is worthy with all posterity to be had in like
reverend account, though he were deceived in some things, even as Augustine
and other Fathers before him were. The wisdom of God will have no man come
near the perfection of the Apostles, and therefore no blemish to him that
wrate so much as he did, to be somewhat ouerseene in Lay Elders, and other
points of discipline; being so busied as he was with weighty matters of
doctrine, and interpreting the whole Scriptures.

But such as have had better leisure to examine this matter since his death,
persist still in the same opinion that he did.] But not in the same moderation;
they would else not charge the primitive church of Christ with inuenting and
vpbolding an humane bishop (this is) devised by man, and not allowed by God:
whereas Calvin grants the ancient regiment of bishops was agreeable to the
word of God, and rule of the sacred Scriptures. Calvin. Institutionum lib. 4.
ca. 4. 4.
If we look into the thing it self (he means the government of the
Primitive Church) we shall find the ancient Bishops never intended to frame
any other form of governing the Church, then that which God in his word
prescribed. Now what kind of government that was, you shall hear his own
confession in the same place; and thereby perceive that many of the points,
which I have before proved, are so sound and sure, that no man learned can
with any truth resist them. Calvin. Institution. li. 4. ca. 4. 2
Habebant ergo singulae Civitates Presbyterorum Collegium, qui Pastores erant
ac Doctores. Nam and apud populum munus docendi, exhortandi, and corrigendi,
quod Paulus episcopis iniungit, omnes obibant. Quibus docendi munus iniunctum
erat, eos omnes nominabant Presbyteros. Illi ex suo numero in singulis
ciuitatibus vnum eligebant, cui specialiter dabant titulum Episcopi, ne ex
aequalitate, vt fieri solet, dissidia nascerentur. vnicuique ciuitati attributa
erat regio, quae Presbyteros inde sumeret, and velu^ corpori ecclesiae illius
accenseretur. Every City had a College of Presbyters, which were Pastors and
Teachers. for they all had the function of teaching, exhorting, and reproouing
in the Congregation, which Paul enioyneth unto Bishops. To whom the office of
teaching was allotted, they were all called Presbyters. These in every City
chose one of their own number, to whom they gave the special title of a
Bishop, lest by an equality as is usually found, divisions should arise. To
every City was appointed a certain region, which took their Presbyters from
the City, and was counted part of the body of that Church. First then
Presbyteries consisted of Pastors and Teachers, and were not had but in
Cities. Next, lest equality should breed confusion, over these Presbyters in
each City as well as over the flock, was a bishop, who in Dignity and
Authority was above them. Thirdly, every Bishop had his region or Dioecese
besides his City, and the Presbyters that were designed for such Country
Parishes as were within his Circuit, were fette from the City, and reputed to
be of the body of the Episcopal Church. And all these things not only were
in the Primitive Church, as I have already proved, but they were also
agreeable to the word of God, as Calvin himself confesses.

You should take all. He tells you that a Bishop should have no dominion over
his brethren, but as a Consul in the Senate, should propose matters, ask
voices, go before others in aduising, warning, exhorting, and moderate the
whole action with his authority, and execute that which is decreed by common
consent. And this kind of regiment he says, the Fathers acknowledge first
entered humano consensu, by the consent of men according to the necessity of
the times, though it were very ancient, as at Alexandria ever since Mark the
Evangelist.] I honor Calvin for his wonderful gifts and pains in the Church
of God, and could easily be enduced to embrace his judgment, were it not, that
in this case a manifest truth confirmed by the Scriptures, Fathers, and by
himself, enforces me to the contrary. Ieromes words I have examined before;
they do not import that bishops first began by humane devise and policy.
Ignatius, Irenaeus, Egesippus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Dionysius of Corinth,
Origin, Tertullian, Eusebius, Methodius, and Ierom himself affirm the first
bishops were made in the Apostles times, and by the Apostles hands. Saint John
in his Revelation writes to the seven Pastors or chief moderatours of the
seven Churches in Asia. Whiles Saint John lived, as Eusebius records, there
succeeded at Antioch, Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Ignatius after Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Euodius; at Alexandria, Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Abilius after Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Amianus; at Rome, Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Clemens after Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Anacletus and Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Linus; at Jerusalem, Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
Simeon after Eusebii Chron^con. Hieronym. interpret.
James. Yea, Saint John with his own hands made Irenaus li. 3 ca. 3

Tertul. de praescript. aduers. haeretic.

Hierony. in Ignatio.


Polycarpe bishop of Smyrna, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, and Jerome
affirm; and that next after Socrates lib. 5. ca. 22.
Eucharius, as Socrates notes. he did the like in many Apud Eusebius. lib. 3. ca.
3.
other places, as Clemens Alexandrinus writes. I can by no means forsake so
many ancient and assured witnesses, whereof some lived with Polycarpe, and were
his Scholars, to follow the mistaking of a few words in Jerome by
whomsoever. Yea Calvin himself says, Calun institutionum lib. 4. ca. 3. 7.
Nec humanum est inuentum, sed Dei ipsius institutum, quod singulis suas
assignamus ecclesias. Paulus ipse Archippum Colossensium episcopum commemorat.
It is not man's devise, but the very ordinance of God, that we assign to every
man his Church. Paul himself mentions Archippus Bishop of Colossus.

That is, Pastor of Colossus; and so we grant each Church ought by Gods law to
have a Pastor.] We must ask further, whether by Gods law each Church must
have one or many: If one, we have our desire; if many, there must yet be one
chief to avoid confusion. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. ca 4.
Equality, as Calvin notes, breeds factions. Jerome says, Hierony. ad
Euagrium.
To suppress the seeds of dissension, one was set above the rest; otherwise
there would be and contra Luciferianos.
as many schisms as there be Priests. Beza makes it an essential and
perpetual part of Gods ordinance, to have one chief in each Presbytery. His
words are; In responsio. ad tract it de ministrorum euangelii gradibus ca. 23.
fol. 153.
Essentiale fuit in eo de quo hic agimus, quod ex Dei ordinatione perpetua
necesse fuit, est, and erit, vt in Presbyterio quispiam and loco and dignitate
primus, actioni gubernandae praesit, cum eo quod ipsidiuinitus attributu^ est
Iure. This was essential in the matter we have in hand, that by Gods ordinance
which must alwais endure, it has bin, is, and shall be needeful, that in the
Presbytery, one chief in place and dignity should moderate and rule every
action with that right which is allowed him by Gods law. And in this he says
right. for a multitude ungoverned must needs be confused, which should be far
from the Church of God; and government there can be none, where all are
equal. When the shepeheardes lead into diverse pastures, whom shall the sheep
follow? when sundry lords make sundry laws, which shall the subject obey?
Sure, if no man can serve two masters, no Church can endure two Pastors.
Whiles they consent they have but one mind though many men; when they dissent,
which in all persons is casual, and in all places, usual; then will there be
as many sides, as there be leaders. You were as good set two heads on one
body, as two chief rulers over one company. If you confess there must by
Gods law be one chief Pastor in one church; then the chief Pastor of each
City, is the bishop which we seek for; and he by your own positions is
authorized as Pastor of the place by Gods ordinance.

This you shall never avoid, do what you can. Each Church in the Apostles
times had many Presbyters that labored in the word. The Scriptures do plainly
witness it; In the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 15. v. 6. and 23; of Antioch, Act.
13. v. 1; of Ephesus, Act. 20. v. 17. and 28; of Rome, Romans 16; of Corinth, 1. Corinthians. 14. v. 29; of Philippi, Philip. 1. v. 1; of Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
v. 12; of other Churches the like is affirmed, Hebr. 13. v. 17; James 5. v. 14;
1. Pet. 5. v. 1. Now by Gods essential and perpetual ordinance, as your
selves confess, there must be one chief and Pastor of each Church and
Presbytery, to guide as well the Presbyters that are Teachers, as the flock
that are hearers, with that power which Gods Law allows unto Pastors. Tell
me now, I pray you, what difference betwixt chief Pastors established in every
City, by Gods law as you are forced to grant; and Bishops succeeding the
Apostles in their Churches and chaires, as the Fathers affirm. If you mislike
the word, Bishop, it is, Catholic and Apostolic; if you mislike the office,
it is Gods ordinance by your own assertion.

We grant the name of a Bishop, and regiment of a Pastor are confirmed by the
holy Ghost; but you yield more to your chief Pastors and Bishops, then the
word of God allows them. as namely you suffer them to continue for life,
where they should govern but for a month or a week; you alotte them
Dioeceses, which should be but parishes; you give them not only a distinction
from Presbyters, but a i^risdiction over Presbyters, who should be all one
with Presbyters, and subject to the most voices of the Presbyters; all which
things we say, are against the Scriptures.] You frame Churches to your
fancies, and then you straight way think the Scriptures do answer your
devises. If we give Bishops any thing, which the ancient and Catholic Church
of Christ did not first give them; in Gods name spare us not, let the world
know it: but if we prefer the universal judgment of the Primitive Church
in expounding the Scriptures touching the power and function of bishops, before
your particular and late dreams; you must not blame us. They were nearer the
Apostles times and likelier to understand the Apostles meanings then you, that
come after fifteen hundred years with a new plot of Church government never
heard of before. All the churches of Christ throughout the world could not at
one time join in one and the self same kind of government, had it not been
delivered and settled by the Apostles and their Scholars that converted the
world. So many thousand Martyrs and Saints that lived with the Apostles would
never consent to alter the Apostles discipline, which was once received in the
Church, without the Apostles warrant. Wherefore we conster the Apostles
writings by their doings; you measure the Scriptures after your own humors.
Whether of us twain is most likely to hitte the truth?

As for your repining at the things which we give to bishops; we greatly regard
it not, so long as the Scriptures do not contradict them; we smile rather at
your devises, which say that a bishop should govern for a week, and then
change, and give place to the next Presbyter for an other week; and so round
by course to all the Presbyters. What Scripture confirms that circular and
weekly regiment of yours? By what authority do you give it the name of a
divine institution, when it is a mere imagination of yours without proof or
truth? She we one example or authority for it in the new Testament, and take
the cause.

Succession by course was ordained by God after the example of 1 De Ministrorum
Euangelii gradilus cap. 23. fol. 156.
the Priests of Aaron.] Did the sons of Aaron loose their Priesthood, when
their courses were ended? No, but they served in the Temple by course; and so
were Bishops appointed by Gods ordinance to guide the Presbytery.] Is this all
the ground you have, upon this slender and single similitude to make Gods
ordinance what please you: If such reasons may serve, we can sooner conclude
the perpetual function of bishops then you can the weekly. for not only the
high Priest kept his honor during his life, but likewise every Priest that was
chief of his order. Indeed their courses being ended, they departed home, but
they lost not their dignity. But what rouing is this in matters of weight:
Will any wise men be moved with such ghesses: Make us good proof out of the
Scriptures; or leave tying Gods ordinance to your appetites.

Ambrose is the man that affirms it.] If you come once to Fathers, I hope we
have ten to one, that affirm otherwise. If Ambrose did say so, we could
not believe him against all the rest of the Fathers, yea, and against the
Scriptures themselves, election of Bishops being prescribed by Paul to Timothy
and Tite, and not succession in order; but I deny that Ambrose says any such
thing. He says the next in order succeeded.] He names neither change nor
course. It is your own devise, it is no part of Ambroses meaning. Anianus the
next after Mark, that was Bishop of Alexandria six years before Peter and
Paul were put to death, was he made by order or by election: Jerome says
expressly. Hieronym. ad Euagrium.
A Marco Euangelista Presbyteri semper vnum ex se electum, etc. they of
Alexandria ever since Mark the Evangelist did always choose their Bishop, he
never succeeded in order. Neither did Anianus govern for a week or a year,
he sat Bishop there Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 13. and
two and twenty years as Eusebius writes; and Abilius the next that was
chosen after his death sat 21. 2 3 Eusebius. Chr^nicon.
thirtene years more before he died, and then succeeded Cerdo, and the rest
in their times all chosen, and all sitting in the Pastoral chair so long as
they lived. The like you may see in the first Bishops of Rome who kept the
Episcopal chair during life, and not by course. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 13.
Linus sat twelve years, 14. and
Anacletus twelve, 34. ^ 5 6 Eusebius. Chronicon.
Clemens nine. Saint John the Apostle living and ordering the whole Church,
whiles the three first Bishops of Rome and of Alexandria succeeded by election,
and governed without changing for the term of their lives. Wherefore it is
evident, this vp-start fancy is far from Gods ordinance.

If you trust not me, mark how your own friends, I will not say your selves do
cross and confute your own inventions. You say, It is Gods disposition, that
the (...) or chief of your Presbytery should go by course; and that order you
call Divine: they say it is accidental; and no part of Gods ordinance. De
Ministr^rum Euangelii gradibus page 153
Accidentale fuit quod Presbyteri in hac (...) alij alijs per vices initio
succedebant. It was accidental that the Presbyters did in this chiefdome at
the first beginning succeed one an other by course. You tell us, the electing
one to continue chief of the Presbytery was an humane order; but they assure
us that election in all sacred functions is the commandment of God, and may
not be altered. Ibidem page 154
Aliud est electionis mandatvm quam immota^ non tantum in Diaconis, sed etiam
in sacris functionibus omnibus seruatam oportui^, aliud electionis modus. The
commandment of election is one thing, which must be observed, not only in
Deacons, but in all sacred functions; the manner of election is an other thing.
The precept cannot be immutable, unless it be divine and Apostolic; others
have no such power to command. Now for my learning I would feign know; this
ruling by course, if it be divine, how is it accidental? if it be accidental,
how is it divine? And the electing of a President or Bishop, if it be humane,
how is it commanded? if it be commanded, how is it humane? This is the way to
call sweet sower, and sower sweet, to make light darkness, and darkness to
be light. I must see better coherence then I do before I call this a divine
Discipline.

You mistake us. we say it is Gods ordinance for a Pastor to govern the
College of Lay Elders; but for one chief to govern the College of Pastors,
we hold is man's invention.] Would God you did not mistake your selves. Your
Presbyteries must consist either of lay men aloue, or of clergy men only, or of
both indifferently. If of Lay Elders only, who shall succeed the Pastor in
the ruling thereof when his course is ended, for example as you say, when his
week is out: His Presidentship must be perpetual which by your rules is
against Gods ordinance, unless you will have the lay Elders in course to do
pastoral duties, and rule pastor and al, which is more absurd and more against
Gods Law then the former. Will you mix your Presbyteries of both: then yet by
Gods law as your selves enforce it, one Pastor must be chief of the rest of
the Pastors, and if by the Scriptures his superiority must be perpetual; as
after his election it must be; what differs this chief Pastor for his life
from a bishop? you would limit his government to a week or a month; but
where does Paul so? show us that rule in Scripture or Father, and set up your
Lay Presbyteries. If not, you walk in the wildernesses of your own fancies,
and you would prescribe us rules of your own making in place of Gods
ordinance; which is dangerous to your selves, and injurious to others, if it be
not presumptuous against God.

Will you have none chief? Then breed you confusion, and lay the Church open
to be torn in pieces with every dissension. besides your selves avouch it is
an essential and perpetual point of Gods ordinance to have one chief over
the Presbytery. These be the brambles and briars of your discipline, which
force you to say and unsay with a breath. but we take your assertion as good
against your selves, and thence we frame you this argument. It is an essential
and perpetual part of Gods ordinance, that one should be chief over the
Presbytery. But the Presbyteries of each Church and City, (where the Apostles
preached) consisted of Clergy men and Preachers. I hope then it is Gods
ordinance to have one chief over the Preachers and Laborers in each Church.
And if election be Gods commandment, as you also confess, and consequently
the Electee once lawfully placed must not be removed without just and apparent
defects; I trust the chief Governor of the Preachers and Presbyters of each
Church, must continue whiles he lives and rules well. for as he was chosen
for his worthiness, so may he not be deprived till he prove unworthy. Now a
chief Ruler or Pastor over the people and Presbyters of each City, elected
by Gods commandment to continue that charge so long as he does his duty,
comes as near to the bishops calling which we maintain, as your head to
that which is above your shoulders.

If youthwart us with Lay Elders; we have this fair Supersedeas for them.
First prove them, then place them where you will. If you talk of going round
by course; it is the order of good fellows at a feast; it was never the order
of governing in the Church of Christ. The Priests of the old Law were after
a time eased of their pains, but never changed their prerogatives. If you say
they differ not in degree, but in honor and dignity from the rest, I have
already proved that singularity in succeeding the Apostles, and necessity in
ordaining, distinguith them from Presbyters. If you quarrel with their
jurisdiction and dioceses, the place now serves to discuss those things,
for so much as we find their function was delivered them by the Apostles, and
is restified in the Scriptures.

The shute Anchor is, if all this were so; that the power of Bishops by Gods law
should be nothing else but a right to call the Presbyters of each place
together, and to ask their voices, and perform what the most part decre^^ and
this to extend no further then their own Churches and Cities.] This I think
be your meaning; if you cannot tie them to your fancies, to bind them fast to
their chaires that they shall not wagge; and if they must needs be highest in
the Session, yet to make them lowest in the action, and to do one lie what
shall please others to determine. But your pleasures, unless you were more
indifferent, are little regarded, the Church of Christ more then fourteen
hundred years before you were borne, has considered of their power and
charge; the Councils both provincial and general are extant to decide the
doubt. But if you will try their right by the Scriptures, I am well content, so
you take to your Presbyteries no more then you can justify to be theirs; and
leave unto Bishops that interest which we prove by the word to belong to
their calling.

CHAP. XIIII. The fatherly power and Pastor all care of Bishops over Presbyters
and others in their Churches and Dioeceses.
I Take it to be a matter out of question, confirmed by the Scriptures, and
confessed by the old and new Writers, that the Son of God willed S. John
the Apostle in his Revelation to write to the seven chief Pastors of the
seven Churches of Asia, calling them by the name of Angels. August. epist. 162.
By the divine voice, says Austen, the Ruler of the Church (of Ephesus) is
praised under the name of an Angel. Amlros. in 1. at Corinth. ca. 11.
Angels he calls Bishops, says Ambrose, as we learn in the Revelation of
John. Hiero in 1. ad Corinth. ca. 11.
Angels he calls those that be Rulers of the Churches, says Ierom, even as
Malachie the Prophet does witness the Priest to be an Angel. And Gregory.
Gregor. in ^alium in Job lib. ^1. ca. 3.
The Preachers in the Scriptures are sometimes called Angels, as the Prophet
says, the Malach. 2.
lips of the Priest should keep knowledge, and they should ask the Law at
his mouth; for he is the Angel (or Messenger) of the Lord of hosts. The new
Writers with one consent acknowledge the same. Bulling. conc^one 6. in
Apocalypse.
The Angels, says Bullinger, are the Ambassadors of God, even the Pastors
of the Churches. Ibid concione 9.
The heavenly letter is directed to the Angel of the church of Smyrna, that is
to the Pastor. Now the stories witness that Angel and Pastor of the church of
Smyrna to have bin Polycarp ordained Bishop (there) by the Apostles themselves,
I mean by S. John. He was made bishop of Smyrna 13. years before the Revelation
(of John) was written. Marlorat. Marlorat in Apoca^yps ca. 2.
John begins with the Church of Ephesus for the celebritie of the place; and
speaks not to the people but to the Prince (or chief) of the Clergy, even
the bishop. Seb. Meyer. Apud Marlorat. in Apocalypse. ca. 3.
To the Angel of the Church of Sardis. Amongst the bishops of this church
Melito was renowned, a man both learned and godly; but what predeccessors or
successors he had in the ministry of the church, is not recorded. Beza says,
Beza annotat. in Apocalypse. ca. 2.
Angelo: idest (...), que^ nimirum oportuit inprimis de hijs rebus admoneri, ac
per cum caeteros Collegas, totamque adeo ecclesiam. To the Angel, that is, to
the chief President, who should have the first warning of these things, and
from him the rest of his Colleagues and the whole Church.

By the person that speaks unto the Pastors of those seven Churches, and
name which he gives them, I collect their vocation was not only confirmed by
the Lord himself, but their commission expressed. He speaks that has best
right to appoint what pastors he would have to guide his flock, til he come to
judgment: even Christ Jesus the prince of Pastors. The name that he gives
them she with their power and charge to be authorized and delivered them from
God. for an Angel is Gods messenger; and consequently these seven, each in his
several charge and city are willed to reform the errors and abuses of their
Churches, that is, both of Presbyters and people. They are warned, at whose
hands it shall be required; and by him that shall sit Judge to take account of
their doings. Hence I infer, first their preeminence above their helpers and
coadiutors in the same Churches is warranted to be Gods ordinance: Next, they
are Gods Messengers to reprove and redress things amiss in their Churches,
be they Presbyters or people, that be offenders. Which of these two can you
refuse? Shall they be Angels, and not allowed of God: Can they be his
Messengers, and not sent by him? He would never reward them, if he did not
send them. Being sent of God, shall they be charged with those things which
they have no power to amend: Is the Son of God so forgetful, as to rebuke
and threaten the Pastor for the Presbyters and the peoples faults, if he have
no further power over either, but to ask voices: At whose hands does God
require his sheep, but at the shepeheards? He cannot be Angel of the (whole)
Church, but he must have Pastor all authority over the whole Church.

The rest of the Pastors, you will will say, had the same charge with him. In
their degree they had; but why does the son of God write only do one of
them, if all were even both in power and charge: You are wo^^^^^ie eagerly to
ask why the Apostle writing to the Churches never mentioned any bishop if
there had been Bishops in the Apostles times. which objection, though it be
need lesse^d he answered, because it is negative; yet Ambrose and Epiphanus
tell you the Churches at the beginning were not settled moroffices exactly
divided; yea the Apostles themselves, for a time kept the Episcopal power in
their own hands, and in some places Paul names the Bishop, as Calvin.
institut. lib. 4. ca. 4^.
Archippus Bishop of Colossus. But on the other side we press you with the
affirmative; and ask you how the Son of God could write precisely to one
Angel in every of those seven Churches, if there were many or none? And what
reason to charge him above the rest; if he had no Pastourall power besides the
rest: It is therefore evident the Churches of Christ before that time were
guided by certain chief Pastors, that ^^^erated as well the Presbyte^s as
the rest of the flock; and those the Son of God ^^ knowledgeth for Stars
and (...), that is, for the Messengers and Stewardes of the Lord of hoste^; at
whose (...) the rest should ask and receive the knowledge of Gods divine will
and pleasures.

And as they were chief Pas^ors, so were they chief^ (...) the Church of
Christ, God by his Law comprising them under that name; and commanding not
only reverence and maintenance, but obedience also to be given unto them.
This case is so clear, it can not be doubted. August. in Tsal. 44.
The Church, says Austen, calls (the Bishops.) her Fathers, The bishops H.
cro. in Tsal. 44.
are thy Fathers, says Jerome, by whom thou art ruled. Origin. That Origin.
in ca. 4. cd Romanos.
Teachers are called Fathers; the Apostle Paul she weth, when he says, I have
begotten you in Christ Jesus by the Gospel. Ambros. in Tsal. 43.
He is a good father, says Ambrose, which can teach and frame the Lord Jesus
in us, as Paul says, my little children, with whom I travel again til Christ
be fashioned in you. Chrysostom. homil. 23. in 11. ad Heb.
Can I be a father, says Chrysostom, and not lament? I am a father in
affection toward you, and languish with love. Hear how Paul cries out, my
little children with whom I travel again. And therefore Idem de sacerdetio.
lib. 3.
worthily, says he, are the Priests to have more honor, then our own
parents. They are these to whom the spiritual births are committed. If they
be Fathers, they must be honored, and the chiefest part of their honor is
obedience. Disobedience of children, is punished in Gods Law Deuteronomy. 21.
by death; and shall it be no si^ne in us to disobey the Fathers of our faith:

Their flock, you think, must obey them, but their brethren and fellow
Presbyters must not. As though the rest of their flock were not their
brethren, as well as the Presbyters? or as if among brethren there might be no
superiority: Chrysostom. hornil. 3. in Acts Apolorum.
Omnes nos fratres sumus. Quamquam and inter fraires fas est, vt vnus
praescribatac caeteri obtemperent. We are all brethren, (says Chrysostom
speaking to his Clergy) how be it amongst brethren it is lawful that one
should prescribe, and the rest obey. And speaking of the return of the Bishop,
when himself was a Presbyter at Antioch, he says; Chrysostom. homil. 20. ad
populum Antioch.
Benedictus Deus, qui caput corpori reddidit and Pastorem ouibus, Praceptorem
discipulis, militibus Ducem (...). Blessed be God that has restored the head
to the body, the Pastor to the sheep, the Master to the Scholars, the
Captain to the soldiers, the high Priest to the Presbyters. Basil writing to
the Church of Neocaesarea upon the death of their Bishop, says; Basil. epist.
62. eccles. Neecasations.
Thy fairest beauty (O City) is decayed: the Church closes her eyes, the
solemn assemblies look heaullie (...), the sacred Synedrion (or Presbytery)
desire their head, they that are in dignaie their leader, the people their
ruler. Hiero. ad Nepotianum.
Be subject to thy Bishop, (says Jerome instructing Nepotianus in the duties
of a Presbyter) and reverence him as the father of thy soul. If I be a Father,
says (the Prophet) where is mine honor. What Aaron and his sons were, that
understand a Bishop and his Presbyters to be. Ambros officier, lib. 2. ca. 24.
If any (says Ambrose speaking of Presbyters and Ministers) obey not his
Bishop, he swarueth from the right way through pride. Austen being newly made
Presbyter, and desiring some longer respite of the bishop before he undertook
the execution of his office, says; August. epist. 148.
Will you me to perish O father Valerius? I beseech you by the goodness and
mercy of Christ, even by him that has inspired so great love in you toward
us, that we dare not offend you for the gain of our soul. Cypr. li. 3.
epist. 14.
Some of the Presbyters (says Cyprian to his Clergy) neither remembering the
Gospel, nor their place, neither thinking on the judgment of the Lord to
come, nor on the BISHOP THAT IS SET OVER THEM; which was never done under any
of my predecessors, with contempt and reproach of their Ruler, take upon them
to do anything (even to communicate with those that fall in time of
persecution.) Let those rash and unwise among you know, that if they persist
any longer in such actions, I will use that admonition which the Lord wills
me, in suspending them from the ministry of the Lords Table; and at my
return, make them answer before us and the whole people for their doings.
Some ripe youths will think all these Fathers were infected with humane
devises, in attributing so much unto bishops; but the grauer sort will
remember these learned and godly men were as like to know what in Christian
duty they were to yield, or to ask; as the plotformers of our time, that
affirm the bishop must be subject and obedient to the greater part of his
Presbyters; and do nothing but what they determine.

The bishop then; or President of the Presbyters, (for I stand not on names
whiles I discuss their powers) is by Christ's own mouth proneunced to be the
Angel of the Church; that is, the chief Steward over Gods household, and
ouerseer of his flock; and the authority that he has in the Church is
Pastoral and Paternal, even the same that has continued in the church since
the beginning of the world. This fatherly kind of regiment began in the
Patriarks, dured in the Priests and Prophets of Moses Law; was derived to the
Apostles, and so descended to the chief Pastors of Christ's church to this
day; who are to be honored and obeyed in the word and Sacraments as Fathers, of
all their children. This power and honor I trust is so tolerable and
Christian, that you dare not spurn against it.

If you did not give it only to them, and take it from all others, we would
not gain say it, so much as we do.] That which is common to every Pastor in
regard of those that are under them, cannot be denied the chief, to whose
oversight and charge the whole church in every place is committed. If you
think the name of Pastor cannot be common to many in one and the same Church,
then the bishop must be Pastor alone: for he is the Angel of Gods Church. If
the pastoral charge may be common to many, then must he have it chiefly and
above all, because he is Gods Angel and superior to all. You remember your
own positions; it is Gods essential and perpetual ordinance that one should
be chief as well over Presbyters as people. He cannot be chief in the
Presbytery, but he must be chief in the Church; and consequently if the
Presbyters be Pastors, he is chief Pastor.

We give him no power but to moderate the meetings, and execute the decrees of
the Presbyters. That we are well content the Bishop shall enjoy; but further we
give him none.] Blessed are your Presbyters, that must have their betters to
execute their decrees: but I pray you sirs, for Gods decrees, who shall execute
them? Must the Presbyters voices be asked before Gods Laws shall be executed?
Take heed not of tyrannical, but of Satanicall pride, if Gods will shall not
take place in your Churches, till the Presbytery be assembled and agreed. You
have provided a president to execute your own pleasures; now let God have one
amongst you to execute his.

Execution in all things we reserve to him that is chief. for as to consult
and decree a number is fittest; so to execute that which is decreed, one is the
surest; lest if execution be committed to many, their excusing themselves one
on another, or dissenting from each other, do hinder the whole.] You begin to
be wise. The honor to determine you keep to your selves, the pains to
execute you lay on your chief Ruler; to make him the gladder to be rid of his
office, that another by course may succeed in his room. And so where by Gods
ordinance you must have one chief, you take such order with him, that he shall
never be willing to stay long in it.

We do it to prevent ambition in such as would seek for the highest place.]
You decrease the ambition of one that should be highest, and increase the
pride of an hundred that should be lowest. for where we have one bishop in a
Diocese tied to the Laws of God, the Church and the Prince; you would have
three hundred in a Diocese, in some more, all of equal power, and set at
liberty to consult and determine of al matters at their pleasures.

We subject our Presbyteries to the Laws of God, the Church, and the Realm,
as well as you do your Bishops; and give them no leave to resist or reuerse
the decrees of any superior powers.] You do well; For when the God of heaven
has declared his will; or the Church by her provincial or general Councils
determined doubts, and made rules; or Christian Magistrates by their Laws
redressed and ordered things amiss; besides the lo^se of your pains it were
more then pride for your Presbyters in their assemblies to consult afresh, and
bring the self same things again to the question. What is decreed by
superiors, must not by inferiors be debated, whether it shall take place or
no; but be rather obeyed with readiness. So that in all cases determined by
the Laws of God, the Church, or the Prince, consultation is both superfluous
and presumptuous; execution is only needful; and that must be committed to
some persons that may precisely be challenged and punished for the contempt; if
that which is commanded be not performed. now whom appoint you to execute the
decrees of God, the Church, and the prince? The whole Presbytery? Then upon
the not execution of Gods or man's Law by any one Prebyter, all must be
punished, as well innocent as nocent, diligent as negligent. The blame must lie
on all, where the charge is in common. Were you but once or twice well followed
for other men's faults, you would soon ware weary of this general and
confused execution. And though you would not, yet neither the equity nor
prudency of Gods or man's Laws endure that wandering kind of execution. they
note and specify the persons that shall have the charge and oversight to
execute their decrees; that upon any neglect or defect the right offenders may
be challenged. And since to avoid confusion and prevent delays you commit
the execution of your own decrees to the care and circumspection of your
President; what cause can there be why the laws of God, the Church and the
Prince should not like wise be executed by the bishop or chief Pastor of each
place: There can be no doubt but the Canons of Councils and Laws of Christian
princes touching Church causes, from the Aposiles age to ours, have been
committed to Episcopal audience and execution; the question is for Gods Law,
who should be trusted with the execution thereof. And who rather say we, then
he that is authorized by God to be the Angel of his Church and steward of his
house; at whose mouth the rest should ask the Law, and be rather subject unto
him, then perch over him.

The execution of Gods Law by no means we grant to the Bishop; for then we
yield him all; but in that case, though each Presbyter be inferior to him, yet
the whole Presbytery is above him, and may both overrule him and censure
him.] That is as much as if you had said; when the sheep list to agree, I will
not say, conspire, they must lead their sheepeheard; and when the children are
wilful, they must rule their father. Otherwise, if the bishop be Pastor and
father to each Presbyter, he is the like to the whole Presbytery; and
consequently they must hear and obey him as Gods Angel, so long as he keeps
within the bounds of his message.

Nay, every Presbyter is a Pastor and Father as well as the Bishop and equal
with him, neither has he by Gods Law any right over them, but only by man's
devise.] Fie on this wavering. Sometimes the Bishop shall be chief over the
Presbytery by Gods essential and perpetual ordinance; Sometimes again
every Presbyter shall be equal and even with him, and he not chief over
them; and when you are a little angry, he shall be subject unto them and be
censured by them. This tapesing to and fro I impute rather to the rawnesse of
your discipline not yet digested, then to the giddiness of your heads. This
it is to wander in the desert of your own devises without the line of Gods
word, or level of his Church to direct you. But can you show us by what
authority you claim this power of your Presbyteries above and against their
Bishops? if by Scriptures, produce them; if by Fathers, then shrink not from
them, when they tell you on the other side what power the Bishop had, and
should have over his Presbyters.

We have both Scriptures and Fathers, but specially Scriptures. First, the
Apostles Peter and Paul acknowledge the Presbyters to be Pastors, and give
them the feeding, ouerseeing and ruling the flock. Next, the Presbytery did
excommunicate the incestuous Corinthian, and imposed hands on Timothy.
Thirdly, they are the Church, which if a man hear not, he must be taken for
a Publicane and an Ethnike by Christ's commandment. Fourthly, the common
wealth of Israel had apparently that kind of government which Christ and his
Apostles did not alter. Lastly, the fathers confess the Churches at first were
governed with the common counsel of the Presbyters, and without their advise
nothing was done in the Church.] These be the fortes of your late erected
Consistory; if these be taken from you, you have no place left whither your
maimed discipline may retreat: and these are most easily razed to the ground
in order as they stand.

For FIRST, the same power which you claim by Peter's and Paul's words, unto
Presbyters as Pastors in respect of the flock committed to their trust; you
must yield unto Bishops as chief Pastors in comparison both of Presbyters and
people; and so you prove against your selves, for the Bishop is as well chief
in the Church, where he is Gods Angel; as in the Consistory, where he
governs the Presbytery. NEXT, you cannot convince that the Presbytery did
either excommunicate the malefactor of Corinth, or lay hands on Timothy; I
have cleared the inferments of both places before. And if you could conclude
any such thing, which you cannot; yet most apparently the Apostle Paul with his
own mouth ^. Cor. 5. v 3.
adjudged the one, and 2. Tim. 1. v. 6.
with his own hands ordained the other. THIRDLY, what is meant by the Church
in those words of Christ, (if he hear not the Church, let him be as an
Ethnike unto thee) I have already discussed; I need not reiterate. If you will
with the Fathers apply that censure to excommunication, you must with the
Fathers understand by the Church, the Bishops and chief Rulers of the Church
FOVRTHLIE, neither had the Jews that kind of government which you would
establish in the Church; ne^did our Lord and Master, or his disciples ever
prescribe to the Gentiles the iudiciass part or form of Moses Iawe more then
they did the ceremonial; if Moses policy be abrogated, Moses Consistor is may
not be continued. The Judges cease where the law fails. the change of the
law ceremonial works, as the Apostle reasons a change of the
Priesthood; and even so the disanulling of their penal judgments,
discharges all their Judges and Consistories. And were it otherwise, what
win you by that against Bishops? If your Presbyters must be the Jews Elders,
your Presidents must answer to their chief Priests, and then have you spunne
afair thread. for where you thought to diminish the power of Bishops over
Presbyters, you triple it by this Argument. It must be death Deuteronomy. 17. v. 12.
to disobey the chief Priest in all points and parts of Gods Iawe. Would you
stand to your tackling, I would never wish a better reason against you for the
power of bishops then your own comparison; but you use to give back so fast
when you be pressed, that my labor would be but lost to follow you. In deed
Cyprian does vehemently urge that precept of Deuteronomie, and many others of
the old Testament for obedience to be yielded to himself and other Bishops,
as well by Presbyters as people; he that will, may see the Cypr. li. 1. epist.
3. 8. 11. and li. 3. epist. 9. and li. 4. epist. 9.
places. LASTLY, for Fathers, as your fashion is, you take a paring of one or
two of the^ where they speak to your liking; but reject both the same and all
other ancient writers, whenthey mainlie depose against your new discipline.

That the advice of Presbyters was at first used in the regiment of the Church,
Jerome and Ambrose seem towitnesse; but that they might overrule or censure
the Bishop, they never said nor meant. Hiero. aduers. Luciferianos.
The safety of the Church, as Jerome thinks, stands on the dignity of the
chief Priest (or Bishop) to whom except there be given a power without any
equal, and eminent above all, there will be as many schisms in the Churches
as there be Priests. And so Cyprian; Cypr. li. 4. ca. 9.
Thou make thy self Judge of God and of Christ, which said to his Apostles,
and thereby to all Rulers that succeed the Apostles in being ordained their
substitutes: he that hears you, hears me, and he that rejects you,
rejects me. For whence have heresies and schisms heretofore risen and
dailyrise, but whiles the Bishop which is but one, and rules the Church, is
despised by the proud presumption of some? and that one Bishop, he calls
Ibidem.
the Leader of the people, the Pastor of the flock, the governor of the
Church, the Bishop of Christ, and Priest of God. Infinite are the testimonies
of the Catholic Fathers against the power which you give to your Presbyters;
but because you turn them all over the bar, as tainted with humane pollitie,
and neglecters of Gods ordinance; let us see whether we can say more for the
power of Bishops over Presbyters by the Scriptures, then you have done for your
Presbyteriall censures, which in my judgment are very flenderlie and weaklie
proved.

All that we can say for the power of Bishops above Presbyters out of the
Scriptures, is this: That the holy Ghost by the mouth of S. Paul, has given
the Bishop of each place authority to ordain such as be worthy, to examine
such as be faulty, and reprove and discharge such as be guilty either of
unsound teaching, or offensive living. Thus much he says to Timothy and
Tite, and in them to their successors, and to all other Bishops of Christ's
Church for ever. The places be plain and need no long discoursing till we
hear your answer.

Of admitting Presbyters, Paul says to Timothy. 1. Tim. 5.
Lay hands hastily on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. And to
Tite: Tit. 1.
For this cause I left thee in Creete, that thou should ordain Elders in
every City (such) as I appointed thee. Of conuenting them he says; 1. Tim.
5.
Receive no accusation against a Presbyter, but under two or three witnesses.
those that sin, rebuke openly, that the rest may fear. Of dismissing them,
he says; 1. Tim. 1.
I prayed thee to abide at Ephesus to command certain that they teach no
strange doctrine. Tit. 1.
Their mouths must be stopped that teach things, they ought not, for filthy
lucre. 1. Tim. 5.
The Presbyters that do their duties let them be counted worthy of double
honor. Tit. 3.
Stay foolish questions and contentions. Tit. 3.
An heretic after one or two warnings reject. Tit. 2.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. See no man
despise thee. 1. Tim. 5.
I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that
thou observe these things, (...) without carrying any prejudice, or inclining to
either part. The words be singular, the charge is vehement; the parties were
Bishops to whom the Apostle wrate: the case therefore* is clear, that the
Bishops power over Presbyters in these pointe^ is ratified by the express
commandment of the holy Ghost.

You be mightily deceived. This power belonged to Evangelists, not to Bishops,
and therefore it dured but for their time, and exceeded not their persons to
whom the Apostles ^rate. See you how easily the very foundations of your
Prelacie are shaken and over thrown.] If your reply be sound, you say
somewhat to the purpose; but if it be false, absurd, repugnant to the very
Text, and refuted by your own positions, then take you heed, what answer you
will make to God for disturbing his Church, despising his ordinance, and
deriding his messengers, that himself has placed and authorized with his own
mouth. And here I must pray the Christian Reader advisedly to mark what is
said and answered on either side. This in deed is the maine erection of the
Episcopal power and function, if our proofs stand; or subversion, if your
answer be good. For if this fail, well may Bishops claim their authority by
the custom of the Church; by any divine precept expressed in the scriptures,
they cannot. But if these rules be deltuered by the Apostle to Bishops, as we
say, they are; and not to Timothy and Tite in respect of their Euangelship, as
the Presbyterists affirm; then can there be no question but this new
discipline is a very dream; and the ancient and Primitive Church of Christ
held the right and Apostolical form of governing the house of God according
to the prescript of his word. Out reioinder therefore is as follows.

No power proper to Evangelists, is, or ought to be perpetual in the Church of
Christ; their calling was both extraordinary, and temporary. but power to
ordain fit ministers, to convent and discharge unfit, is, and ought to be
perpetual in the Church of Christ. This therefore was no power proper to
Evangelists, which S. Paul in these places prescribed unto Tite and Timothy.
Again, your Presbyters may not claim Euangelisticall power, since your
Presbyters are no Evangelists; but your Presbyteries claim this power, which
Paul here commits to Timothy and Tite, even to ordain, examine, censure
and deprive Pastors and Teachers; ergo, this power was not proper to
Evangelists. Let all this be nothing, if Saint Paul in express words say not
as much. 1. Tim. 6.
I charge thee (says he to Timothy) in the sight of God, and before Jesus
Christ, that thou keep this commandment without spot and unrebukable, UNTIL
THE APPEARING of our Lord Jesus Christ. For Timothy to observe these things
until the coming of Christ in glory, was utterly impossible, he was to die
long before; these precepts therefore are delivered to him, and those that
should succeed in his place, unto the end of the world. Ergo, Timothies power
and function in this behalf must be perpetual in the Church of God, and not
fail before the day of judgment. Ambros. in 1. ad Tim. ca. 6.
With great vigilancie and providence (says Ambrose upon this place) does
the Apostle give percepts to the Ruler of the Church; for in his person does
the safety of the people consist. He is not so circumspect as fearing
Timothies care, but for his successors, that after Timothies example they
should observe the ordering of the Church. Now let the Christian Reader judge
whether this were a temporar^e function in Timothy, that died with his person;
or a perpetual charge to him and his successors for ever.

Surely Timothy was an Evangelist, Timothy was no Bishop.] You say he was no
Bishop; See Chap. 12. page 233.
Eusebius, Jerome, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoretus, Epiphanius, Oecumenius,
Primasius, affirm he was a Bishop; and in that respect S. Paul by this epistle
directed him, and all other Bishops in him, how to impose hands on Presbyters,
and receive accusations against them; yea the whole Church of Christ since the
Apostles times, without exception has so constred and observed the Apostles
words, in suffering none but Bishops either to ordain, or degrade Presbyters:
yet all this with you is nothing; your bare fancy must over bear both
fathers, were they never so learned; and Churches, were they never so ancient.
And though you avouch, this power must not exceed their two persons, to whom S.
Paul wrate; yet you are so liberal and beneficial to your Presbyteries, that
against all truth and authority, you make them succeed Timothy and Tite in
their Euangelisticall power. And so according to your manner you will have this
power to be proper, and yet common; to be extraordinary, and yet usual; to
cease with their persons, and yet to dure for ever with your Presbyteries. Fire
will better agree with water, then you with your selves; except you leave this
rolling too and fro at your pleasures.

We say the Evangelists had this power for a time; the Presbyteries for ever.]
What you say, no wise man will regard, unless you make better proofs then I
yet see you do. You have not a word, nor a tittle in the Scriptures for the
power of your Presbytefies; and yet you pronounce so peremptorily and
resolutelie of the^, as if there were nothing else written in the new
Testament, but the power of your Presbyters.

Did not the Presbytery impose hands on Timothy to make him an Evangelist?
did not they watch and feed the flock in the Apostles times? did not the holy
Ghost make them over seers of the Church? what would you have more?] Of lay
men, your Presbyteries either wholly or chiefly consist. then they also be
Pastors and Bishops, and watch and feed the flock, and the holy Ghost has
set them over the Church; and they also impose hands, as well as the best. And
to say the truth, what thing is there so peculiar to Pastors which you do not
communicate to your Presbyters? for when you be urged y^ Presbyters in the
Apostles times were by duty to do those things, which belonged properly to
Pastoral care and oversight, and therefore lay men were no part of th^se
Presbyteries; you answer roundly, that lay Elders in the Consistory, do
watch and feed and ouerlooke the flock as well as Pastors; and so not only
their power, but also their charge is the very same, as you say, that the holy
Ghost gave unto Pastors, and yet they no Pastors. And touching hands laid on
Timothy by the Presbytery, you answer your selves. for when you allege,
that the Presbytery did impose hands on Timothy; we ask you whether all
the Presbytery had right and power to impose hands, or only some of them? If
all; then Lay Elders must either impose hands (which Calvin conclusiuely
denies: Calu. institutionum, li. 4. ca. 3.
hoc postremo habendum est, solos Pastores manus imposuisse Ministris; this we
must understand, that only Pastors imposed hands on Ministers) or be no part
of the Presbytery. If some only imposed hands; and yet the Presbytery is
said to do that which not all, but some few, or one of them did; In like
manner Paul says the Presbytery laid hands on Timothy, when himself did
the deed, who was one of the Presbytery. And thus much Calvin likewise
avouches; Calu. institutionum, li. 4. ca. 3.
Pa^lus ipse se, non alios complures, Timotheo manus imposuisse comm^morat.
Paul witnesses that himself, and none others laid hands on Timothy.

And strange it is to see you build the maine foundation of your Presbytericall
power on a place, that has so many sound and sufficient answers as this has.
First, Jerome, Ambrose, Primasius and Calvin tell you the word (Presbytery)
signifies in that place the degree and function which Timothy received, not
the College and number of Presbyters. Next, Chrysostom, Theodorete,
Oecumenius, and Theophilact tell you, that Paul by the Presbytery meant the
Bishops (their names at first being common:) for that Presbyters might not lay
hands on a Bishop, such as Timothy was. Thirdly, the Scriptures tell you
that the Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, and the seventy disciples were of
the Presbyteries in the first Church; and they might well impose hands on
Timothy without any Presbyters. Fourthlie, Saint Paul tells you, as Calvin
well observes and urges, that himself and none others laid hands on
Timothy. Lastly, your selves say Timothy was an Evangelist, which function
and vocation the Presbytery of no particular Church could give him, but only
the Apostles. What power had the Church of Iconium or Ephesus to make
Evangelists, I mean such as should accompany the Apostles, and assist them in
their travails? If you trust neither Scriptures nor Fathers; for shame trust
your selves and your own positions. How shall other men believe your
assertions, when your selves do not believe them? If Timothy were an
Evangelist, they must be Apostles and no Presbyters that imposed hands on him.
If the Presbytery of any particular Church imposed hands on him, Timothy must
be a Bishop, and have a local charge in some Church; which you impugn under
pretense of his Euangelship. Choose which yyu will, so you choose some what,
and stand to it whrn you have chosen it. Were they Presbyters or no, that
imposed hands on Timothy? If they were, yet they did it jointly with Paul;
and so without the Apostle or his successor, Presbyters may not impose hands,
and then must Timothy be a Bishop when Paul wrate unto him; for Presbyters
could not make him an Evangelist. Were they no Presbyters but Apostles, or
others of higher calling? Then makes this place nothing for the power of
Presbyters, either to ordain or deprive ministers of the word and Sacraments;
and setting this aside, what one jot find you in the Scriptures concerning
your Presbyteries?

The conclusion is. We show you substantial and full proof, that TIMOTHY AND
HIS SVCCESSOVRS are charged by Paul to observe these precepts of the holy Ghost
in the Church of Christ for ever; touching the admitting of fit ministers, and
removing of unfit. Thence we infer, this power must be perpetual in Bishops,
for they succeed Timothy in the Church; the Presbyteries do not. On the other
side you claim this authority from Bishops to your Presbyteries; but you
cannot prove either their succession from Timothy, or joint commission with
Timothy, by any sentence or syllable in the Scriptures. That they should feed
and watch the flock; you urge, and we grant; in teaching and exhorting, they
were joined with Timothy, by reason the laborers must of force be many, where
the harvest was so great, as in the Apostles times: but in ordaining and
governing the Teachers, as there was no need of many, so is there no precept
for many, least by the multitude of Rulers, order should be rather confused
then preserved. Wherefore as Timothy was placed at Ephesus, and Tite in
Creete, to ordain, moderate and rebuke, as well Presbyters, as people; so was
Archippus at Colossus, so were the seven Pastors in the seven Churches of
Asia, to whom the son of God wrate by S. John's pen; so in all the
Apostolic Churches, were Apostolic men throughout the Christian world left to
guide and govern the Churches of Christ with like power, and to leave the same
to their successors for ever. And this our construction and exposition of of
S. Paul's words to Timothy, the learned and ancient fathers confirm with one
consent, and the Catholic Church of Christ, has continued and performed in
all ages and places since the Apostles deaths.

Mean you that Bishops alone might do what they would without the knowledge
or consent of their Presbyters?] My meaning is soon understood. You establish
one chief in your Presbyteries by Gods essential and perpetual ordinance,
to execute that which you decree; whom you call your President. How far I
join with you, you shall quickly perceive. To avoid tumults and dissentions,
God has authorized one in each place, and Church able, to have and maintain a
Presbytery, who with Pastoral and fatherly moderation, should guide as well
the Presbyters that assist him, as the people that are subject to him according
to the laws of God and man; the execution whereof is chiefly committed to his
charge, that is the Leader and ouersee^ of all the rest; whom we call a
Bishop. His power I call a moderation and not a domination, because the wisdom
of God has likewise allowed and provided Christian means as well to bridle
him from wrongs, as to direct him in doubts.

That is right the power which we give to our Presbyteries.] Did you not put
lay men instead of Pastors, to be Presbyters, and make them controllers,
where they should be but aduisers; your Presbyteries might have some use in
the Church of God, though far less now, then when they first began: but your
disdaining Bishops and taking from them that which the Apostle gives them, and
your ex^olling Presbyteries (the most part whereof, if not all, be lay Elders)
to determine all cases, and censure all persons in the Church, which the
Scriptures never speak of; are the spots and stains of your discipline,
which you will never wash away. Presbyteries we acknowledge were in the
Apostles times, and in the Primitive Church, serving to religious and needful
uses; but no such Presbyteries as you pretend, neither erected to any such end
as you conceive, nor endued with any such sovereign power, as you imagine.

I find many uses of Presbyteries ordained in Cities by the Apostles, and
after by them conioined in one Church with the Bishop; whereof some are
extinguished by the alteration of times, others remain in force to this day.
The first was the conversion of the world unto Christ. In great Cities where
none yet believed, how long would it be before one man should gain any great
number unto the faith; persecutions especially growing so hot, that none
might publicly show himself to be a Christian without danger of life?
Wherefore the holy Ghost disposed and appointed many laborers in every
City, to carry the knowledge of the truth from house to house. As at Ephesus
Paul at one tinie furnished Act. 19.
twelve with the gifts of Gods spirit for the spreading of the Gospel in that
place; at Rome he saluted Romans 16.
twenty that were of his acquaintance, besides those he knew not, who planted
themselves and their households in that City, to win the multitude to the
obedience of the faith. And so wheresoever the Apostle erected any Church, they
did store it with as many meet men to teach the word, as they could find,
that the truth of Christ might disperse it self not only throughout their
Cities, but into the Towns and countries that bordered near them.

The next use of Presbyteries was to continue such as they had converted, by
instructing, exhorting and encouraging the believers from house to house, and
from man to man, to stand fast in the doctrine received, and neither to shrink
at the bloody storms of tyrants, nor to give ear to the wil^e charms of
Satan, nor follow the deceitful baits of this world; but constantly, with
truth and holiness to serve God, in spite of all adversaries that exalted
themselves against the knowledge of Christ. And as the people did increase, so
did the pains in each place, and consequently the number of Presbyters; one
man being no more able to serve the necessities of a great City, then to bear
the burden of the earth on his back. Wherefore the spirit of wisdom so
guided the Church; that to procure the conversion, and attend the salvation of
men, there was every where, (as occasion required) store of Pastors and
Teachers; and yet to mainetaine unity, and keep both Preachers and people in
peace, there was in each Church and City, one chief amongst them, that as
principal Pastor of the place, looked into all their doings, stayed them from
dissentions, rebuked the unruly, and with the help of the rest rejected the
intolerable: least many Teachers by chalenging unto themselves such as they
had conuertes, should rent the faithful into as many Churches as there were
Presbyters in every City, for which cause, each place, were it never so
great, had but one Church, and one chief Pastor or Bishop elected to succeed
in the Pastoral charge and chair above the rest that were his brethren in
office, children in honor, helpers in labor, and assessours in counsel and
judgment.

The third use, was the trapning up and trying of men that were meet to have
the care of souls committed unto them, and the regiment of the Church reposed
on them. At first, the wonderful power of the holy Ghost supplied all wantes
and defectes of learning and knowledge, so that by the laying on of the
Apostles hands, men before unfit were made meet ministers of the new
Testament: but because these gifts were not always to continue, or not in so
plentiful manner as at the Prime tide of the Gospel; the Apostles settled in
every Church and City, needing their service, and able to give them
maintenance, by reason of the populousness of the place, a Presbytery, that
is, a convenient number of Deacons to serve about divine matters and mysteries,
and of Pastors to intend for the word and Sacraments. from whence as from a
fountain, both the Cities themselves might at all times after have sufficient
men to furnish their own turns, and to help the smaller Towns and Uillages
within their circuit, which for the slenderness of their state, could neither
maintain Presbyteries, nor nourish up meet men to supply their need upon
the death of the former Incumbents. This to us that have Uniuersities for that
purpose founded by the bounteousnes of Christian Princes and other
benefactours, may seem superfluous; but the Church of Christ after her first
supply made by the Apostles hands, had no means to continue the succession
of fit and able Pastors in each place, but only her Presbyteries in greater
Churches and Cities, that were her nurceries of learning, and Seminaries of
sound religion and holy conversation; which stored both the Cities where they
were supported, and the country round about, that was under the charge and
oversight of the Bishop of each City.

The fourth use of Presbyteries, which you much grate on, but never rightly
hit, was the aduising and assisting the Bishop or Pastor of each Church and
City in all doubts and dangers. At first there were no Councils to make
Canons, nor Christian Princes to establish laws for the good guiding and
ordering of the Church; but each place was left to direct it self. Least
therefore the Bishops only will should be the rule of all things in the
Church; the government of the Church was at first so proportioned, that
neither the Presbyters should do any thing without their Bishop; nor the
Bishop dispose matters of importance without his Presbytery. The Presbyters
sat not with the Bishop as equal in power with him, much less as superior
above him, when the more part consented against him; you would feign have it
so: but the Church of Christ, from the Apostles to this present, never used or
endured any such presumption.

Ignatius ad Magnesios.
As Christ (says Ignatius) does nothing without his father, so do you
(nothing) without the Bishop, whether you be Presbyter, Deacon, or Lay man.
And again, Idem ad Sarsenses.
Presbyters be subject to your Bishop, Deacons to your Pesbyters, and Lay men
to both. My soul for theirs that observe this order, the Lord will be always
with them. The Canons reporting the ancient discipline that obtained in the
Church from the Apostles times, say; Canones Apostolorum, ca. 38.
Let the Presbyters and Deacons do nothing without the consent of the Bishop,
for the Bishop is he, to whose charge the people are committed, and who shall
render an account for their souls. Tertullian that lived in the next age after
the Apostles, proves that in his time, neither Presbyter, nor Deacon might
baptize without the Bishops leave. Tertul. de baptismo.
The right to give baptism, has the high Priest which is the Bishop, then the
Presbyters and Deacons; Non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter ecclesiae
honorem; quo saluo, salua pax est: but not without the Bishops authority, for
that honor the Church yields (to Bishops;) which being preserved, peace is
maintained. Emulation is the mother ofschismes. The Council of Ancyra, that
was elder then the Council of Nice, shows; It was Council. Aneyr. ca. 13.
not lawful for Rural Bishops to ordain Presbyters or Deacons, nor for the
Presbyters of the City to do any thing out of their charge without the
license and letters of the Bishop. The Council of Laodicea expressing the
Bishops preeminence, says; Council. Laodicen, ca. 56.
The Rural Bishops that are already made, must do nothing without the consent
of the Bishop of the City. Likewise the Presbyters must do nothing without the
liking of their Bishop. The Council of Arle in Constantines days; Concilii
Arelatens. 1. ca. 19.
Presbyteri sine conscientia Episcoporum nihil faciant. The Presbyters may do
nothing without the knowledge (or consent) of the Bishop. Jerome gives the
same reason for it that Tertullian does. if the chief Priest should not have
power, Hiero. aduers. Luciferianos.
eminent above all without partner, there would be as many schisms as there be
Priests. Inde venit vt sine Episcopi missione, neque Presbyter, neque Diaconus
ius habeant baptizandi. Thence is it, that without the Bishops leave, neither
Presbyter, nor Deacon may baptize. If Presbyters by the discipline of the
Primitive Church were to obey their Bishop, and might do nothing, no not
baptize without the bishops leave; how far were they from ouer-ruling and
censuring their bishop by number of voices, which you attribute to your
Presbyters?

This was that custom of the Church, which Jerome confessed was against the
Divine disposition.] If this were the custom of the Primitive Church, then
were their Presbyteries nothing like your Consistories; neither did the Bishop
as a Consul in the Senate ask voices, and execute what the most part decreed;
but as a Pastor he governed and ouer-looked, as well the Presbyters as the
people; and without his consent and liking, the Presbyters might do nothing,
no not haptize nor administer the Lords supper. neither does Jerome say that
this custom of the Church was against the divine disposition; he is so far
from condemning it, that he says, Aduersus Luciferianos.
the safety of the Church depends thereon; but Jerome wills the Bishops to
remember, that though the whole care and oversight of the Church be now given
to them, and taken from Presbyters for preventing of schisms; yet they should
use them with honor, and consult with them for the good of the Church, because
by the truth of the divine disposition before schisms began, they were trusted
in common with the regiment of the Church.

That disposition which he calls divine, we seek torestore.] By pretense
of those words, you proclaim your own devises under the title of Gods
ordinance. Otherwise, the charge that Paul gives Timothy, makes strongly
for Bishops against your Presbyteries; but that we interpret his words by the
practice of the Church; and thereby conceive, that though the chief power and
care were committed to Bishops; yet their Presbyteries were not excluded. for
as then Bishops had no means to be directed or assisted, but only their
Presbyteries. Afterward, when upon the general prevailing of the Gospel on
the face of the earth, Synodes began to assemble; and the Pastors of diverse
Churches used by letters and meetings to confer about such orders and rules
as they thought needful to be observed in all their Churches; the
Presbyteries of every particular place had more leisure and leave to play, by
reason provincial Councils undertook the debating and resolving of those
doubts and difficulties that before troubled the Presbyteries. And as you tie
your President to the execution of such things as your Presbyters shall decree;
so the Primitive Church of Christ had greater reason and better ground to bind
her Bishops to see those things performed, which were concluded by general
assent of the Bishops and Pastors of any Province, Where you may see, upon
what occasion, the power of Presbyteries first decreased, not that Bishops
wrongfully encroched on their liberties, and violently ouer-mastered them; but
what things were before handled and debated in the Presbyteries of each place,
came now to be discussed and concluded in the Synodes and full assemblies of
all the Bishops and Pastors of one kingdom or Country. So that Synodes in
consultation and determination of all ecclesiastical griefs and causes, were
preferred by the Primitive Church of Christ, as Courts of greater judgment,
higher power, better experience and more indifferency, then Presbyteries; and
if malice do not blind you, you will confess the same.

Was it possible to find in any Presbytery, so many grave, wise, learned, and
sufficient men as in a Province: In Presbyteries, affections and factions
mightily prevail, by reason men that live together upon liking or disliking,
soon link together: In Synodes where all were strangers to themselves and to
the parties, no such thing could be feared. In Presbyteries it was easy for
the Bishop to have his forth, for that the rest were subject unto him, and
might many ways be displeased by him, if he would seek revenge: In Synodes
they were all his brethren and equals, no way in danger to him, and therefore
the more likely to be sincere and indifferent Judges. And as for authority,
I trust your selves do not mean in every Parish to erect a Pope and a
College of Cardinals, from whom there shall be no appeal, of whose wrongs
there shall be no redress, whose censures must stand indissoluble; that were
of all tyrannies the most intolerable. In all Christian societies, the whole
of like power and calling is greater then any part; and a Province must be
respected before a Parish. Wherefore Presbyteries must yield to Synodes; and
the Bishop of each place is more bound to regard and execute Synodal then
Presbyterall decrees.

This whiles you mark not, you imagine the whole Church of Christ conspired
against Presbyters to suppress them, and to change the Apostolical form of
regiment; where in deed the decrees of Councils and laws of Christian princes
moderating and determining all those doubts and questions which before were
examined in Presbyteries, caused them to be less needed and less regarded
then before; and charged the Bishop with the execution of all laws and Canons,
without assembling or consulting his Presbyters; superior Courts not
submitting their acts to the judgment of inferior officers. Wherefore, when
you rail at Bishops as usurpers and tyrants over their brethren, you forget
that after so many hundred years, all things being settled and guided by laws,
which your Presbyteries neither may reuerse, nor can correct; your Elders were
as good spare their pains, as loose their labors. More laws we need not,
better you cannot make; no man that has his right wits will choose to live
under the discretion of the Presbyters, rather then under the prescript of
written laws. Frustrate them when you will to make work for your
Consistories, and you shall find greater difference betwixt the equity and
certainty of the Canons, and the affectionate and inconstant headiness of
your Presbyters.

We would change no laws, but such as are Popish; and where now the Bishop
alone does all, we would join the Presbytery with him.] The laws that
vpheld the Popes superstition or usurpation are already abrogated, thanks be
to God; the rest that agree with the Canons of the Primitive Church, if you
seek to dissolve, I would wish you did publish the new, that men might see
them before you did exauthorate the old, least you make the people as lawless
as your Presbyters. It is easier to euert or disturb, then to plant or
establish a Church or common wealth. If you take not the same laws again, I
dare warrant your childrens children to the fourth generation, shall see
neither order nor peace in your Churches. And as for joining Presbyters with
the Bishop to execute laws, that is the way to multiply Bishops, and where we
have one, to make us twenty; but that is not the way to have laws more
speedily or sincerely executed. In a multitude, diversity of opinions
breeds delays, and hinders execution; in one it cannot; and if each man be
subject to affections, I hope the more, the worse. But what reason we whether
one or many shall execute the laws, when it is not in our hands to limite the
lawmakers to our choice: They that have power from God to make laws, have
like wise authority and liberty to choose who^ they will charge with the
execution of their laws; and therefore in Gods name, let both Councils and
Princes choose what persons they think meetest to see their Canons and Laws
observed; so long as they transgress not the rules of piety and equity.

Our chiefest care is for the right execution of Gods law; which we would not
have committed to the Bishop without his Presbyters.] Give the Bishop that
right and authority which Gods law allows him, and the join with him, whom
you can. What right is that?] You heard before. he must have Pastoral and
Paternall power; either wholly, if by Gods law there may be but one Pastor in
one Church; or chiefly, if there may be more in the same place to advise and
assist hun in governing the flock. More authority by Gods law we claim not
for Bishops, then to be Pastors of the places which they govern. And
Pastoral authority since you give to every Rector in his Church, what reason
have you to deny it to every Bishop in his Diocese?

We give no man Pastoral power over the Presbyteries; and as for Diocesses,
we say they are intrusions on other men's cures.] If by Gods law you assign
one Church to one man as Pastor of the same; then all the members of that
Church, be they Presbyters or people, must be subject to him as to their
Pastor, and he must have Pastoral authority over them, whatsoever they be.
And therefore this shift of yours, that the Presbyters shall have a President
over them by Gods ordinance, but no Pastor, is a mere collusion, repugnant as
well to the word as Church of God. for what do the Scriptures call your
President in respect of the Presbyters, if not a Pastor: Show us either his
name or his power in the new Testament; and if it be not equivalent with
Pastoral, we will exempt your Presbyters from all subjection. The power that
Timothy received, to restrain them from preaching false doctrine, and to
convent and rebuke such Presbyters as sinned, was it not Pastoral? And that
charge was to remain by the Apostles words, to him and his successors till the
coming of Christ. Your Pastors that you would erect in country parishes,
shall they not have Pastoral power over your lay Presbyters? shall your lay
Elders be sheep without ashepeheard? shall no man watch over their souls? If
your lay Presbyteries must have a Pastor over them in each country parish,
how comes it to pass that your Presbyteries in Cities may endure no Pastors
above them? Are they not all of one and the same institution by your own
rules? Is there one order in the Scriptures for rusticall Presbyteries; and an
other for civil? I think your selves ran hardly show any such distinction.
Wherefore when we give bishops Pastoral authority as well over their
Presbyters as over their people, we do it by the warrant of Gods word, that
makes them chief Pastors over their Churches, which includes both
Presbyters and people; and we therein give them no more then by your wills you
would give to the meanest Rectors of country parishes.

Pastors we are content they shall be over their flocks, but not over their
coequals and copartners.] Then no man may take or lead their flocks from
them, so long as they teach and guide them right: and consequently your
Presbyters may use no Pastoral power in any bishops charge without his liking.
For he is Pastor of the flock; and by Gods law they must hear and obey the
voice of their shepeheard. And as for the rest of the Presbyters, if you make
the^ copartners with him; that is, not helpers, but equals; you distract the
flock, and rent the Church into as many pieces as there be pastors. One flock
cannot have many pastors, except they be subordinate one under another: but
many pastors of equal power must needs have many flocks. Wherefore one Church
must have but one pastor, to whom therest, be they Presbyters or others, must
by Gods Law be subject and obedient, whiles he rightly directs them, and
woorthely rebukes them; otherwise against God and his truth, we must obey
neither man nor Angel. Yet to temper the Pastourall power of bishops that it
might be fatherly, as it has been always in the house of God even from the
beginning; and not Princely, for fear of reigning over the Lords inheritance;
the Church of Christ did in certain cases of importance not suffer the bishop
to attempt any thing without the consent of his Presbyters or a Synod. The
fourth Council of Carthage prohibiteth the bishop Council. Carthaginens. 4. ca.
23.
to hear and sententiate any man's cause without the presence of his Clergy,
as also it voideth and 32.
the gifts, sales and exchanges of ecclesiastical goods made by the Bishop
without the subscription of his Clarks. The Council of Hispalis. Council.
Hispalensis 2. ca. ^.
We decree according to the rule of the ancient fathers, that none of us
presume to degrade a Presbyter or Deacon without the examination of a Council.
for there are many that condemn them without discussing their causes, rather
by tyrannical power, then by Canonical authority. Many like cases there are
in which the bishop might not meddle, without his Presbytery or a Synod,
whereof some are altered by laws, some rest in force at this present.

Against this tyrannical power which you mention we repine; that Bishops
alone should excommunicate and deprive Presbyters at their pleasures.] Did you
acknowledge the Canonical authority of bishops, we should soon conclude for
the tyrannical; but under the show of the one you impugn the other, and when
you come to redress it, you establish a plainer tyranny in stead of it. True
it is that the frequencie of Synodes, did first rebate the credit and decaie
the use of Presbyteries. For when the bishops of each province, as by the
general Councils of Nice and Chalcedon they were bound, met twice every
year, to hear and moderate Ecclesiastical griefs and causes; Presbyters
were less regarded, and less employed then before, Synodes, as superior
Judges entering into the examination and decision of those things, which were
wont to be proposed in Presbyteries. And when private quarrels and questions
increasing, Synodes began to be tired with continual sitting about such
matters, and the bishops of most Churches to be detained from their cures and
attend the debating and deciding of griefs and displeasures betwixt man and
man, the burden grew so intolerable, that Synodes were forced to settle an
appeal from the bishop to the Metropolitan; and commit it to the care of the
Primate, what causes were fit for Synodall cognition. The Council of Sardica.
Council. Sardicens, ca. 14.
If any Bishop in a rage hastily moved against a Presbyter or Deacon, will
cast him out of the Church, we must provide that an innocent be not condemned,
and deprived the Communion. All answered; Let the party so eiected, have
liberty to fly to the Metropolitan of the same province, and desire his
cause to be more advisedly heard. The great Council of Africa finding how
troublesome it was for the bishops of that whole Region to meet and stay the
hearing of all matters, Council. Af^can. ca. 129.
chose out three of every Province to end causes undetermined; and by reason
they could not assemble twice a year for the length of the way, they were
contented with Ibidem ca. 19.
one full Council in the year, and left the causes and complaints of
Presbyters, Deacons and other Clergy men, first to the bishops that were
nearest, and then to the Primate or Metropolitan of the same province. Ibidem
ca. 2^.
We decree that Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferior Clergy men, if in
any matters they find themselves agreeued with the judgments of their own
Bishops; the Bishops that are nearest shall give them audience. And if they
think good to appeal from them, they shall not appeal to the Tribunals
beyond the Seas, but to the Primates of their own Province, even as we have
often decreed of Bishops.

These Canons did not establish but repress tyrannical power in bishops, if
any did assert it, and required the bishop before he proceeded against
Presbyter or Deacon, to take unto him assessours of the nearest bishops, such
as the parties conuented should demand; and if they could not end the cause
with the liking of both sides, then the Primate to have the hearing of it, and
lastly, the Council, if either part would appeal from the Primate. Thus
did the Bishops of the Primitive Church order the hearing of causes within
their provinces, neither prowdly nor Antichristianly, but in my judgment,
soberly and wisely referred them from the Bishop to the Primate; thereby to
ripen causes, and search into the truth of each complaint, with a great deal
less trouble and no less indifferency, then if it had been immediately
brought to the Council.

And were you as moderate as you be resolute, you would perceive what a
tedious labor it is, and in our State superfluous for a Synod of Bishops to
sit all a year long hearing private griefs, complaints and contentions, If
you be so desirous of it, I would you were for a while fast tied to it, that
you might learn to be wise; you would be the willinger as long as you lived
to let courts alone, and spend your time better then in examinations,
depositions and exceptions of witnesses. Howbeit in our realm unless you
change all your Ecclesiastical laws, I see not how Synodes or Presbyteries
should intermeddle with any such matters. for how shall your Presbyters judge?
by discretion, or by law? Your discretions I know no man so foolish that will
trust. What greater tyranny and injury can be urged on a christian realm, then
instede of Laws to offer the determinations of your Presbyteries? Shall each man's
safety and soul depend on your pleasures? But your Presbyteries you mean
shall be tied to execute the same Laws that are already settled. Alas good
men; how many hundred years will you ask before your Presbyteries in cities
and villages will be able to read them? and how many thousand before they
understand them? Are you well in your wi^^es to claim the execution of those
Laws for your Presbyteries, which they neither do, nor ever will conceive?
first set them to school, and when they can read law, send them to the
universities, and upon their growing to such perfection that they can hear and
decide each man's case by the Laws of this realm, make petition for them, to
have them authorized in every parish insteade of the Arches. If otherwise you
will have them sit Judges in all men's cases before they can read either Latin
or Law; the world will muse at your madness.

Your Bishops are no such great Lawyers.] And therefore they have the more
need of Chancellors and Registers that are better acquainted with the Laws
then themselves are, and as for appeals, unless you look to tread
government under your feet, and overrule all things by the mere motions of
your own wills, though they sometimes advantage offenders, yet were they
provided to protect innocents, and are Christian remedies to do every man
right that thinks he has wrong. They do not maintain the Antichristian
pride of bishops; there can be none other, nor better way to repress it,
then by appeal to bring the judgments of all their Courts and Officers to be
tried and examined by the princes power and delegates, which I trust you take
to be no tyranny. If corruption sometimes creep in through men's fingers to
bolster bad causes, the Laws are far from allowing, and I as far from
defending it. What has been so sacred, that covetousness has not expugned?
and your Presbyteries, except they consist of Angels, and not of men, will
soon show both what affections and what corruptions are in men, as well as
other Consistories.

Man's laws we leave to such as are skilled in them; we would have our
Presbyteries meddle no further then with rebuking and censuring of vice, as
Gods Law requires.] To admonish those Tite 3.
that err, reject th^se that persist, and 1. Timoth. 5.
rebuke those that sin, are Pastoral and not Presbyteriall duties by the
words of S. Paul. And he that is Pastor, has both word and sacraments
committed unto his care within his own Church. Wherefore, without their
pastor the Presbyters may not iudicially rebuke, nor publicly excommunicate
any man within his charge. They may preach the word, and so generally apply it
in the pulpit, they may dispense the Sacraments, and so not deliver them, where
they find men impeni^ent; but personally to convent them, or openly to sever
them from the fellowship of the church that belongs to the Pastor, and not
to the Presbyters. Saint Paul committed that power and care to Timothy, and
his successors, not to the Presbytery of Ephesus. The words are plain. 1.
Timoth. 5.
Against an Elder receive thou no accusation, but under two or three witnesses.
those that sin, rebuke thou openly, that the rest may fear. I charge (thee)
before God and the Lord Jesus, and his elect Angels, that thou observe these
things without proiudice or partiality, that is, without oppressing or
favoring any side. She withus much for your Presbyteries, and bring them in
with full fail.

Paul made Timothy no Monarch at Ephesus to do all this without the
Presbytery; but appointed him to be chief in these actions, and the
Presbyters to join with him.] Much less did Paul make him a voice-asker, to
know whether it should please the Presbyters to have these things done, or no.
The charge is precisely and exactlie Timothies, and not the Presbyteries; the
power therefore must be his and not theirs. All this notwithstanding, you
affirm against the words of the Apostle, and against the use of the Primitive
Church, that the Presbyters might overrule and censure Timothy, if he would
not be quiet; and in spite of Timothy do in all these things as they saw
cause; and this you barely suppose without any kind of proof. But either
show what warrant you have to claim this prerogative of Presbyters above and
over their bishops and pastors; or give us leave to believe the whole Church
of Christ expounding and practicing those words of S. Paul as we do; before
your slender and naked supposals. The private use of the keys in appointing
offenders upon the acknowledging of their sins, for a time to for bear the
Lords Table, we deny not to Presbyters; but the public use of the keys, to
exclude an impenitent and obstinate person from al fellowship of the faithful
as well sacred as civil; that the Church of Christ allowed always, and only
to bishops.

Origin says; By Origin. homil. 14 in Le^i, ca. 24
falling from truth, faith and love, a man geth out of the tents of the
church, though he be not cast our by the BISHOPS VOICE. Cypr. writing to a
bishop, that was reproched by his Deacon; says; Cypr. lib. 3. epist 9.
Use against him the power of your honor either TO DEPRIVE HIM, or REMOOVE HIM
from the communion. Ambros. offici^r. lib. 2. ca. 27.
The affection of a good Bishop, says Ambrose, wishes to heal the sick, to
remove cankred sores; to cauterize, not to cut off; lastly, that which can not
be healed TO CVT IT OF with sorrow. Hiero. ad Riparium aduers. Vigilantium.
I marvel, says Ierom against Vigilantius, the BISHOP, in whose charge he is
said to be a Presbyter, DOES NOT CRVSH this unprofitable vessel with the
Apostolic rod, and deliver him over (to Satan) for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved. August. de gratia and corruptione ca. 15.
There is no greater punishment in the Church (says Austen) then that
damnation, which THE EPISCOPAL IVDGEMENT pronounces; yet the Pastor must needs
sever the sick sheep from the whole, lest deadly infection reach unto others.
Chrysostom. homil. 5. in 2. cap. ad Hebrae^s.
If (says Chrysostom, giving y^ people admonition of a certain abuse crept in
amongst the^) we be despised, we shall be compelled to bring these threats to
effect, and to chastise you by the laws of the church. Be angry who list, I will
keep them from the church a long space as Idolaters. Bear with me, neither
let any man despise the bands of the church. It is not man that binds, but
Christ which has giue^vs this power, and made men masters of so great honor.
we desire not to be brought to that extremity; if we be, we will do our duty.
If any man break those bands, I have done my part; thou shall answer to him,
that COMMANDED ME to bind thee.

The Council of Nice willed Synodes to be kept twice every year, to examine
whether any Nio^n. Council. ca. 5.
Lay men or Clergy men were excommunicated, by the IMBECILITY, PERTINACY OR
INSOLENCY OF THE BISHOP; and such as were found to have OFFENDED THEIR
BISHOP, to stand excommunicate, til the Synod released them. The Council of
Antioch likewise decreed, that if Council. Antioch. ca. 6.
any Lay man Presbyter, or Deacon were excommunicated BY HIS OWN BISHOP, no
man should receive him to the communion, before he were restored by his own
Bishop, or by a Synod. The Council of Sardica in the same manner. Council.
Sardicens. ca. 13.
If any Deacon Presbyter or Clergy man be excommunicated, and fly to another
Bishop of his acquaintance, that knows he is deprived of the communion BY HIS
OWN BISHOP, the other must not with reproach to a Bishop and his brother,
receive that person to the communion. The Council of Taurine to which Ambrose
wrace, decreed touching Exuperantius a Presbyter, (that had reproched Triferius
his bishop, and was therefore by him put from the communion) Council.
Taurinatens. ca. 4.
vt in eius arbitrio sit restitutio ipsius, in cuius potestate eius abiectio,
hoc est, vt quando velide^ Exuper antius satisfecerit, vel episcopo Triferio
visum fuerit, tu^c gratiam communionis accipiat: That his restitution should BE
IN THE (Bishops) DISCRETION, in whose power the rejecting of him was. And
therefore when Exuperantius (the Presbyter) should make satisfaction, or
T^iferius the bishop be so content, then he should be received to the
communion. The Council of Africa takes order for such as Council. A^ric. ca.
28.
complain against the judgments of their own bishops, that they shall be heard
by the next bishops; but if any man fly Ibidem ca. 9.
(...), THE CANONICAL SENTENCE OF HIS OWN BISHOP, no man should receive him
to the communion. By which it appears that Gregory's words are very true,
where he says. Gregor. lib. 50. homiliarum homil. 26.
THE BISHOPS now in the Church holdethe places (of the Apostles.) THEY which
have that degree of regiment, HAVE AVTHORITIE to bind and loose. And
Theophilacts. Theophilact. in Mash. ca. 16.
THEY HAVE POWER to bind and loose, which have the grace of a BISHOPS OFFICE,
as Peterhad. The public use therefore of the keys, to excommunicate from al
Christian company, belonged to the bishop as pastor of the place. the
Presbyters sat with him; at first as assessors and consenters, before Synodes
undertook such causes; but after when once Councils began to have the
hearing of such griefs, then ^ate the Presbyters with the Bishop, only as
beholders and aduisers of his judgment, that the matter being public might be
handled with the more gravity and sincerity; not withstanding, to examine it,
or reuerse it, pertained only to the assembly of the bishops of the same
province.

If none but Bishops may ex communicate how do your Judges of the civil Law,
which are no Ministers take upon them to do it?] They take not upon them the
power of the keys committed to the Apostles and their successors; but
in^^ic^^ punishment for disobedience containing all those penalties, that by
law were ordained for such as contemned the keys of the Church, by what name
soever they call it. be it a suspension, condemnation or excommunication it
greatly skilleth not, so long as they claim it not by Gods Law, but by man's;
and yet if the sentence of the Canon wrappe all contempt within the band of
excommunication; I see no cause but lay Judges may denounce the offendour to be
within the compass of the Canon. for that is more then if they pronounced him
wilfully obstinate; and consequently to have incurred the sentence of
excommunication, which the Canon decrees. And of all men you should not be so
curious, which give your lay Presbyters power to consure their Pastor by
number of voices, and make excommunication to be the judgment of the whole
Church, comprising as well the people, as the Presbyters. for our parts, though
we take the power of the keys to be common to all that have Pastoral charge of
souls, in their degree; yet to avoid the infinite showers of excommunication,
which would ouerslow all Churches and parishes, and the intolerable quarrels
and brabbles that would ensue, if every Presbyter might excommunicate at his
pleasure; we praise the wisdom of Gods Church in suffering no inferior to
excommunicate without the Bishops consent and license; and for ought that I
know, we follow the same rule. Surely, had we two or three hundred
excommunicatours, where we have one, lightnings ^^ie not so fast about in a
tempest, as excommunications would in every diocese.

To increase the power of Bishops, you make them Pastors over Churches; but
when it comes to the discharging of Pastoral care, they be furthest off: but
grant them to be Pastors, they can be but over those Churches that are in
Cities; over whole shires they cannot be; since they can not be present in so
many places to do any Pastoral duties.] Had we first devised or else divided
dioceses for bishops, you might well have challenged us for making them larger
then Pastoral care might extend unto; but your quarrel in deed is not to the
length or breadth of their dioceses (which must wholly be referred to the
wisdom and consideration of the State;) you dislike that a Bishop should have
any Diocese at all or govern any Church besides that one wherein he teaches
and administreth the Sacraments. which nice conceit of yours not only
condemns the whole primitive Church of Christ that assigned Dioceses unto
bishops, but contradicts the very grounds and examples of that government
which the Apostles left behind them.

Did the Apostles appoint Dioeceses for Bishops? that were news indeed.] No
such news, but that your own Principles will confirm the same. for what order
say you did the Apostles leave behind them to govern the Church? Did they
trust one Pastor or Presbyter alone in each place to do as he thought good?
Or else did they provide direction and assistance in dangerous and doubtful
cases to guide him and help him in the government of the church? The power of
one man in each church to do what he will be he Pastor or Presbyter, your
selves affirm is Antichristian and devilish. And I think you say truth, if
he will have neither associats to restrain him, nor superiors to ouerlooke
him. That were to plant a Pope in every parish, with plenitude of power to do
what pleases himself. What you detest in Bishops, I hope you will not endure
in the Presbyter or Pastor of every parish church in the Country; that he
shall take upon him alone to guide his flock as he sees cause, without
consent or oversight of any man.

You may be sure we abhor it as the poison of all piety, and the very root
of Antichrists pride.] Means to avoid it I see none; but that every rural
Pastor must have either a Presbytery in the place with him; or the Bishop of
an other church appointed over him; that may both direct him and rule him as he
does the Presbyters of his own city. If he have no help at home, he must
needs seek it abroad. one of the twain is inevitable. Now for Presbyteries
there is no possibility to have either so many meet Clergy men, or so much
maintenance as will serve them in every country parish. fit Pastors for so
many places, putting one to a Parish, could never yet be found. Whence then
shall we get so many thousand able Presbyters as to furnish ^ch parish with
three or foure^ which are few enough, and too few, respecting the burden that
they must be are in the sight of God and man.

Again, had we store of men, which we have not, nor no age before us had;
from whom shall we have maintenance for them and theirs? From the people?
Half the realm of England employed to that use will etten but serve. The
people now yield a tenth part unto God and their Minister, which proportion
is so moderate, that where the parishes are small, the Pastor has work
enough to live thereon. then must they consequently give five parts of ten,
which is just the half of allthey have, before there can be any show of a
Presbytery in every parish. I do not ask you how well the people, that are,
God knows, poor enough in many places with these nine parts which they have,
will like to spare so much to the furthering of your fancies; or how a
Christian Prince can bigest to have all her subjects so disabled, and half the
realm allotted to support your conceits. these blocks and a hundred such you
never stumble at, whiles you run your selves out of breath to pursue the
perfection and profit of your discipline; but this I would know: did the
Apostles, besides the relief of the poor, which indeed is a divine precept,
impose this charge on every parish by Gods commandment? or did ever any
Christian kingdom or common wealth since Christ's ascension abide this yoke:
If they did, show the instance, and claim your maintenance; if you can show
no such thing, do you not perceive that your little fingers are heavier to
Gods people then the Apostles loins were: and that your discipline is far
greeuouser to the faithful, then their doctrine: The best is, you may talk
long enough, before either Prince or people, rich or poor will admit or endure
this chargeable frame of your needless and proofelesse government.

To amend these flawes, which rend the very body of your discipline in sunder,
(for hardly can so many Pastors in every parish be gotten, as you must have;
and more hardly maintained;) you are driven to change the very substance of the
Presbyteries that were in the Apostles times, and insteede of Ministers of the
word and sacraments, who preaching the Gospel must live of the Gospel, to
return us a quest of Lay Elders, which you thought might be found in every
place, and would not be so costly as the former; and to give them power to
impose hands, to bind and loose sins in heaven and earth, to censure
doctrine and manners in all men, even in Pastors, by deprivation,
excommunication or howsoever; and rather then they should miscarry, to make
them Teachers and Watchmen, Pastors and Bishops in the church of God,
contrary to the whole church of Christ, to all the ancient and learned Fathers
and Councils, and contrary no less to the Scriptures then to your own
positions. But Masters, you must either confound all, and make no difference
betwixt Pastor and people, which now you are fair for; or, will you, nill
you, you must exclude Lay Elders from these actions, which be proper to
Pastors; and so have no Presbyteries, but where meet men may be had, and in
Christian manner honored and succored for their pains. And consequently
country parishes, which by no means can be provided either of men or
maintenance sufficient for such Presbyteries, as the word of God allows,
must have their Pastors restrained by none, and subjected to none, but
Pope-like, if not Lucifer-like, to be more then Princes; or if that be not
tolerable, then must they be united and annexed to some city that lies near
them, and be governed by the bishop and Presbytery of that place even as the
churches in the city are, and so be part of his charge and diocefe.

How ancient Dioceses were in the church of God, and how generally received
and approved; will soon appear by the full consent of all antiquity. The
Council of Antioch renewed Council. Antioch, ca. 9.
(...), The Canon of their fathers anciently established, that no Bishop
should undertake (...): but those things only which pertained to his own
Church, and the country towns belonging to the same. Every bishop has full
power (...): in his own Church and in all the Country round about which is
under the jurisdiction of his city, to make Priests and Deacons and dispose
every thing discreetely. The general Council of Constantinople says;
Constantinopolita^. council, ca. 2.
(...): Bishops must not invade the Churches that are without the bounds of
their Dioecese, Ibidem.
vnlessethey be called, they may not pass the limittes of their own Dioecese
either for ordering of Ministers, or for any other Ecclesiasticalbusines, (...)
(...), observing the Canon that is already established of every man's
Dioecese. The general Council of Ephesus having report made unto them, that
the bishop of Antioch presumed to order in Cyprus without the compass of his
Diocese and Province, repressed that his enterprise, being as they term it,
Council. Eph^sini de^retum post aduentum Episcoporum Cypri.
(...). An innovation against the Ecclesiastical laws, and against the Canons
of the holy Apostles; and decreed the Bishops of Cyprus should hold their right
untouched and unviolated according to the Canons of the holy Fathers and their
ancient custom; adding there withal that the self same rule should be
observed in other Dioeceses and Provinces whatsoever, that no Bishop should
invade an others limits, which were not anciently, and from the beginning
subject to him or his predecessors.

The great Council of Chalcedon determines Council Chalcedonens. act. 15. ca.
17.
(...), that all rural Churches and Country parishes shall remain
immovable (or without alteration) to the Bishops that have had them;
specially if they have quietly possessed and governed them above thirty
years. for the enlarging of Dioceses upon the return of schismatikes and
heretics to the Church; and parting them with the consent of the former
Bishop, where the circuit was too wide and troublesome, or joining them where
the people so desired; he that will, may read the 57. 102. 103. 119. 120. 121.
122: Canons of the great Affricane Council. By which it is evident, that the
Bishop of every City besides his principal and Cathedral Church had the
villages and parishes of the Country round about that City belonging to his
Diocese and jurisdiction; and these partitions and distributions began even
from the Apostles and from the beginning, as the Council of Ephesus avouches,
and were confirmed and ratified by the four great and Oecumenicall Councils,
and received and continued by all the godly Bishops and Fathers of the
Primitive Church. Wherefore they be mightily deceived that think cathedral
churches, and Episcopal Dioceses to be a part of Antichrists pomp and pride,
and his first invention; the wisdom of Gods spirit devised and settled that
course even from the first enlarging of the church; and all the general and
prouincial Councils liked and allowed the same. There is almost no Council that
does not mention and confirm to every bishop his Diocese; and inhibite all
others to enter or intermeddle with any cause or person in an other man's
circuit. The Council of Ancypra suffers not the Council. Ancyr. ca. 13.
rural Bishops to ordain, without the license of the bishop of the City. The
Council of Neocesaria provides that Council. Neocasarie^s. ca. 13.
(...), the Presbyters of the same region, shall not minister the Lords Supper,
when the Bishop of the City is present. The Council of Gangris accurseth all
that assemble any Congregation for Divine service, Council. Began. grens^ ca. 6.
unless a Presbyter licenced by the Bishop be present with them. The Council
of Laodicea forbids any Council. Laodic. ca. 56.
Bishop to be made in Country towns and villages. The Council of Antioch
callethit Council. Antioch. ca. 9.
a Canon of their fathers, that antientlie stood in force, even as the
Council of Nice before them said it was Council. Nicen, ca 6.
an ancient use. The Council of Ephesus makes it an Council. Ephesians. post
aduentum episcoporum Cypriorum.
Apostolic rule. The Council of Carthage kept by Constantines procurement,
inhibited; Council. Carthag. 1. ca. 10.
Ne quis alienos fines vsurpet, aut alterius plebes sine eius petitu, quia inde
caetera mala omnia generantur: that no Bishop shouldvsurpe upon an others
borders, or cures without his request, because thence came all other mischief.
The Council of Sardica like wise; Council Sardicens ca. 18.
Illud prohibeat sanctitas vestra, vt nulli Episcopo liceat, alterius Episcopi
Ciuitatis Ministrum ecclesiasticum solicitare and in sua Dioecesi (vel suis
parochijs) ordinare. Let your Holiness prohibit, that no Bishop procure away
any ecclesiastical Minister of the Bishop of another City, and order him in
his own Dioecese, (or parishes.) The third Council of Carthage would have
Council. Carthaginens. 3. ca. 20.
no Bishop usurp over an othersflocks, nor encroch on his Colleague within his
Dioecese. The fourth Council of Carthage commanded the Corcil. Carthaginens 4
ca. 36
Presbyters that guided Churches through the Dioeceses to fet Chrisme not from
any Bishop, but from their own Bishop. The Council of Aurelia; Council.
Aurelianens ca. 19.
All the Churches that have been, or are daily builded in sundry places, we
decree according to the rule of the former Canons, that they shall be in the
power of that Bishop, in whose territory they stand.

As the use of Dioceses was ancient, so the reason that first occasioned them
was inevitable, even by the pattern of the Apostolic Discipline. For when
country towns and villages first began to receive the faith, how were they
furnished with fit Pastors, and how were their Churches governed but by the
Bishop and Presbytery of some city adjoining? Lay Presbyteries the church of
Christ never had any, yea the Scriptures permit none to rule Pastourall
actions; other Presbyteries those places were neither able to have, nor to
maintain. What now was left but only to submit and incorporate themselves
to the Bishop of some City near them, by whom their Churches might be both
guided and supplied, when any need required, even as the churches in cities
were: If to avoid schisines rising every where by the multitude of Teachers
and Pastors, Bishops were in the Apostles times placed throughout the world,
in all the cities that accepted the Gospel, to guide and moderate the
Presbyters that were many; shall we think this order was needful only for
cities, and needelesse for Towns and Uillages? Were not the Presbyters of so
many parishes as one shire does yield, as like to trouble the Region with
Schisms and heresies, as the Presbyters of the city: You lack sense, if you
think that dissension and error could not creep as well into Uillages as
into Cities; or that the Apostles provided one kind of regiment for cities,
another for country parishes. If all the churches in one city, which at Rome
were Optatus lib. 2. contra Parmenianum fol. 16.
above forty in Optatus time, were governed by one bishop; why might not the
Uillages, and Parishes conftning round about the City, be governed after the
same manner.

So that for Dioceses, as well the necessity, as the antiquity of them, is
evident. It was not possible in the Primitive church, to have Presbyters to
succeed in the roun^es of such as died in country parishes, but from the
bishop in whose Diocese the churches were. He supplied their wants out of his
own church and Presbytery, which served to store the whole Diocese.
Otherwise, within his circuit none other bishop could ordain a Presbyter;
nor without his leave might any Clergy man depart his church. The Council of
Antioch; Council. Antioch. ca. 22.
A Bishop may not invade an others City that is not subject to him, nor
Country not pertaining to him, to ordain any; neither he appoint Presbyters
or Deacons in places that are under an other Bishop unless it be with the
liking (or consent) of the Bishop of that Region or Country. The Council of
Nice; Council. Nicen. ca. 16.
If any Presbyters or Deacons or other Clergy men, not having the fear of God
before their eyes, nor knowing the Ecclesiastical Canon, leave their own
Church, they must not by any means be received in another Church. And if any
shall with-holde a Clergy man belonging to another, and ordain him in his
own Church, (the Bishop, from whom he departed, not agreeing,) his ordering
shall be utterly void. This was the general and perpetual discipline of
Christ's church in all the coasts and quarters of the world, as may appear to
him that will take pains to view these places. The Council of Constantinople
1. ca. 2. and 3. of Chalcedon. ca. 8. of Carthage the first, ca. 5. the second
ca. 11. the third ca. 20. and 21. the fourth ca. 27. of Orleance, ca. 22. of
Sardica, ca. 18. 19. of Taurine, ca. 6. of Aurenge, ca. 8. of Venice, ca. 10.
of Tours, ca. 9. 11. And so the Mileuitane Council, ca. 15. Affricane, ca. 21.
Aurelian the third ca. 15. the Epaunine, ca. 5. the Valentine, ca. 6. and
Aruernine ca. 9. and 10.

If these rules were universally and anciently observed, that no Presbyter
might remove from one church to another, nor depart from the church where he
was first called, without the consent of his bishop; neither might any other
man impose hands on him, or admit him and inuest him into any church, without
the liking and goodwil of the bishop, in whose diocese the church stood, and
of whose Clergy the party was: by no means could any country parishes in the
primitive church, have any Presbyters but from some city, and that not without
the liking and assent of the Bishop. which forced all country towns and
villages to matriculate and incorporate themselves into the church of some
city, by whose bishop, their Presbyters living, were governed; and dying, were
supplied, even as the churches in cities were. The reason of their doings, is
as evident as their fact. for if Bishops were placed by the Apostles hands to
ordain Presbyters and contain them in their duties, lest in so great a
number emulation might breed confusion, which all the Fathers were fully
resolved was the Apostles deed; they must needs be of opinion, the Apostles
meant to have Country Towns and Uillages guided and assisted the very same
way that they left for Cities; and the same men that governed the one, all
things considered, were the fittest to be trusted with the other.

If you object that the bishops of the Cities could employ no pastoral care,
but where they were present; I answer that all the Councils and Fathers of the
Primitive Church were not so ignorant as not to understand what Pastoral
oversight a bishop might yield to towns and Churches far distant from him,
though he were not present to dispense the word and Sacraments amongst them.
To see them always stored with a sound and able Pastor, that should watch over
their souls; to take care that they were rightly taught and soberly guided; to
keep both Presbyters and people from schisms, heresies and open impieties; to
direct in dangers, and determine doubts without troubling the whole province to
meet upon every particular occasion and contention; these be good parts of
pastoral vigilancie, and very needful effects of episcopal regiment, which
may be performed as well in a Diocese as in a City.

In any man's harvest he that labors himself, and ouerseeth the rest, does
more good then any other. In each man's house, the steward that well orders
and guides the family is more profitable then any of his fellows. In Gods
house and harvest, shall the ouerlooking of others be counted either needelesse
or fruitless? Saint Paul himself knew not these curious positions when he
appointed Tite to take the charge and oversight of the whole Island of Creete;
and saw no cause why one man might not perform many Pastoral and Episcopal
duties to all that were in the same Country with him. But what seek I more
examples, when we have the pattern from the Primitive Church that first
allotted Dioceses to bishops, and the liking and approbation of all provincial
and general Councils that ratified and confirmed as well the partition as
distinction of territories, and charged each man's interest in every diocese to
be preserved without infringing any man's bounds, or encroching on any man's
right.

The need that you pretend of having Dioeceses, as well for the guiding as
furnishing of country parishes by the Bishops and Presbyteries of the cities,
we easily avoid for in every parish with the Pastor we appoint lay Elders, by
whose counsel as Ambrose witnesses al things should be done in the Church;
and when the former Incumbent is dead, were serve the electing of a new to the
people of the same parish to whom by Gods Law it appertains. And here we let
you understand that you have not so good warrant for the regiment of Bishops,
as we have for the election of Bishops and Pastors by the people. The
Scriptures are clear with us; the fathers often and earnest; the perpetual
use of the Primitive Church is so full with us in this behalf, that no example
can be showed to the contrary. Your Bishops therefore being not elected by the
people, are no true Pastors in the Church of God.] I know well you have no
other shift to avoid the necessity of Episcopal regiment, but by your lay
Presbyteries, and therefore you must cleave to them, or else admit the form of
governing the Church by Bishops, to be Catholic and Apostolic, which would
gripe you to the very hearts. But how far both the word and Church of God
are, and ever were from mentioning or acknowledging any lay Elders to be
imposers of hands, and governors of Pastoral and Ecclesiastical actions, we
have already seen, and may not now regresse thither again. Feign would you
fasten them on Ambrose, but of all the Fathers he is the unfittest Proctour
for your Lay Presbyteries. he brusheth them off as a man would thorns that
hang at his heels. If you believe him not alleging the Romans Laws against
your Lay Elders, beleeeue him speaking in an open Council against them.
Council. Aqulleiense in condemnations Palladis.
Sacerdotes de Laicis iudicare debent, non Laici de Sacerdotibus. Priests
ought to judge of Lay men, not Lay men of Priests. And condemning Palladius
the heretic; we are ashamed (says Ambrose) that he should seem to be
condemned of Lay men which chalengeth to be a Priest. In hoc ipso damnandus
est, quod Laicorum expectat sententiam, cum magis de Laicis Sacerdotes iudicare
debeant. He Is WORTHY TO BE CONDEMNED EVEN FOR THIS VERY POINT, that he
expects the judgment of Lay men, whereas Priests ought rather to judge of
Lay men.

How sufficient the bar is that you lay against our Bishops and Presbyters
because they are not elected by the people of each place, but named by the
Prince, and presented by the Patron, the Chapter now presently following
shall fully declare.

CHAP. XV. To whom the election of Bishops and Presbyters does rightly
belong, and whether by Gods law the people must elect their Pastors, or no.
The want of popular elections is one of the griefs you conceive, and
exceptions you take against the Bishops of this Realm; which quarrel does not
so much touch the office and function of Bishops, as it does the Princes
prerogative. Did we teach, it were not lawful for the people to elect their
Pastor, you might make some show against us; now, when we say no such thing,
but you rather think, the Prince may not name her Bishops without the consent
and election of the people; you impugn not us, but directly call the Princes
fact and her laws in question. I take not advantage of man's law, thereby to
decline the force of your reasons or authorities, but to put you in mind, that
if there were any defect in the law, it must not be ascribed to Bishops, but
imputed rather to the makers of the law. Howbeit, to tell you the truth, I
think there will be found better reason for the making and maintaining the
law, then you will be able to bring for the repealing or altering the law for
when superstition and blindness wholly possessed the peoples hearts, as in time
of Popery; how could the Prince have restored Religion, or reformed the
Church, if the people through the Realm had still been suffered to choose
themselves Pastors after their own desires: The first occasion of the law
being good and godly; what ground have you to dislike the continuance thereof:

Cyprian says it is Gods ordinance that the people should ekct their Pastor,
and Cypr. li. 1. epist. 4.
according to the divine instruction, the same is observed in the Acts of the
Apostles in the choice of Matthias, and of the seven Deacons.] Those examples I
have answered before. It is not written that Matthias and his fellow were
chosen by the multitude; an Apostle might not be chosen by men, his calling
must be immediate from God. Yea, the words of the Text are. Act. 1.
Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men, show which of these twain thou
have chosen, to take the office of this administration and Apostleship. So that
thence can nothing be concluded. As for the choice of the seven in the Acts of
the Apostles, Epiphanius says; Epiph. li. 1. ^^. 1. de aduen^u Christi in
^arn^m.
Of the seventy Disciples were the seven (...), that were set over the
widows. The Council gathered under Justinian, alleging Chrysostomes words
upon that place, concludes of them in this wise. Concilii in Trullo sub
Iustiniano, ca. 16.
We therefore denounce that the foresaid seven Deacons must not be taken for
those that served at the mysteries, but for such as were trusted with the
dispensation of the common necessities of those that were then assembled
together. Jerome alluding to this place calls a Deacon, Hiero. ad Euagrium.
mensarum and viduarum Minister, the servant of tables and widows. The fourth
Council of Carthage, says; Concilii Carthag^. 4. ca. 4.
The Bishop alone shall lay his hands on the head of a Deacon, when he is
ordered, quia non ad Sacerdotium, sed administerium consecratur; because he is
consecrated not to any Priesthood, but unto a service. Your selves give the
Deacons no charge in the Church, but the care of the poor; as persuaded that
these seven received none other function at the Apostles hands. You therefore
by your own rules are excluded from taking any hold of this election. And in
deed since they were not chosen to be Presbyters and dispensers of the word
and Sacraments; what consequent can you frame from their electing by the
people, to force the like to be observed in Presbyters and Bishops?

You give them power to preach and baptize; against you therefore the argument
is good.] The Primitive Church gave them leave so to do in cases of
necessity, where Presbyters wanted; otherwise, neither do we, nor did they
make them Presbyters and Ministers of the word and Sacraments. Tertullian
says; Tertul. de baptism.
Presbyters and Deacons may baptize, with the Bishops leave. Jerome says,
that Hiero. aduers. Luciserianos.
Presbyters and Deacons in lesser and far distant Towns, did baptize, but
not without the Bishops license. Gelasius Episc^pu per Lucaniam and Siciliam
constituti^.. 9.
We appoint the Deacons (says Gelasius) to keep their own measure, and to
enterprise nothing against the tenor of the Canons of our forefathers. Without
a Bishop or a Presbyter, let not (a Deacon) presume to baptize, unless in
their absence extreme necessity compel, which is often permitted unto Lay
christians to do. The church of Rome did not give the^ leave to baptize, but in
cases of necessity when others could not be gotten, as they did Lay men. for
my part, though Saint Luke in the Acts do not give them the name of Deacons;
and Chrysostom expressly thinks they were made Chrys^st. homil. 14. in acta
Apostolorum.
neither Presbyters nor Deacons, whose judgment the Council in Trullo
follows; yet by Saint Paul's precepts teaching us what conditions he
required in those that should be Deacons, I collect their office was not only
a charge to look to the poor, but also to attend the sacred assemblies and
service of the Church and even astep to the Ministry of the word. Ignatius
says to Heron the Deacon of Antioch; Ignat. ad Heronem Antiochia Diaconum.
Do nothing without the Bishops; for they are Priests, thou do but attend
on the Priests. They baptize, consecrate the mysteries, (...), impose hands to
ordain and confirm, thou do (in these things) but minister unto them, as
holy Stephen did to James and the Presbyters at Jerusalem. And so Cyprian:
Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 9.
Diaconos post ascensum Domini in caelos Apostoli sibi consti^nerunt
Episcopatus sui and ecclesiae ministros. The Apostles after the Lords
ascension into heaven appointed Deacons to attend both on the Church, and on
their Episcopal function. Iustine Martyr an hundred years before Cyprian,
says of his time; Justinius Apologia 2. ad Antoninum p. um.
After the chief amongst us has given thanks, and all the people said Amen,
those that with us are called Deacons give unto every one present, of the
sanctified bread and wine; and carry there of to such as are absent. The
Council of Ancyra willed Deacons that sacrificed unto Idols in time of
persecution Council. Ancyranni. ca. 2.
(...), to cease from all sacred service in the Church, and neither to deli^er
the (Lords) bread or cup, or to speak openly to the people (in time of
prayers.) For I interpret (...), not to preach, but to command the people
silence, attention and devotion, which the Deacons used to do whiles the
divine service was performed at the Lords Table. Whatsoever their office was,
it is certain, they were not Presbyters and Ministers of the word and
Sacraments; and therefore from the election of those seven in the Arts, to make
a general and precise rule for the choice of al Presbyters and Bishops to the
worlds end, is but astraine of your forwardness; it has neither cause nor
consequent in any learning.

You make final account of it, but Cyprian esteemed this to be proof
sufficient to make it Gods ordinance. you shall hear his words. Cypr. lib, 1.
epist. 4.
The people chiefly has power to choose worthy Priests, and refuse unworthy.
The which we see descended from the divine authority, that the Priest should
be chosen in the presence of the people under all men's eyes, and be approved
to be worthy and fit by public judgment and testimony; as in Numbers God
commands Moses, saying; Number. 20.
Take Aaron thy brother, and Eleazar his son, and thou shall bring them to
the mount before all the assembly, and put off Aarons garments, and put them
on Eleazar his son. Before all the multitude God wills the Priest to be
made; that is, he instructs and shows that Priests should not be ordained
but with the knowledge of the people standing by; that by the people present,
the offenses of the evil may be detected, or the deserts of the good
commended; and that to be counted a lawful and true ordination, which is
examined with the voices and judgment of all, which afterward according to
Gods instruction was observed in the Acts of the Apostles, when Peter spoke to
the people of ordaining a Bishop in Judas place. Neither only shall we find
that the Apostles observed this in the ordaining of Bishops and Priests, but
also of Deacons. Which surely was therefore so diligently and warily done, the
whole multitude being called together, lest any not worthy should by stealth
get either the place of a Priest, or to serve at the Altar. Wherefore it must
be duly retained and kept, as coming from the divine tradition and Apostolic
observation, which is used with us and almost in all provinces, that in rightly
ordaining, the next Bishops of the same Province resort to the people for whom
they ordain a Ruler, and the Bishop to be chosen in the presence of the
people, which best knows the life of each one, and has viewed all the manner
of his conversation. It is a notable place, I was loath to leave out any,
though the words were somewhat long.] I would as soon have believed your
report of the words, had it bin true, as your repeating them; but you have
done well to put the matter out of doubt, and somewhat eased me by alleging
them. for now I shall not need but to refer you to your own allegation.

I have much mused with my self, what should lead you to make so great
account of this place as you do; I could never see any such thing as you
intend, either contained in the Scriptures, which Cyprian brings; nor
expressed in the reason which he gives for this kind of choice, nor enforced
in the heat of those words by which he summeth his collection. The places of
Scripture say nothing for your purpose; Eleazar was not chosen by the people,
but expressie by God, and by him alone. Your selves I hope will discharge that
quotation, as erroneous and mistaken. There are no such words in the text, as
Cyprian cites, there were no such deeds. God willed Moses to Number. 20. verse.
25. 26.
bring Aaron and Eleazar his son up into Mount Hor, (whither the people
neither did nor might ascend,) and there to put off Aarons garments, and to put
them on Eleazar his son. And verse 27.
they (three) went up into the mount Hor in the sight of the Congregation
(standing beneath;) and only two, verse. 28. 29.
Moses and Eleazar (Aaron dying in the top of the Mount) came down from the
Mount. Whereby all the Congregation saw that Aaron was dead, and they wept for
him thirty days. The Congregation did not intermeddle by word or deed with
this election; Eleazar as the eldest son was called for by God to succeed in
his fathers place. Out of this you may gather that God advanced the eldest
son to have his fathers office; not that the people elected him: it was not
in their power to appoint, who should stand before the Arc to minister unto
the Lord.

The choice of Matthias helps you as much, as the apparelling of Eleazar did.
I have often said, you may remember it, the people had no power to choose an
Apostle, no more then they had to choose Eleazar. He must have his calling
from God and not from men; and so Matthias had. The faithful did all
acknowledge, that he was the party whom God had chosen to take Judas place,
they did not elect him. The words of Saint Luke are manifest; Act. 1. v. 24. 25
Thou Lord show whether of these twain thou have chosen to take the room of
this Apostleship. To the choice of the Seven I have oftentimes spoken, I shall
not need to distrust your memory. You have not forgotten the Apostles words to
the people; Act. 6. v. 2.
It is not meet, that we should leave the word of God to serve the tables.
They meant not the Lords table; the care thereof the Apostles did not
transfer from themselves to any others; but because the Grecians murmured
that their widows were neglected in the daily ministering, that care the
Twelve committed to such as the people would like and elect. What can be urged
out of these Scriptures, let those that be wise, judge; my capacity is so
slender, that I see utterly nothing euinceable by these examples.

Neither does Cyprian stretch the places to give the people by Gods law the
election of their Bishops; he saw the precedents would enable no such
consequent; he urges by Scripture the peoples presence to this end, that
their testimony should be had touching the life and behavior of the party
that shall be chosen, least an unworthy and wicked person should secretly
steal to the office and function of a Bishop. He says, it contineth from
divine authority; Cypr. li. 1. epist. 4
vt Sacerdos plebe praesente deligatur, that a Priest should be chosen in the
presence of the people; and that ordinations ought not to be made, nisi sub
populi assistentis conscientia, but with the knowledge of the people standing
by. Now why the people should be present, he notes in these words, vt vel
bonorum merita praedicentur, vel malorum crimina detegantur; that as well the
merits of the good might be acknowledged, as the faults of the lewd
discovered, by the presence of the people, quae singulorum vitam plenissime
nouit, and vniuscuiusque actum de eius conuersatione perspexit, which knows
each man's life most exactly, and has tried his behavior by his conversation.
Though Cyprian^ proofs do not conclude the peoples presence by Gods law to
^ee required in the choice of Bishops, yet Cyprians meaning is very good, and
agrees both with the order of the Primitive Church, and with Saint Paul's
prouiso, that a Bishop 1. Tim. 3. v. 7.
must be well reported of, even of them that are without, as also that he
must be no follower of wine, no fighter, no brawler, no filthy gayner, no
desirer of money, but ruling his house honestly, and having his children in
obedience; in effect, one whose life and conuer^ation the whole Church
commended, and the adversary could not challenge. Notwithstanding, you may not
hence collect that the principal and essential right of electing by Gods
law, consists in the peoples voices; you nor no man living can deduce any
such thing out of the Scriptures. The Apostle that we read, used no such form
of elections, as in the chapter before I was occasioned more at large to show.
And since we have neither precept nor example of the Apostles for the people
to choose their bishops, I think you will hardly make any demonstration for
your popular elections by the Scriptures.

We have places ynow in the new Testament, but that you eleuate and elude
them; and besides, we have the general and full consent and use of the
Primitive Church, to justify our interpretation of those places to be
agreeable to the truth of the word, but sometimes you do allege and esteem
the universal custom of the Church and exposition of the Fathers, when they
make for you; and sometimes when they please you not, you reject them as fast.]
Do us no wrong; we refuse nothing that the ancient and Primitive church of
Christ universally observed and practiced as expressed or intended in the
Scriptures. It is your manner, it is not ours, to think no churches, councils
nor Fathers ever understood the necessary points of doctrine and discipline
mentioned in the word before your selves. If the whole church of Christ made
any such conclusion out of the Scriptures for the popular election of bishops
as you do, we will presently receive it; if not, stay your vaunts, till you
bring their warrants; and by that time your heat will be well delayed. you
show one that after his manner is eloquent and vehement, for that he takes in
hand; but his proofs are weak, if not mistaken; his purpose is, to have the
peoples presence and testimony to witness their lives that shall be chosen;
his confession is, that this was not general; though in favor of his cause he
says, Apud nos, and fer^ per Prouincias vniuersas tenetur, It is so observed
with us, and almost in all Provinces.

The whole Church afterward kept that order in electing their Bishops.] What
course they kept, we shall quickly find; all the question will be, whether
they required the peoples voices as necessary by Gods commandment, which may
not be broken, neither for Prelates nor Princes; or whether they used that
kind of election as an order in Christian assemblies fittest to preserve the
peace of the Church, and to maintain the good liking of the people toward
their Pastors. It shall therefore be best, first to consider, where the holy
Ghost lays the burden and charge of these elections; then, what freedom the
wisdom of God leaves to the multitude or Magistrates of each City and
Country. These things well marked, will deliver us from wandering and erring,
as touching Gods ordinance.

The Apostle writing to Timothy and Tite; first, describes what manner of men
must be admitted to the office of a Bishop; and then assures the Ordainers
that if they lay hands on any other then on such, they communicate with the
sins of as many as they advance unfit for that place. 1. Tim. 5.
Lay hands hastily on no man; neither be partaker of other men's sins;
keep thy self pure. Hiero. in 1. ca. epist. ad Tit.
Let the Bishops hear, says Jerome, that have power to appoint Presbyters in
every City, with what condition the order of ecclesiastical constitution is
tied; neither let them think they are the Apostles words, but Christ's.
Whereby it is evident, that they which contemning the Apostles precept, give
any man an ecclesiastical degree for favor, not for desert, do against
Christ. Chrysostom. Paul Chrysostom. him. 10. in 1. ad Tim.
meaning to entreat of a Bishops office, shows what manner of man in all
things a Bishop must be, not giving it as a warning to Timothy; but speaking
unto all, and by him directing all. And again upon those words, I charge thee
before God and Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou keep these
precepts, Lay hands hastily on no man; he says, Idem hom. 16. in 1. ad Tim.
Paul terrifieth Timothy, and having so done, he mentions that which is
most needful, and chiefly holds the Church together, (...), even
ordination. Lay hands hastily on no man, neither communicate with other men's
sins. What is hastily? not upon the first trial, not upon the second, not
upon the third, but oftentimes examining, and exactlie sifting the party. The
case is dangerous, thou shall bear the punishments of his sins, who art the
occasion of them, for remitting the former offenses out of time, thou shall
answer for those that are after committed, as being the cause of them; and
likewise for those that are past, as not letting him alone to lament and repent
them. And Ambrose, (Paul) Ambrosin 1 ad Tim. ca. 5.
charge Timothy before God the father, and Christ his son, and the elect
Angels. Under this charge he commands those things to be kept which pertain
to ordination in the Church, least easily any man should get an
ecclesiastical dignity, but in quisition be first had of his life and manners,
that a meet and approved Minister or Priest may be appointed; neither any to
be ordained whose faults deserve suspicion, least the ordainer be defiled with
his sins and offenses. for he sins, which ordains, and tries not.
Occumenius, Where Paul says to Timothy, Occumenius in 1. ad Tim. ca. 1.
I prayed thee to stay at Ephesus, adds; Idem in 4. and
(...) there had Paul ordained him a Bishop. Idem in 4. and
Let no man despise thy youth,] for a Bishop must speak with authority, 5.
ca. 1. ad Tim.
He gives precepts not to Timothy alone, but to every Bishop. And upon these
words, Lay hands bastilie on no man.] 5. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Paul treats of ordinations, for he wrate to a Bishop. And so writing on the
epistle to Tite, he says; Paul Idem in 1. ca. epist ad Titum.
left Tite to make Bishops in every City, having first made him a Bishop.
Primasius likewise; Primasii praefatio in 1. ad Tim.
Timothy was a Bishop, and Paul's disciple; to him by writing he gives
authority to correct all ecclesiastical discipline, and to ordain Bishops
and Deacons. And again, Idem in 5. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Be not partaker of an other man's sins. Paul says; It is a communion with
another man's sins, when one is ordained and not examined. As therefore in
ordaining evil men, he is partaker of their sins which ordains such; so in
the ordaining of the holy, he is partaker of their righteousness which did make
choice of so good men. The peril of ordaining Bishops and Presbyters by Paul's
own confession, lies ineuitablie on such as impose hands; and therefore by
Gods law they must have power to examine who be fit, and liberty to refuse
those that be unfit. For as without them there can be none ordained; so if
rashly or corruptly they lay hands on any, they be partakers of their sins.

Further, with elections of the Scriptures do not meddle, save that Timothy
(as the Fathers affirm by occasion of Paul's words) was chosen Bishop by
prophecy; that is, by the direction and appointment of the holy Ghost, and not
by voices. Oecumenius, Oecumenius in 4. ca. 1. ad Tim.
(...). By the commandment (or appointment) of the spirit, were Bishops (at
first) made, and not at randon. So Theodorete. Theoder. in 1. ca. 1. ad Tim.
Thou vndertookest this order by divine revelation. Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
hons. 5. in 1. Tim. 1.
Paul to stir up (Timothy) puts him in mind who choose him, and who
ordained him, as if he had said; Thou wast chosen of God; he himself put thee
in trust, (...). thou wast not made by men's voices. And Theophilact;
Theophilact. in 1. Tim. ca. 1.
Anciently by the oracles and appointment of the Prophets, that is, by the holy
Ghost, Priests were straight way ordained. So was Timothy chosen to be a
Priest. Ambrose says; Timothy was Ambros in 1. Tim. 1.
predestined when he was taken by the Apostle, to this end that he should be
ordained, as judged worthy to be a Bishop. This kind of election I take was
usual in the Apostles times; the spirit of God directing them on whom they
should lay their hands; other election of Pastors and Teachers, I read none
specified in the sacred writings. Popular election of Bishops I find afterward
practiced in the Primitive Church, but not mentioned in the Scriptures; and
therefore well may the peoples interest stand upon the grounds of reason and
nature, and be derived from the rules of Christian equity and society; but
Gods law does not meddle with any such matter, nor determine more then I
have told you; which is, that such Bishops as ordain them shall answer for
them with the peril of their own souls, if they do not carefully look
into the ability and integrity of all that they authorize with imposition of
hands to guide or teach the flock of Christ.

When I say the people can not challenge by Gods law the right to choose their
Bishop, I mean, no such thing is expressed and commanded in the Scriptures;
excluding thereby the false conceits of some fanaticall spirits in our days,
which affirm our Bishops and Teachers to be no true Pastors, because they
are not chosen by the particular voices and personal Suffrages of the people;
and by consequent, our Sacraments to be no Sacraments, and Church no Church;
and so this whole Realm to be drowned in confusion without assurance of
salvation; whose madness is rather to be chastised by the Magistrate, then to
be refused by doctrine; the authors being void not only of learning which
they despise, but of reason to weigh what is said against them. Otherwise, I
acknowledge each Church and people, (that have not by law, custom or consent
restrained themselves) stand free by Gods law to admit, maintain, and obey no
man as their Pastor without their liking, and so the peoples election by
themselves or their rulers, depends on the very first principles of humane
fellowships and assemblees. for which cause though bishops by Gods law have
power to examine and ordain, before any may be placed to take charge of
souls; yet have they no power to impose a Pastor on any Church against their
wills, nor to force them to yield him obedience or maintenance without their
liking. How far authority, custom and consent may prejudice and overrule
this liberty, which Gods law leaves undiminished, shall anon be handed;
when once we see what order the Primitive Church observed in her elections of
Bishops and Presbyters.

The Churches of Christ had aunciently two ways to be provided of Bishops and
Presbyters. the one, Election; the other, Postulation. When the Bishop of any
City died, whose Church had store of Clergy men to succeed; Cypr. li. 1.
epist. 1
the Bishops of the same Province that were nearest to the place, by conference
amongst themselves appointed a day to resort thither, and advertised both
people and Presbyters thereof. At which time the Clergy and Laity assembling
in the Church, so many Bishops as conveniently might (but under three they
could do nothing) came thither; and there heard both whom the Clergy named,
and whom the City liked. If all, or the most of every sort agreed, the party
was pronounced chosen, and another day prefixed to ordain him, the Bishops
proposing his name, and the time on the Church doors, and requiring every man
that could or would object any thing against him, to be then and there ready
with his proofs and witnesses. At their next repair, the Bishops that came to
give imposition of hands, heard advisedly what each man could charge him with;
and if in their consciences the elect proved to be such as the Apostle
prescribed, they ordained him in the eyes of all men Pastor of that Church,
and burdened him with the due observation of Gods and man's laws. If they found
any just impediment, they rejected him as unfit, and proceeded to the like
election of some other, on whom both Presbyters and Citizens could accord.
Alexander Seuerus the Roman Emperor, did commend and imitate the Christians
manner in trying and examining their Presbyters and Bishops. Aelius Lampridius
in Alexand. Sever.
When he would send (says Lampridius) any Rulers to the Provinces, or make
Governors, he proposed their names, exhorting the people, that if any could
object any crime, they should make just proof; and used to say it were a shame
not to do that in the Rulers of the Provinces, which the Christians did in
proclaiming their Priests that were to be ordained.

When the Cities had not store of Clergy men, or not such as they liked, they
were forced to seek a Bishop from another church; and then did they go to the
Bishop of the chief or mother City in the same Province, and of him desired
to have such a man for their Bishop; or else some other, whom the Metropolitan,
that is, the Bishop of the mother Church or City should think fit for them.
This was called Postulation. Upon their request, the Metropolitan, conferring
with the Bishop whose Presbyter was desired, and calling unto him at the least
two other Bishops, tried and examined the party liked, after the same manner
that others were, and then ordained him; or if he were rejected, some other
likewise tried, and approved to be Ruler of the Church that wanted a Pastor.

And as to keep the people from faction, and the Presbyters from ambition, the
Bishops of the same Province were appointed to be present at the choice, and to
see the election go forward in Christian and decent manner, without corruption,
canuasse or tumult: so to restrain the Bishops that they should not disorder
the action for hatred or favor of any side, the whole order of their
proceeding was to be intimated to the Metropolitan, before they imposed
hands; and if any just complaint were made of their partiality, the
Metropolitan had power to stay them from going forward, and with a greater
number of Bishops to discuss, and upon cause to reuerse the Election. The
Council of Nice wills Concilii Nice, ca. 4.
a Bishop to he made by all the Bishops of the same Province, and if any
difficulty suffer not all to assemble, yet at least three to meet, and the
rest by letters to give their consent before the party be ordained. Yea, they
made it a clear case, that Ibidem ca. 6.
if any were ordained without the knowledge of the Metropolitan, he should be
no Bishop; as also that if any diversity of judgments grew amongst the
Bishops, the voices of the most part should prevail.

For the making of Presbyters, there did not assemble so many Bishops, since
one was sufficient to lay hands on the^, howbeit the same order was observed
in trying and examining Presbyters that I mentioned before in Bishops; and the
public testimony of y^ people touching their conversation was not omitted,
except the Bishops were so assured of their good behavior, that they would
take it upon the burden of their own souls. Concilii Carthaginens. 3. ca. 22.
Let no man be made a Clergy man* (says the third Council of Carthage) nisi
probatus vel Episcoporum examine; vel populi testimonio; unless he be allowed
by ye examination of the Bishops, or by the testimony of the people. And
likewise, Concilii Carthagi. 4. ca. 22.
The Bishop must not ordain Clerks without the counsel of his Clergy, and
have also theassent and testimony of the Citizens. The people might not elect
Presbyters, the council of Laodicea did utterly prohibit it; Concilii
La^dice. ca. 13.
The multitude must not make choice of such as shall be called (...) to be
Priests: (for (...) is either y^ place where they sat, or the office which
they bare) yet might they present such as they took to be meet men for that
place, to the Bishop, and pray him to examine and allow the^ according to his
discretion; yea, they were desired by the Bishop to find out such amongst
themselves, as they supposed for learning and life to be fit for that calling,
though unknown as yet to the bishop, and to offer them, that he with the
help of his Clergy might try them whether they were answerable to the Canons
of the Church, and worthy that function. So was S. Austen Possidonius de vita
Augustini, ca. 4.

August. epist. 148.


violently caught by the people, when Valerius exhorted them to look out of
themselves some meet men to be dedicated to the service of God, and brought to
the Bishop to be ordained. The like August. de adulterinis coniugiis ad
Pollentium, li. 2. ca. 2.
violence was offered to many by the people, as Austen confesses. Jerome
touches this order of presenting by the people, when he says to Rusticus,
Hiero. ad Rusticum Monachu^ de videndi forma.
Cum ad perfectam aetatem veneris, and te vel populus, vel Pontifex ciuitatis
in Clerum elegerit: when thou co^mest to perfect years, and either the people,
or the bishop of the city choose thee into the Clergy; thereby noting that in
cities some were assumed by the Bishop; some offered by the people as meet men
to be taken into the number of Clergy men.

In country parishes when they wanted, they desired a Presbyter or Deacon of
the Bishop in whose dioces they were; and he according to their necessities did
furnish them out of his own Presbytery, or out of the store of some other
Church in his diocese; and if he were not able to do it, they repaired to the
Metropolitan, who did furnish them out of the whole Province. Concilii Afri^^.
ca. 5^.
It happens often (says Aurelius Bishop of Carthage in the Council of
Africa) that Churches which want Deacons, Presbyters or Bishops, ask them of
me; and I mindful of the Canons send to the Bishop under whom he is, and
acquaint him that his Clarke is desired of this or that Church. and hitherto
they have not withstood, but least hereafter it fall out that they deny me
requiring this of them, if I demand any such thing of one of my fellow Bishops
with two or three of your place joining with me, and he be irreligious (and
not regard me) your charity must determine what I shall do. for you know that
I sustain the care of many Churches and ordinations. They answer; This seat
has had always liberty whence soever to ordain a Bishop that was desired of
him, at the instance of any Church. One Bishop may ordain many Presbyters, but
a Presbyter meet for a Bishoprike is hardly found. Three at least were
requisite to impose hands on a Bishop; but any one Bishop might ordain
Presbyters, as the ancient Canons of the Church import; Canones Apostolici,
ca. 1. 2.
Let a Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops; but a Presbyter, Deacon,
and the rest of the Clergy by one Bishop.

The Primitive manner of electing Bishops we see; wherein I observe; first, that
the bishops who were to impose hands, had their warrant by Gods law to reject
the party chosen, if they found him unfit either for learning or manners; the
words of Saint Paul are clear to that purpose; 1. Tim. 5.
Lay hands hastily on no man, neither communicate with another man's sins.
Next, the whole church was to join in the naming and liking of their Pastor
before he was accounted to be chosen. The nomination as some say, belonged to
the Clergy, the rest had the approbation, so that neither could the Clergy
prevail without the peoples, nor the peoples desires take place without the
consent of the Clergy. Leo distinguishes the Clergy from the people, in that
the Clergy did elect and subscribe; that is, deliver their election in
writing; the people he deuideth into three degrees, and every one of the^ had
an interest in the liking and accepting of their Bishop. Leo epist. 89.
Expectarentur vota Ciuium, testimonia populorum, quaereretur honoratorum
arbitrium, electio Clericorum, quae in sacerdotu^ solent ordinationibus ab ijs
qui norunt patrum regulas custodiri. The desires of the Citizens should be
expected, the testimony of the people, the judgment of the honorable should
be had, and the election of the Clergy; which things use to be kept in
ordering of Priests (or Bishops) of all that know the rules of our fathers. and
again, Ibidem.
Teneatur subscriptio Clericorum honoratorum testimonium, ordints confensus and
plebis. qui praefutur^^ est omnibus, ab omnibus eligatur. Let the subscripti^
of the Clergy be continued, the testimome of the honorable, the consent of
the order and people He that shall ouersee all, let him be chosen of all.

The wisdom of Gods Church in taking the consent of the people in the
election of their Bishops, I cannot but commend; I find to great and good
effects of it in the Church stories. For thence it came copasse, that the
people, when their desires were accomplished, did QVIETLIE RECEIVE, WILLINGLTE
MAINTAIN^, DILIGENTLY HEAR, and HEARTILY LOVE their Pastors; yea venture
their whole estates and hazard their lives, rather then their Pastors should
miscarie; as may be seen by the zeal of the people of Alexandria for Sozom.
li. 6. ca. 12.
Athanasius and Socrates, li. 4. ca. 37.
Peter, of Cesarea for Nazianz. or atio in laudem Basilii.
Basile, of Constantinople for Socrat. li. 2. ca. 13. and li.
Paul arm 6. ca. 16.
Chrysostom, and of sundry other places for their Bishops. And could the
people as well have tempered their grief, when their affections were
ouer-ruled, as they showed their love, when their expectation was satisfied;
their interest in electing their Bishop had vene better regarded, and longer
continued: but expetienee of their factions, schisms, tumults; vprores,
murders and what not, if they might not have their wills, caused both ancient
Fathers and Councils to mislike that the people bare so great a swaie in these
elections, and forced Christian Princes, if not wholly to exclude them, yet
greatly to abridge them.

Nazianzene reporting the choice of Eusebius to the Bishoprike of Cesarea,
says; Nazianz. in epitaphio patris.
The City of Caesarea was in a tumult about the choice of their Bishop; and
the sedition was sharp and hardly to be appeased. And as the people distracted
in many minds, proposed some one, some another, as is often seen in such
cases; at length the whole people agreeing on one of good calling amongst them
commended for his life, but not yet baptized, they took him against his will,
and with the help of a band of soldiers that was then come to the City,
they placed him in y^ Bishops chair, and offered him to the rest of the
Bishops present, and mixing threats with persuasio^s, they required to have him
ordered, and pronounced (for their bishop.) Thus was Eusebius. chosen, or rather
forced and intruded against all the canons, yea against his own liking by the
heat and intempera^ce of the people. In electing Basil, the next that succeeded
Eusebius, they again fell to another vproare, and stood as stiff against
Basil being a most worthy man, as they were heady for Eusebius; til they were
calmed by the wisdom and travel of Nazianzens fathers. Ibidem.
Again says Nazianz.) after the death of Eusebius. the same City grew tumultuous
for the same cause; and the sedition the feruenter it waxed, the absurder it
proved. The like we read and worse of other cities Eusebius. lib. 1. ca, 24.
There kindled a grienous seditio at Antioch (says Eusebius) about the
deposing of Eusta thus; and after when an other was to be chosen, the flame
therofso increased that it was like to subvert the whole city; the people being
divided into two parts. The Magistrates of the city supported the sides, and
bands of soldiers were mustered, as against an enemy; and the matter had bin
tried by the sword, if God and the fear of the Emperor (writing unto them)
had not somewhat assuaged the rage of the multitude. eight whole years the
place was without a Bishop.

When Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria was deposed by the great Council of
Chaltedon, and Proterius set in his place, by the common decree of the Synod;
Euagr. li. 2. ca. ^.
a mighty and intolerable sedition grew amongst the people for it, some
affecting Dioscorus, some cleaving to Proterius. the people opposed themselves
against the Magistrates, and when with a strong hand they thought to repress the
vproare; the multitude with stones beat the soldiers into a Church, and
besieged them, and destroyed a number of them alive with fire. And taking their
advantage upon the death of Martian the Emperor, they Ibidemea. 8.
erected an other Bishop, and brought him to the Church on Easter day, and slew
Prorerius and six others with him in the Temple without any regard of the
place or the day, and drew his body wounded and mangled along all the
quarters of the City, beating and hewing his dead carcass in most miserable
wise; and burning as much as was left, they scattered his ashes into the
wind, exceeding the fierceness of any wild beasts. The people of Rome
played their parts in the election of the in Bishops no less then others did,
as their own stories witness. for example at the choice of Damasus, Ruffinus
ecclesiast histor. lib. 2. ca. 10.
the sedition was so great, yea the war so fierce (the people maintaining on
either side their Bishop elect) that the places of prayer were fi^led with man's
blood. Ammianus says; Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 27.
the conflict was so sharp, that the regent of the city, not able to redress
it nor appease it, was feign to forsake the place, and in the church where the
Christians assembled, in one day there were slain an hundred thirty seven; and
the rage of the people scant ceased a long time after.

Every where sedicions increased so fast, that hardly could a bishop be
quietly chosen, which made Austen in his life time contrary to the Canons to
elect his successor. August. epist. 110.
I know (says he) upon the deaths of Bishops, the Churches are usually
turmoiled by ambitious and contentious persons, which I have often seen and
sorrowed. Nazianzen seeing their disorder in the choice of Basil, censured
popular elections in these words; Nazianz. in epitaphio patri^.
It was not obscure who did excel the rest, no more then the Sun compared
with the Stars; but very evident to all others, and specially to the most
selected and purest part of the people, I mean the Clergy and our Nazarites,
to whom either wholly, or chiefly, such choices ought to be referred (so should
the Churches never take harm;) and not to to the richest, and mightiest, and
to the throng and indiscretion of the multitude, yea even to the basest persons
amongst them. The Emperor at last was forced by public laws to restrain the
people, and take the election of bishops from them, and give it to the Clergy
and certain chief men of every City. Nouella constitutio 123.
(...). We decree (says Justinian) that as often as need requires to ordain
a Bishop, the Clergy and principal men of the City (for which a Bishop must
be provided) shall meet together and set down in writing three persons, and
taking their oath upon the holy Euangile, shall express in their writing, that
they have chosen them neither for reward, promise, favor, or any other cause,
but knowing the persons to be of the right and Catholic faith, and of honest
life, etc. that of those three so named, the best may be ordained at the
election and judgment of the ordainer. If any man be ordained a Bishop, and
this not observed, we command him by all means to be removed from his
Bishopric, and likewise the other, that presumed to impose hands against this
(our) Law. If three sufficient persons could not be found in the Clergy of
that City which wanted a bishop, the Electours might name two, or one; so it
were d^one within six months, and the men such as the Laws requires,
otherwise the Metropolitan^ to choose for them. A Lay man amongst others the
Emperor says, they might name; but the Canons did not permit a Lay man to be
elected, but only to be desired.

I do not think the peoples presence, or testimony were debarred by this Law;
for that continued a long time after; I take it rather the Electours might
offer none without the peoples liking; but by this means, the multitude were
excluded from electing whom they would; and the power thereof translated to the
Clergy and Governors of each City to name certain, if the people could like
of their choice; otherwise within six months the right to deuolue to the
chief Bishop of the Province. Then began this rule to be more straitely
urged; Did. 62. docendus.
Docendus est populus, non sequendus; the people (in electing of Bishops) must
be taught and guided; not obeyed and followed. For Popes themselves could say,
though the Did. 63. nosse.
election belong to Priests, yet the consent of Gods people must be had. Leo
epist. 84. ca. 5.
When (says Leo) you go about the election of the chief Priest (or Bishop)
let him be advanced before all, whom the consent of the Clergy and people with
one accord desires. If their voices be divided betwixt twain, let him be
preferred before the other in the judgment of the Metropolitan, which has
more voices and merits; only let none be ordained against their wills and
petitions, lest the people despise or hate the Bishop which they never
affected; and they less care for religion, when their desires are not
satisfied. The like regard of the peoples desires and petitions was had in
Gregory's time and long after. Gregor. epist^. l^r. lib. 2. ca. 6^.
If it be true (says Gregory to Antonius) that the Bishop of Salona be dead,
hasten to admonish the Clergy and people of that City to choose a Priest with
one consent that may be ordained for them. And to Magnus about the election of
yt bishop of Millan. Ibidem ca. 66.
Ward (says he) the Idem habetur lib. 4. ca. 66. 67. and lib. 7. ca. 48.
Clergy and Idem habetur lib. 4. ca. 66. 67. and lib. 7. ca. 48.
people that they dissent ^ot in choosing their Priest, but with one accord
elect some such as may be consecrated their bishop.

The order of choosing their bishops in the primitive Church by the Clergy and
people was never so much respected but that they might many ways forsake and
loose their right; as by petition, when they had none of their own; by
compromise, when they could not agree; by deuolution, when they neglected their
time above six months, or transgressed the Laws or Canons either in the
form of their election, or in the person elected: specially upon any
corruption, disorder, or violence, the election was utterly void, and the
parties deprived of all power to elect for that turn. and when they could not
agree, they were to send some to the Metropolitan to yield him the reasons of
their dissenting on both sides, and he to Gregor. epistol. lib. 4. ca. 91.
strike the stroke betwixt them, or else they did refer their consents to two
or three that should repair to the chief bishop of the Province, and there
make choice, with his advise and consent for the whole city. Gregor. epist.
lib. 2. ca. 54.
If you can find (says Gregory) no fit person (amongst yourselues) on whom
you can agree, then choose three wise and in different men, and send them to
this city, in the name of the whole, to whose judgment the people will stand.
And again, Ibidem ca. 74.
Conue^t the Clergy of the church of Naples, to choose 2. or 3. of themselves,
and not to slack to send the^ hither about the election of their Bishop. And
in their certificat to us let the^ signify, that those whom they send, have
authority to supply al their places in this election. So that the peoples right
to elect their bishop never depe^ded on Gods express commandment, but on the
foundation and reason of humane government, and was subject both to the Canons
of Councils and laws of Princes, and might be moderated and restrained by
either of them, and by the peoples consent, default, or abuse be transferred,
relinquished, or forfeited; and without their wills by superior powers and
public Laws for just cause be abridged, altered, or abrogated. for the power
and freedom of the people is not only submitted to the sword which god has
authorized, but wholly closed in yt sword; neither is any thing lawful for the
people (setting aside the commandments of God, which are subject to no mortal
man's will or power,) which the laws of their country restrain or prohibit.
Wherefore there can be no question, but the people may willingly forsake, and
worthily loose the right which they had in the choice of their bishops, and the
Prince either way be lawfully possessed of the peoples interest. you must
rather if you will needs be so inquisitiue, examine the causes that induced
the law, whether they were just or no; and so shall you see whether this
manner of election be a wise and good prevention of such corrupt factions, and
fearful tumultes, as our desperate age would easily breed; or a rigorous
encrochment on the peoples right without cause or consent; which you can not
offer to think without evident wrong to the Prince and Realm.

It cannot be denied, but the Prince of right has, and ever had as great
interest in the choice of bishops, as the people. There can no reason be
pretended for the multitude, but it concludes more strongly for the
Magistrate. If the people by Gods Law were to choose their bishop; the king as
the principal part and head of the people, by the same Law must be suffered
to have the chief place amongst them. Did ever Gods or man's Law prefer the
feet before the head, the rowt before the ruler, or the people before the
Prince? Matthew. 10.
The servant is not above his Master; no not in elections of bishops. for if
the rule be general, it includes even that particular. Wherefore though there
were no Princes christened in the Apostles times nor in 300. years after to
claim or use their right; yet against the head, that it shall not be head, to
rule and guide the fee^e, can be no prescription, by reason Gods ordinance for
the head to govern the body, is a perpetual and eternal law; and the
usurpation of the members against it, is no prescription, but a confusion, and
the subversion of that order, which the God of heaven has immutably decreed
and settled. And even in the Primitive Church when leisure from greater
affairs, and occasion of popular vproares put Christian Emperors in mind to
use their right, they were by Councils acknowledged to have good interest in
the elections of bishops, and by the whole Church suffered not only to have a
several and sovereign consent, but by their Laws to moderate, restrain and
punish the attempts and abuses as well of bishops and clarks that were electors
and ordainers, as of the people that were the likers and supporters of the
parties so corruptly or disorderly chosen.

When Valentinian the Emperor, upon the death of Auxentius willed the bishops
assembled to elect for the city of Millane, such a one, as should be fit for
the place; Theodoret. lib. 4. ca 6.
the Synod prayed him being wise and religious (...), to appoint (a Bishop) To
whom he answered, the matter is too great for me to undertake. you that are
vouchsafed of the divine grace, shall better determine (who is meet.) When
Chrysostom. was chosen to be bishop of Constantinople, Sozomene says; Sozomen.
lib. ^. ca. 2.
(...): The people and Clergy determining (on him) the king approved it; and
sent to fet him (from Antioch.) Socrat. lib. 7. ca. 29.
After Sisimius was dead, though many labored to have Philip, others to have
Proclus ordained; yet it seemed good to the powers (or princes) to have none of
that church advanced to the Bishoprike by reason of some vain men, but it
pleased the^ rather to call a stranger from Antioch. Upon the death of Maximian
successor to Nestorius, Socr. li. 7. ca. 40.
left again in the election of a bishop variance should arise, and the Church
be troubled, the Emperor Theodosius, strait ways (the body of Maximianus not
yet being buried) commanded the Bishops that were present to set Proclus in the
episcopal seat. Pelagius being chosen bishop of Rome without the princes
commandment for that the city was then besieged, and no man could pass
through ye enemies camp, Platina in Pelagio 2.
Gregory was afterward sent to excuse the matter and appease the Emperor.
Nilenim tu^ a Clero in eligendo Pontifice actu^ erat, nisieius electione^
Imperator approbasset. for then the act of the Clergy in choosing their bishop
was void, unless the Emperor approved the election. Greg. that excused Pelagius,
witnesses the like of his own choice, and of sundry others. Of himself he
says; Gregor. epist. lib. 1. ca. 5.
Lo, my most gracious Lord the Emperor has commanded an Ape to be made a Lion.
Wherefore he must impute al my faults and neglige^ces, not to me (who was
unwilling) but to his own devotion, which has committed the mystery of
strength to so weak an one as I am. To all the bishops of Illy^iest he writes;
Idem epistolar. lib. 4. ca. 53.
Because I understand by your letters, that the consent of you al, and THE
PLEASVRE OF THE MOST GRACIOUS PRINCE CONCVRRED in the person of John our
brother and fellow-Bishop, I greatly rejoice. To the Emperor Mauritius he
says; Idem epistola^. lib. 6. ca. 17^.
It can be no small thanks with God, that John of happy memory being taken
out of this life, your godliness about the appointing a Bishop, stayed a great
while, deferred the time, and sought advise in the fear of God. Wherefore I
think my brother and fellow-Bishop Cyriacus to be very fit for the Pastoral
regiment, whom your holiness preferred to that order after so long
consultation.

Neither had the Roman Emperors this authority to dash elections, and appoint
bishops only at Rome and Constantinople; other places were in like subjection
to them; and though their care were not so great for the smaller cities, which
were innumerable, as for the principal Sees, where themselves lived, and
whither they often resorted; yet their right was alone in greater and lesser
Churches. If the chiefest bishops might not be chosen without the Emperors
consent, the meaner places had neither by the Canons, nor by the Scriptures any
more freedom from the Princes power then the greater. So that what
superiority was then acknowledged and yielded by the greatest and chiefest
Churches as due to Christian Emperors in the elections of bishops; the same
could by no means be denied them over other Churches though the Princes
themselves sometimes neglected, and sometimes refused to be troubled with the
choice of so many thousand Bishops, as were under their territories. And
therefore Adrian Bishop of Rome was not the first that did grant and give this
right to the Empire, as some Romish stories would feign enforce; it was
received in the Church of Christ many hundred years before Adrian was borne,
and used as well by other Christian kings in their realms, as by the Emperor
in his dominions. The Pontifical it self 580. years after Christ notes it
as a new and strange accident, that Pelagius the second Exl^bra Pontifical. in
vita P^lag^^ 2.
was chosen Bishop of Rome without the Emperors commandment: and gives this
reason, for that the Longobardes then besieged the City; and Gregory the
first of that name that next succeeded after Pelagius, two hundredth years
before Adrian confirms it to be true by report of Gregor. epistol. lib. 1.
ca. 5.
his own election; and Gregory of Turon living at the same time, and whose
Oeacon was present at Rome when Gregory the first was elected, Gregor.
T^r^nens. lib. 10. ca. 1.
witnesses as much in the tenth book of his history and first Chapter.

Wherefore Adrian did but either continue or renew this right, when the Empire
was translated unto Charles the great, and ^atified it, with a curse on the
transgressoins; he did not then first grant it; the Roman Emperors long
before enjoyed it. Did. 63. Adrianus.
Adrian and a Synod (of one hundred fifty three Bishops and Abbat^) defined
that the Archbishops and Bishops of every Province should take their
inuestiture from Charles, so as unless he were commended (or allowed) and
invested by the king, he should be consecrated Bishop by no man; and whosoever
did against this decree, they did wrap him in the band of excommunication. Leo
the eight in an other Synod more then 130 years after Adrian, Did. 63. In
Synod^.
with the Clergy and people of Rome, did reknowledge and confirm unto Otho
the first of that name, king of the Germans, and to his successors, in the
kingdom of Italy for ever, power to choose and appoint the Bishop of the
Apostolic See (of Rome) and consequently Archbishops and Bishops, that they
should receive inuestiture from him. So that if any were chosen Bishop by the
Clergy and people, except he were also approved and invested by the said
king, he should not be consecrated. Which priu^lege to Sigebert. Chronicon in
an. 1111.
give Bishoprikes and Abbeys by a ring and a staff, continued in the Roman
Emperors more then 300. years after Charles, and was restored to Henry the
fifth 1111. years after Christ by Paschalis the second, and not afterward
wrested from him and his successors by the bishop of Rome, but with extreme
treachery, bloodshed and violence.

As the Emperors of Rome used this superiority in elections of bishops four
hundred years before Charles; so the kings of France continually practiced the
same three hundred years before the Empire came to their hands. After
Licinius the ninth bishop of Turon, Gregor. Turo^ens. ^ist. lib. 10. ca. 31.
in the tenth place Theodorus and Proculus were surrogated by the commandment
of Queen Chrodieldis wife to Chlodoueus the first christian King of France.
Idem lib. 3. ca. 17.
The eleventh was Dinifius, who came to the Bishopric by the election of the
said king. The twelfth Idem lib. 3. ca. 17.
was Ommatius, who was ordained by the commandment of king Clodomere one of
Chlodouees sons. At Aruerne four years after Chlodouees death, Idem lib. 3.
ca. 2.
Theodorike (another of his sons) commanded Quintianus to be made (Bishop)
there, and all the power of the Church to be delivered unto him, adding, he was
cast out of his own City for the zeal and love he bare to us. And the
Messengers strait way departing, called the Bishops and people together, and
placed him in the chair of the Church of Aruerne. And when Idem lib 4. ca. 5
Quintianus was dead, Gallus by the kings help was substituted in his chair.
After whose decease Idem li. 4 c^. 6.
Cato elected by the Clergy and most part of the people, bare himself for
bishop; but when king Theodoualdus heard it, Idem lib. 4. ca. 7.
certain Bishops were called unto Mastright, and Cautinus ordained Bishop, and
directed by the kings commandment to Aruerne, was gladly received of the
Clergy and Citizens there. The same Cato was afterward chosen by the precept
of King Chlotharius to the bishopric of Turon; for so the Clergy told him;
Idem li. 4. ca. 11
non nostra te voluntate expetiuimus sed Regis praeceptione, We desired thee
not of our own wills, but by the kings commandment; which he refused, and
thereupon they of Turon suggested another to the King; to whom the king
replied, Idem li. 4. ca. 15
Praeceperam vt Cato Presbyter illic ordinaretur, and cur est spreta nostra
iussio? I commanded that Cato the Presbyter should be ordained (Bishop) there,
and why is our commandment despised? They answered, We requested him, but he
would not come. And whiles they were with the king, Cato himself came and
besought the king, that Cautinus being removed, he might be placed at
Aruerne. At which the king smiling, he then secondly requested he might be
ordained at Turon, which before he had neglected. To whom the king said; I
first commanded, they should consecrate you to that Bishopric: but as I
hear you despised the place, and therefore you shall be far enough from it.
When Pientius bishop of Poicters was dead, Austraphius hoped to succeed in his
place. Idem li 4 ca. 18.
But king Charibert (one of Chlotha^ius sons) turned his mind, and
Pascentius succeeded by the kings commandment. The like precepts of diverse
christian kings of France, 1000. years before our days for the making of Idem
li. 6. ca. 7.
Iouinus, 9.
Domnolus, 15.
Nonnichius, 38.
Innocentius, 39 lib 7. ca.
Sulpitius, 17. lib. 8 ca.
Promotus, 20.
Nicetius, 22.
Desiderius, 39 and li. 9. ca.
Gundegisilus, 23.
Virus, 24.
Charimeres, Fronimius and other bishops of France in sundry churches of that
realm, he that likes to see, may read in the story of Gregory made Bishop
of Turon before Gregory the first was placed to the Sea of Rome. By which it
is evident, that other Princes besides the Roman Emperors, have from their
first profession of Christianity, not only ruled the elections of Bishops as
they saw cause, but appointed such as were meet for the places to be
consecrated, without depending on the voices of the people, or Clergy.

And what should hinder christian Princes to take this right into their own
hands from the people; since there is no precept in Gods Law to bind the
church that the people should elect their bishops; and consequently the manner
of electing them must be left to the laws of each Country, without expecting
the peoples consent: Bullinger a man of great reading and judgment alleging
both the examples of the Scriptures and the words of Cyprian, which are before
repeated at large, and also the use of the primitive Church in choosing their
Bishops, cocludeth thus; Bulling erus de episcoporum institutione and functione
lib. 2. ad H^nricum ^ct auum Augliaregem.
Quanquam ex illis omnino colligere nolim, deligendi Episcopi^us ad promiscuae
plebis suffragia esse reducendum. Utrum enim totius ecclesiae comitijs an
paucorum suffragijs Episcopum designari melius sit, nulla potest certa omnibus
praescribi eccles^is constitutio. Sunt enim alijs regionibus alia Iura, alij
ritus and instituta. Si qui abutuntur (iure illo) per tyrannidem, cogantur in
ordinem a sancto Magistratu, vel transferatur ab eis ius designandi Ministros.
Satius est enim eligendi munere seniores aliquot ex regis vel magistratus iussu
defungi, aduocatis consultisque, etc. Notwithstanding I would not collect by
these, that the right to choose a Bishop, should be recalled to the voices of
the people. Whether it were meeter to have a bishop appointed by the asse^bly
of the whole church, or by the suffrages of a few, there can be no certain
rule prescribed to all Churches. for diverse Countries have different Laws and
customs. But if any tyrannically abuse (their right) they may be punished by
the godly Magistrate, or the right of electing taken from the^. for it were
better that some grave men by the Magistrates or the kings commandment made
the election, calling to them and consulting with such as know what belongs
to the function of a bishop, what is fit for the people and church where he
shall be placed, and how to judge of every man's learning and manners.

Beza that holds hard for discipline, gives over popular elections, as no
part of Gods ordinance; and confesses that in Geneua it self, though their
state be popular, yet they allow the people no such power. In resp^nsion^ ad
tractat^onem de Ministr rum Euangelii de gradibus ca. 22. fill. 154. and 155.
The erecting of the Deconship (says he) was essential, and never to be
abrogated in the church of God. And the manner of appointing (some) for that
function in the Church, to wit, by election, was likewise essential; but that
the whole multitude was called together and gave their voices, that was neither
essential, nor perpetual. for after, when experience taught that confusion and
ambition rising by occasion of the multitude increased, was to be prevented;
the Synod of Laodicea being indeed but prouincial, yet approved by the sixth
Ecumenical council, prudently took order by their 13. canon, that the election
of such as were chosen to the sacred ministry, should not be permitted to the
multitude, or to the people: not as if the whole Church ought not to be
acquainted with sacred elections and to allow them, but for that a mean
therein is to be observed; the prerogative being yielded to assembly of
Pastors; and the second place to the liking of the godly magistrate; and
lastly, the people to be certified openly of the whole matter; and lean given
the^, if they have any reason of dissenting, to propose their causes orderly.
Which course being hitherto religiously and wisely observed in this City, when
one Morellius a fanaticall spirit in favor of the people presumed to
reprehend, his writing was worthily condemned both in this church, and in many
Synodes of France. The choice of the seven in the Acts makes no perpetual nor
essential rule for elections in the Church of God. The Council of Laodicea did
well and wisely prohibit the people to have the choice of such as should be
called to the sacred ministry. The Pastors elect, the magistrates consent, and
open report there of is made to the people; and if they have any just cause to
allege against the parties chosen, they must propose and prove their
exceptions; and when Morellius would have challenged more interest then this
for the people in the election of their Pastors, his opinion was condemned
both by the censure of Geneua, and by the Synodes of France. All this is
confessed by Master Bezaes own testimony.

We differ, you think, in some points from the manner of Geneua: we have
great reason so to do. They live in a popular state; we in a kingdom. The
people there hear the chiefest rule; here the Prince: and yet there the people
are excluded from electing their Pastors. If the multitude have any cause to
dislike, their allegation is heard and examined by the Pastors and
Magistrates, but they have no free power to frustrate the whole by dissenting,
much less to elect whom they like. Now that our state has far better
cause to exclude the multitude from electing their Bishops, then theirs has,
is soon perceived. The people there maintain their Pastors; our Bishops are
not chargeable to the Commons, but endowed by the liberality of Princes,
without any cost to the multitude. Their Pastors are chosen out of the same
City, and their behavior known to all the Inhabitants; our Bishops are taken
from other places of government, and not so much as by name known to the
people, which they shall guide. With us therefore there is no cause why the
people should be parties, or privy to the choosing of their Bishops; since
they be neither troubled with the maintaining of them, nor have any trial, or
can give any testimonic of their lives and conuersations; which were the
greatest reasons that inclined the Fathers of the Primitive Church to yield so
much unto the people in the choice of their Bishops. And lastly, if Princes
were not heads of their people, and by Gods and man's law trusted with the
direction and moderation of all external and public government, as well in
Religion as in policy, before, and above al others, which are two most
sufficient reasons to enforce that they ought to be trusted with elections, if
they please to undertake that charge, whereof they must yield an account to
God; yet the people of this realine at the making of the Law most apparently
submitted and transferred al their right and interest to the Princes Judgment
and wisdom; which lawefully they might, and wisely they did, rather then to
endanger the whole common wealth with such tumulets and vproates as the
Primitive Church tasted of, and lay the gappe open again to the factions and
corruptions of the unsettled and unbridled multitude.

Think you all corruptions are cut off by reserving elections of Bishops to
Princes?] Faceions and tumultes I hope you will grant are by that means
abolished and utterly extinguished. As for bri^erie, howsoever ambitious heads
and covetous hands may lincke together under color of commendation to deceive
and abuse Princes ^ares, yet reason and duty binds me and all others, to
think, and say, that Princes persons, are of all others farthest from taking
money for any such respects. The words of Guntchrannus, Chlotharius son, and
king of France more then a thousand years ago, make me so to suppose of all
Christian and godly Princes; who when Remigius bishop of Bourges was dead, and
many gifts were offered him by some that sought the place, gave them this
answer; Gregor. Turonici historia Francor. lib. ca. 39*
It is not our princely manner to sell Bishopriks for money, neither is it your
part to get them with rewards, lest we be infamed for filthy gain, and you
compared to Simon Magus. In meaner persons more justly may corruption be feared
then in Princes; who of all others have least need, and so least cause, to set
Churches to sale. Their abundance, their magnificence, their conscience, are
sureties for the freedom of their choice. And therefore I see no reason to
distrust their elections as likelier to be more corrupt, then the peoples. It
is far easier for ambition to prevail with the people then with the Prince.
And as for the meetnesse of men in learning and life to supply such places,
Princes have both larger scope to choose, and better means to know who are
fit then their people. for since Bishops are not, and for the most part cannot
be chosen out of the fame Church or City; what course can the people take to
be assured of their ability or integrity, whom they neither live with, nor
whose doctrine or manners they are any whit acquainted with:

This difference betwixt our times and the former ages of the Primitive Church
whiles some mark not, they cry importunely for the peoples presence and
testimony in the choice of Pastors; never remembering, the people before there
were any Christian Magistrates, must needs have greater interest in the
election of their Pastors then afterward they could have: and when godly
Princes began to intermeddle with Ecclesiastical matters, the peoples
testimony was still required, because the parties chosen conuersed always
with them even in their eyes and ears, whereby they could witness the
behavior of the electees to be sincere and blameless; which in our days is
clean otherwise, by reason the Uniuersities and other places of the Realm
train up men meet for Episeopall charge and calling, and not the same
Churches and Cities where they shall gouerue. Hierony. cause. 8. quest. 1. licet.
Requiritur in ordinando Sacerdote etiam pop^li praese^tia, v^sciant omnes and
certisint, quod qui praestantior est ^^ omni populo, qui doctior, qui sanctior,
qui omni virtute em^entio^, ille eligitur ad sacerdotium, and hoc attestante
populo. The peoples presence (says Jerome) is required in ordaining a Priest
(or Bishop) that all may know and be sure, that out of the whole people, the
better, the holier, the learneder, the higher in all virtue; even he is chosen
to the Priesthood, the people witnessing as much for that is it which the
Apostle commands in the ordaining of a Priest, saying; he must have a good
testimony of those that are without.

If this were the reason, why the people were called to the election of their
bishops; then the cause ceasing, why should not the effect likewise cease: If
they can give no testimony, (as in our case they cannot,) what neeveth their
presence: If the authority of the people were requisite to place their
pastor, as when there was no belecuing prince happily it was; in that respect
also the Magistrate is more sufficient then the multitude to assure the
election, and assist the elect. If consent be expected, lest any man should be
intruded upon the people against their wills; the peoples consent is by the
public agreement of this realm yielded and referred to the princes liking. If
judgment to discern between fit men and unfit be necessary; I hope the
gravity and prudencie of the Magistrate may woorthely be preferred before the
rashness and rudeness of the many, that are often led rather with affection
then with discretion, and are carried with many light respects and lewd
means as with faction and flattery, favor and fancy, corruption and
briberie, and such like baits, from which Governors are, if not altogether
free, yet far freer then the intemperate and unruly multitude. And so take
what respect you will, either of DISCERNING, ASSISTING or MAINTAINING of fit
passours, and you shall find the choice of ishops lies more safely in the
princes then in the peoples hands.

The Clergy used to discern and elect, the people did like and allow their
Pastors and to say the truth, men of the same profession, if they be not
blinded with affections, can best judge of ^ch man's fitnes.] Indeeee the Canon
Law rules the case thus; Did. 63. breniter, and did. 63. nullus Ad^^a^u^
omni^ (...) li^^^.
Electio clericorum est, co^sensus Principis, petitio plebis. Clergy me^ must
elect, the Prince may consent, the people must request: and the late bishops of
Rome never left cursing and fighting, til they excluded both prince and people;
and reduced the election wholly to the Clergy, whom they might command at their
pleasures; but by your leave, it was not so from the beginning. The form of
election prescribed by yt Roman laws 1000. years since, willed Nouella
constitutio 123.
the Clergy and (the governors or) chief men of the city to come together,
and taking their oths upon the holy gospel, (...), to decree, (that is to
elect or name) 3. persons; of which ye ordainer was to choose ye best at his
discretion.

The fullest words that the ancient Greek Writers use for all the parts of
election, (...), to propose, to name, to choose, to decree, are in the stories
ecclesiastical applied to the people. When Eudoxius of Constantinople was
dead, and the Arrian^ had chosen Demophilus in his place; the Christians there
is Socrates writes Socr. li 4. ca. 14.
(...) chose one Euagrius. Sozomene says Sozo. li. 6. ca. 13.
(...) they decreed Euagrius to be their bishop. Nazianz. speaking of ye
election of Eusebius, says; Nazianz. in epitaph. patri^.
the people were divided into many sides, (...), some naming one, and some an
other; (which word also Socr. li. 4. ca. 30.
Socrates uses of the people in the choice of Ambrose) and repineth that in
his time Nazianz. vt supra.
(...) the first naming of the bishop was permitted (...) to the headie and
indiscreet multitude. At the choice of Paulus to the Bishopric of
Constantinople, Socrates says Socr. lib. 2. ca. 6.
the people were divided into two parts, and the Omousians (...), elect Paulus
to the Bishopric. The Council of Nice was content that such as were ordained
by Miletius, should be re^rdered, and placed in the countes of other bishops
that died, Socr. lib. 1. ca. 9.
(...), if they were found worthy, and the people elected them. Upon the d^^th
of Auxentius at Millan^, Sozomen. lib. 6. ca. 24.
(...), the multitude, says Sozomene, fell to ^edition, not agreeing on the
election of any one. When Nectarius was dead, and Chrysostom chosen in
succe^^e him, Sozomene says, Sozom. l^^. ^. ca. 2.
(...), the people and Clergy decreeing it, the Emperor consented. Socrates
says he was chosen Socr. li. 6. ca. 2.
(...), by the common decree of the Clergy and people. Upon the depriving of
Nestorius, Socrat. lib. 7. ca. 35.
many ^amed Philip, (...), but more chose Proclus and Proclus election had
prevailed, had not some of the mightiest pretended a Canon against him, that
being named Bishop of one City, he could not be translated to another.
Socrates ibid.
Which being heard and believed (...) forced the people to hold their peace. So
that in the primitive church the people did propose, name, elect and decree as
well as the Clergy; and though the Presbyters had more skill to judge, yet the
people had as much right to choose their Pastor; and if the most part of them
did agree, they did carry it from the Clergy; so the persons chosen were such
as the Canons did allow, and the ordainers could not justly mislike.

If it seem hard to any man that the people in this point should be preferred
as far forth as the Clergy; let him remember the Apostles in the Acts, when
they willed the Church at Jerusalem to choose the seven, that undertook the
care of the widows; did not make any special remembrance or distinction of
the seventy Disciples from the rest, who were then present, and part of that
company; but committed as well the discerning as electing of fit men in common
to the whole number of brethren; reserving approbation and imposition of hands
to themselves. for Act. 6.
calling the multitude of Disciples together, they said (...), consider of
seven men of your selves that are well reported of, and full of the holy
ghost, and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. (...), and
they chose Steven (and the other six) whom they set before the Apostles.
Since then the Apostles left elections indifferently to the people and Clergy
of Jerusalem; if you make that choice a president for elections, what warrant
had the Bishop of Rome to exclude them: if their unruliness deserved afterward
to have their liberty diminished, or their ^way restrained; that belonged not
to the Popes, but to the Princes power. and therefore he was but an usurper in
taking it both from Prince and people without their consents; and christian
Princes use but their right, when they resume elections out of the Popes hands,
and by conference with such as shall impose hands on them within their ^wn
realms, name whom they think fit to succeed in the episcopal seat. So did
the ancient Emperors and Princes that were in the primitive church as I have
showed.

They never took the whole into their hands, but only gave their consents
before the election could take place.] It was a most tedious and trouble some
work for one man to name and elect all the Bishops in the Roman empire. and
therefore the Emperors left the Magistrates of each City to perform that
care together with the Clergy, thereby easing themselves of infinite labor
and danger; yet where occasion so required, they showed what right they had to
elect and name such as should govern the Churches. When Nazianzene had
resigned and relinquished the bishoprike of Constantinople to the Fathers
assembled in the second general Council, Theodosius the elder, Sozom. li. 7.
ca. ^
commanded the Bishops to give him the names of such written in a paper, as
every of them thought fit to be ordained, reserving power to himself to
choose one out of that whole number. The Bishop of Antioch (being the chiefest
man then present) put their names in writing, whom he and the rest thought
fittest; and in the last place set Nectarius to gratify Diodorus Bishop of
Tarsus, that had commended him for his gravity and person, though otherwise
unknown. Ibidem.
The Emperor reading the Catalogue of those that were written, stood at the
name of Nectarius, and holding his finger there, read them all over again, and
at length choose Nectarius. Every man marueiled and asked who this Nectarius
was, and of what profession, and of what place. And understanding that he was
not yet baptized, they marueiled the more at the Emperors judgment. Diodorus
himself understood not so much, for had he known it, he du^st not to have
given his voice to one unbaptized to be made a Bishop. The Emperor hearing
that he was not yet baptized, stood in his resolution, notwithstanding many
Bishops labored against it. And so was Nectarius baptized, and whiles he was
in his christening vesture, declared to be Bishop of Constantinople by the
common decree of the Council. The people intermedled not with this choice, the
Bishops named every man his Socrates, li. 7. ca. 7.
friend whom he sought to prefer. Nectarius came by chance to know whether
Diodorus would any thing unto Tarsus, whither he was then traveling, who fell
on the sudden in liking with him being an ancient and grave man, but had no
further knowledge of him, and showed him to the Bishop of Antioch, praying him
to remember the man, when he wrate the names for the Emperor. The Bishop of
Antioch Ibidem.
derided the conceit of Diodorus, by reason many worthy men were nominated
for this election, and for fashions sake to please Diodorus, placed Nectarius
last. The Prince not knowing the one nor the other, fastened on his name, and
would not be removed, though by the Canons he could not have been elected, and
many Bishops bent themselves to alter the Emperors mind. This election was
made wholly by the Prince, not only without the Clergy and people, but against
both the Canons and the liking of the Bishops then assembled; and yet the
general Council took it to be their duties to pronounce him and ordain
him. Bishop of Constantinople according to the Emperors choice.

The Bishop^ you see delivered the names, which Princes now do not observe.]
The Bishops you see knew not the man; for had they known him, they could not
by the Canons have named him. and had the Emperor of himself known any other
to be fit besides those named in his paper, he might as well have chosen one
of them, as he did Nectarius. Howbeit I do not gainesay, but Princes should
be well advised whom they choose; and assured either by their private
experience, or by the public commendations of others, that the men are likely
to live unspotted, and do good in the Church of Christ. For since the holy
Ghost has pronounced that such as impose hands on any Presbyters or Bishops
are partakers of their sins; if they do not thoroughly examine and refuse
such as they find unfit, I must confess, that if Princes will not endure to
have the persons whom they choose, to be tried by such as shall ordain them,
they undertake that burden themselves, which otherwise lies on the ordainers.
No power on earth may frustrate or abolish the precept which the holy Ghost
gives; 1. Tim. 5.
La^e hands hastily on no man. if hands be hastily laid on, that is, if men
apparantlie unworthy be called to the government of the Church of God; be it
people, Prelate, or Prince, that is wittingly the cause thereof, God will not
so be answered. The suffering of wicked men to infe^t or trouble the Church is
evil, the commanding of such to be placed in the Church is worse. I do not
speak as if Christian princes might not safely elect and name Bishops without
danger or scruple; only they must remember, as it is an honor in pre-eminence
to choose those that shall guide the Church under them, so is it aburden of
conscience to provide by the best means they can, that no venomous nor uncle
an thing so much as enter the house of God, to defile it with his presence, or
disorder it with his negligence.

The ancientest laws of our Country witness that Elections were free from
Articull Cleri, ca. 14. and Westminster the 1. ca. 5.
force, fear or entreaty of all secular powers; and the kings of this Realm
consented it should be so.] As ancient laws of this Realm as those, witness
that the kings of England had the gift and collation of bishoprikes and other
dignities of their aduourie, before free election was granted. And when Princes
first yielded that the Clergy should make free elections, they restrained the^
to these conditions, that they should ask license of the king to choose, and
when their election was made, it was not good without the royal assent. The
statute of Prouisors of benefices made at Westminster the 25. of Edward the 3.
will tell you so much; the words be: Statutum de Prouisoribu^ beneficiorum
apud Westminster. an. 25. Edward. 3.
Our sovereign Lord the King and his heirs (in case the Bishop of Rome do
intermeddle against the law) shall have and enjoy for the time the Collations
to the Archbishoprikes and other dignities elective, which be of his aduourie,
such as his progenitors had before that free election was granted, sithence
that the first elections were granted by the kings progenitors upon a certain
form and condition; as to demand license of the king to choose, and after the
election, to have his royal assent, and not in other manner; which conditions
not kept, the thing ought by reason to resort to his first nature. By which it
is evident, the kings of England had right to confer bishoprikes and other
dignities, before free elections were granted, and when they granted free
elections should be made, they did never dispossess themselves of these two
prerogatives: First, that the kings license must be asked to choose; and next,
the kings consent to make the election good; yea, Henry the first, the
Conquerors son, sent the Pope word in great earnest, that Matthaeu^
P^risiensis in Henric^ 1. an. 1103.
he would not lose the inuesti^ure of his Churches, not for the loss of his
kingdom. and so neither Clergy nor people had ever any right in this realm to
choose their bishops since the kings of this land began to endow them with
lands and livings for the ease of their people, and benefit of their Church,
but by the kings grant, and with the kings leave and consent. For Gods law
prescribing no form of electio^s, it is most clear by the laws of this
realm, that princes being y^ first founders of Churches and endowers of
bishoprikes have had, and ought to have the Magna charta, ^a. 5.
custody of the same in the vacancie, and the In parliaments Edwardi 1. apud
Kacrlile, 25. regus sui, citatur 25. Edwardi 3. in Statuto de Prouisoribus apud
Westminster.
presentiments and collations of those Prelacies, as Lords and Aduowees of all
the lands and possessions that belong either to Cathedral Churches or Bishops.

If you speak of former ages when as yet Bishops lived on the oblations of the
faithful; I have then likewise showed by the example of Theodosius and others,
twelve hundred years ago, that Princes though not as Patrones, yet as higher
powers made elections of Bishops as they saw cause; and though they did not
reserve all elections to their personal and royal assent, yet in their steads
the Theodoret. li. 4. ca. 20.
Magistrates and chief men of each City were to consent, before the election
could be good; yea, they were to Nouella constitutio. 123.
make the election jointly with the Clergy, as we find confirmed by the
Roman laws.

Not only Princesbut Patrones are suffered in every Church to present whom
they think meet, to take cure of souls; and so the people are every way
defeated of their choice.] Call not that the defeating the people of their
right; which was begun with so great reason for the good of the people, and
has now continued more then a thousand years, warranted by the laws, and
practiced with the liking of all Nations. The law of this land knows not the
beginning of Patronages. Magna Charta. ca. 33 and
Aduocations and 13.
Presentations are remembered in Magna Charta, as things long before current by
the laws of the Realm. Statutum de Marlebridge.
The plea of Quare impedit, when the Bishop refuses the Patrones Clearke as
well for the summonitions, as for the return, is mentioned in the Statute of
Marlebridge, anno 52. Henrici 3. the laws of foreign countries are far elder
then ours that are extant. Amongst the laws of Charles the great, made for
France and Germany, and collected by Ansegisus in the yecre, 827. this is one.
Ansegisus legum Francia, li. 1. ca. 84.
Statutum est vt sine authoritate and consensu Episcoporum, Presbyteriin
quibuslibet ecclesijs nec constituantur nec expellantur. Et si Laici Clericos
probabilis vitae and doctrinae Episcopis consecrandos, suisque in ecolesijs
constituendos obtulerint, nulla qualibet occasion eosreijciant. It is decreed
that Presbyters shall not be appointed in any Churches, nor removed from
thence without the authority and consent of the Bishops. And if lay men offer
Clerks of tolerable life and learning unto Bishops to be placed in their own
Churches (that is where lay men are Patrones) the Bishops upon no manner of
occasion shall reject them. Neither might the Patron place a Clarke without
the Bishop, neither could the Bishop refuse the Patrones Clarke, if he were
such as the Canons did tolerate.

In Spain, about the 7. year of king Reccesiunthus, and the 654. year of
Christ, the Council of Coledo made this Canon; Concilii Toletani, 9. ca. 2.
We decree, that as long as the founders of Churches remain in this life, they
shall be suffered to have the chief and continual care of the said places,
atque Rectores idoneos in eisdem basilicis ijdem ipsi offerant Episcopo
ordinandos; and themselves shall offer meet Rectors unto the Bishop, to be
ordained in those very Churches. Quod si spretis eisdem fundatoribus, rectores
ibidem praesumpserit Episcopus ordinare; and ordinationem suam irritam esse
nouerit, and ad verecundiam suam alios in eorum loco, quos ijsdem ipsi
fundatores condignos elegerint, ordinari. And if the Bishop, neglecting the
founders, shall presume to place any others; let him know that his admission
shall be void and to his shame, others shall be placed in their steads, even
such as the founders shall choose being not unworthy. Long before this, the
Roman laws determined the like throughout the Roman Empire. Nouella
constitutio. 123. ca. 18.
If any man build a Church or house of prayer, and would have Clerks to be
placed there, he or his heirs; if he allow maintenance for those Clerks, and
name such as are worthy, let them be ordained upon his nomination. But if
such as they choose be prohibited by the Canons as unworthy, then let the
Bishop take care to promote some, whom he thinks more worthy.

This law gives two reasons for Patronages, which I take indeed were the
very grounds of that interest they have at this day; to wit, building the
Church, and maintaining the Ministers. Before the law for Tithes was made in
Cities, the Clergy lined of the voluntary Oblations and Donations of the
faithful; in country villages the lord of the Soil was left to his
discretion to yield what allowance he thought good out of his land for the
maintenance of the Minister; the rest of the inhabitants being but his
husbandmen and servants, had neither wealth to build Churches, nor right to
give any part of the fruits and profits of their lords land. So that either
Churches must not at all have been built in country towns, or the lords of
each place were to be provoked to the founding of Churches, and allowing
convenient proportions with the honor and pre-eminence to dispose their own
to their liking.

Neither do I see any thing in Gods law against it. for when you affirm the
people should elect their Pastor, I trust you do not include in that word
children, servants, beggars or bondmen; but such as are of discretion to
choose, and ability to maintain their Pastor. Put then the case, which was in
the Primitive Church when the villagers and husbandmen of each place had no
state nor interest in the lands which they tilled, but served the lord of the
Soil, and had allowance for their pains out of the fruits of the earth at his
pleasure; what assurance or maintenance could those men yield unto their
Pastors? Call to mind but yt conquest of this land, when there was neither
freeholder, nor copie-holder, but all bond besides the lord; who could then
elect a Clerk, but only the lord of the place, since no man was free but he
alone? Wherefore Patronages and Presentations are far ancienter in this and
all other Christian realms, then either the liberty or ability of
husbandmen and copie-holders; and when the lords of villages having erected
churches, and allotted out portions for divine service, made afterward some
free, and some bond tenants; did either Gods or man's law command or intend,
that their latter grants should overthrow their former rights? That which has
so many hundredth years been settled and received by the laws of all nations, as
the remembrance and inheritance of the first Founders or Donours of every
Church, shall a few curious heads make the world now believe it is repugnant to
the law of God? By your eager impugning of Patronages, without understanding
either the intent, or effect of them, wise men may soon see what soundness of
judgment the rest of your discipline is likely to carry.

To close up this question, if the allowance given at first to the ministers of
each parish by the lord of yt Soil, were matter enough in the judgment of
Christ's Church, to establish the right of Patrones that they alone should
present Clerks, because they alone provided for them; the Princes interest to
confer Bishoprikes has far more sound and sufficient reason to warrant it.
for besides the maintenance which the kings of this land yielded, when they
first endowed bishoprikes with lands and possessions, to unburden their people
of the support and charges of their Bishops; and in that respect have as much
right as any Patrones can have: the pre-eminence of the sword whereby the
Prince rules the people, the people rule not the Prince, is no small
enforcement, that in elections, as well as in other points of government, the
Prince may justly challenge the sovereignty above and without the people, Gods
law prescribing no certain rule for the choice of Bishops; the people may not
challenge the like without or against the Prince. And lastly, though the people
in former ages, by the sufferance of magistrates, had somewhat to do with the
elections of their Bishops; yet now for the avoiding of such tumults and
vprores as the Primitive Church was afflicted with, by the laws of this Realm
and their own consents, the peoples interest and liking is wholly submitted
and enclosed in the Princes choice, so that whom the Prince names, the people
have bound themselves to acknowledge and accept for their Pastor, no less
then if he had been thosen by their own suffrages. And had they not here unto
agreed, as by Parliament they have; I see no let by Gods law, but in Christian
kingdoms when any difference grows even about the elections of Bishops, the
Prince as head and Ruler of the people has better right to name and elect,
then all the rest of their people. If they concur in judgment, there can be
no variance; if they dissent, the Prince (if there were no express law for
that purpose, as with us there is) must bear it from the people; the people by
Gods law must not look to prevail against their Prince.

If we might safely do it, we could object against the Princes giving of
Bishoprikes, that Athanasius says; Epistola Athanasii ad solitari. am vitam
agen^e^.
Where is there any such Canon, that a Bishop should be sent out of the
palace? And the second Council of Nice alleges an ancient Canon against it;
Nieena Synod^ 2. ca 3.
All elections of Bishops, Presbyters or Deacons made by the Magistrate, are
void by the Canon which says; If any Bishop obtain a Church by the help of
the secular Magistrate, let him be dep^^^ sed and put from the Lords table.
and all that communicate with him. The Council of Paris likewise in earnest
manner. Concilium T^risiens. 1. ca. 8.
Let none be ordained Bishop against the wills of the Citizens, but only whom
the election of the people and Clergy shall seek with full affection. Let him
not be intruded by the Princes commandment, nor by any other means against
the consent of the Metropolitan and the Bishops of the same Province. And if
any man by overmuch rashness presume to invade the height of this honor by
the Princes ordination, let him in no wise be received by the Bishops of the
same Province.] Rules of discipline be not like rules of doctrine. In Christian
faith whatsoever is once true, is always and every where true; but in matters
of ecclesiastical government, that at some times, and in some places might be
received and allowed, which after and else where was happily disliked and
prohibited. If any Father or Council affirm, that by Gods law the people
have right to elect their Bishop, the Prince has not; the assertion is so
false, that no man need regard it. No proof can be made, that the people have
by the word of God an essential interest in the choice of their Pastors. If
we speak of man's law; whatsome Councils decreed, other Councils upon just
cause might change; and what some Princes permitted, their successors with as
great reason might recall or restrain, as the variety of times and places
required. Of Councils S. Austen says; August. de baptis. contra Dona^ist. li.
2. ca. 3.
Ipsaplenaria (Concilia quis nesciat) faepe prior aposterioribus emendari. Who
can be ignorant that general Councils are often amended, the former by the
latter, when by the experiment of things, that is opened which before was hid,
and seen which before was not perceived, and that without any smoke of
sacrilegious pride, obstinate arrogance, or envious contention: Of Princes
edicts I take the case to be so clear, that no man doubts whether humane
laws may be altered or no. All Princes have the sword with like commission
from God, and hear their scepters with one and the same freedom that their
progenitors did. As they may with their own liking abridge themselves of their
liberty; so may they with the advice and consent of their state resume the
grants of former Princes, and enlarge the privileges of their royal dignity
as far as Gods law permits.

For answer then to your authorities, I say: First, Athanasius and the other
two Councils might speak of those times, when as yet christian Princes had not
revoked elections of Bishops to their own power, but by their public laws
commanded their Clergy and people to make choice of their Pastors. And in that
case, he that contrary to the positive laws of any kingdom or common wealth
made secret means or procured to be placed by the private letters of Princes
against the open laws of the Realm where he lived, was an ambitious and
violent intruder, and not worthy to bear the name of a Pastor and Bishop in
Christ's Church. Next, Athanasius and the rest may speak not of election, but
of examination and ordination, which by Gods law is committed to Bishops, and
not to Princes; and then their meaning is, It is not sufficient for a Bishop to
have the Princes consent and decree; he must be also examined and ordained by
such as the holy Ghost has appointed to impose hands on him, which no man may
omit though he be never so much allowed and elected by ye Princes, and so both
their words and proofs seem to import.

Athanasius misliketh that Constantius I^ epistola ad solitariam vi^am agentes.
sent such as should be bishops, out of his palace, and forceably invaded the
Churches by his soldiers and captains, none of the comprouincial bishops
approving or admitting them. The second council of Nice does not impugn that
princes should elect, but that Nicenae Synodi 2. ca. 3.
the decree of the magistrate is not enough to make a bishop. And why? he must
be approved and ordained by the bishops of the same Province, and by the
Metropolitan, as the Nicene Canons witness. Now the 4. Canon of the Nicene
Council which they mention, speaks not a word who shall elect and name
bishops, but who shall examine and ordain the^, as is evident to be seen. And
so the council of Paris, Concilis Pari^iens. ca. 8.
Non principis imperio ingeratur; let him not be imposed by the Princes precept
against the Metropolitanes good will. And therefore if any rashly presumed to
invade that honor per ordinatione^ regiam, as ordained by the king, and not by
the Metropolitan and his Comprouincials, no man might accept him or
acknowledge him for a Bishop. Neither has the ancient Canon any other sense,
which says; Apostolorum ca. 30.
(...): etc. If any Bishop resting on worldly governors, by their help get any
Church, let him be deposed and excommunicated, and all that join with him.
They do not exclude Princes from naming and electing of bishops, no more then
they do the people; only they reject violence, for so much as a bishop by the
rules of the holy Ghost, must be thoroughly examined, and peaceably ordained by
such as shall impose hands on him, and not pere^ptorilie intruded or imposed by
any earthly force or power.

CHAP. XVI. The meeting of Bishops in Synodes, and who did call and moderate
those assemblies in the Primitive Church.
THe necessity and authority of Synodes, is not so much in question betwixt
us, as the persons that should assemble and moderate those meetings. The
disciplinarians themselves, if I be not deceived, are far from making their
Pastors or Presbyteries in every parish supreme Judges of doctrine and manners
without all exception or reuocation; and we be further. for what if the
Pastors or Presbyters of any place maintain heresy or offer injury, which
are cases not rarely incident, but every where occurrent eue^ in those that
bear the names of Christians: shall impiety and injustice so reign and
prevail in the Church, that none may withstand it, or redress it: That were
to make the house of God worse then a den of thieves; for thieves fear the
detecting, and fly the punishing of their offenses; which many Presbyters
would not, if there were no way to restrain and over rule their pestilent and
wicked purposes. Wherefore, as in civil affairs there are Laws and Powers to
uphold justice, and prohibit violence; without the which, humane societies
could not consist: so in the Church of Christ, when it is without the help and
assistance of a Christian magistrate, there must be some external and
judicial means to discern error, and redress wrong, in case any particular
person or Church be infected or oppressed; otherwise, there is no possibility
for truth and equity to harbor long amongst the sons of men.

The remedy which the Primitive Church had, and used against heresy and
injury, she derived as well from the promise made by Christ's own words, as
from the example of the Apostles in the like case. Christ willing such of his
Disciples as were grieved by their brethren, after the first and second
admonition, to toll it to the Church; adds for the direction and confirmation
of all religious assemblies and conferences; Matthew. 18.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them; and whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever you shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Whether the
name of the Church in this place he taken for the assembly of Elders and
Rulers under Moses law, or of Pastors and Teachers under the Gospel, to me
it is indifferent; this is evidently the order, which our Savior wills to
be observed; from private admonition to go to witnesses, and from witnesses to
assemblies. So the word (...) does most plainly signify; and so the
promise annexed does clearelie import; where two or three are assembled
together in my name, I am in the midst of them.

Neither could any other course be established in the Church. for since an
end of controversies must be had amongst men, least perpetual contention
bring final confusion, and pluck up the very roots of all charity and
equity from amongst men, when neither private persuasion, nor friendly
mediation can appease the parties contending; what other order could be
prescribed, but a Judicial hearing and determining of things in question: Now
Judges must needs be either single or assembled; and single Judges of force
must either be Sovereign and supreme Judges, or else under superiors appointed
by the same warrant. The Bishop of Rome claims a single and sole commission
to hear and conclude all causes, concerning either faith or right; and were
his proof as good, as his challenge is proud, it were worth the discussing.
but the more he claims, the more he sins, by reason he takes unto
himself without commission, an infallible and inevitable judgment over all
men and matters upon the face of the earth, that any way touch the truth or
the Church. Princes are single and sovereign Judges of earthly things, and
when they believe, the defense and maintenance of the Church and faith is by
God himself committed to their power and care; but Christ did not settle the
sword to be the general and perpetual rule to govern his Church. for then
without a Prince there could be no Church; and consequently, neither in the
Apostles times, nor three hundred years after, had Christ any Church here on
earth, since none of the Roman Princes that were lords of the world,
publikelie maintained the Christian faith before Constantine.

Since we find no single nor supreme Judges, on whom the Church of Christ must
always depend for the debating and ending of ecclesiastical strifes and
contentions; of necessity there must either be none, which were the utter
subversion of all peace and order amongst the faithful, where there wants a
Christian Magistrate; or else the Pastors and Stewards of Christ's Church, to
whom the care and charge thereof is committed, must assemble together, and
with mutual conference and consent, perform those duties to the Church in
general, which otherwise they do to each particular place and person. for
though Pastors be affixed to their places and charges, yet that does not
hinder the common care they should have of all the members of Christ's body;
and therefore when need so requires, they must as well employ their travel
abroad, as bestow pains at home, to direct or pacify the household of faith.
This brotherly kind of succouring and assisting each other in troubles and
dangers, is sometimes performed by letters, but never so thoroughly and
effectually, as by meeting and assembling together, when with deliberate and
full advise, they may hear and determine what they think meetest for the
safety and quietness of the Church of God.

Their warrant so to do, is builded on the maine grounds of all divine and
humane societies, strengthened by the promise of our Savior, and assured unto
them by the example of the Apostles and perpetual practice of the Church of
Christ. By Gods law what obedience and reverence the father may expect from
his children, the same or greater must all believers yield to the fathers of
their faith. They are comprised in the same name, and in the same commandment
with the fathers of our flesh, and consequently must have the same honor. And
if the fullness of each man's reward must be according to the excellency of his
labor; they that beget us, nourish us, and continue us in Christ, deserve
far greater honor, then they that bring us into this world, and provide
only for the things of this life. Again, the Church is the body of Christ,
and in that respect, as in our bodies, so in his, not only the members have a
common care for the whole, but the principal parts must direct and guide the
rest; namely, the eyes to see, the ears to hear, and the mouth to speak for
the whole body. Such therefore as Christ has placed to be the Hebr. 13.
watchmen and leaders, Matthew. 5.
the light and salt of his Church, must not only warn and guide, but also
lighten and season in their measure the whole body. for what commission they
have from Christ severed and single in their proper charges, the same they must
needs retain assembled and joined throughout their circuites. Yea, the Lord so
much tendereth the fatherly care, and brotherly concord of the Pastors of his
Church, that he has promised to be present in the midst of their assemblies,
and with his spirit to direct them, so they come together, not to accomplish
their own lusts and desires, but to sanctify his name by detecting error,
resisting wolves, maintaining truth, curing the sores and maladies that pester
and poison the members of his body.

Celestinus writing to the general Council of Ephesus, says; Celestini
epistola ad Concilium Ephesinum.
The assembly of Priests testifies the presence of the holy Ghost. It is
true that is written, since the truth cannot lie, and in the Gospel are these
words; Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I
in the midst of them. This being so, if so small a number be not destitute of
the holy spirit, shall we not much more believe that he is now in the midst
(of you,) where so great a multitude of holy men are assembled? The Council of
Chalcedon applies the same words to the same purpose. Relatio Synodi
Chalcedonens. ad Leonem action^ 3.
We saw (say they) as we thought the heavenly spouse conversant amongst us.
For if where two or three are assembled in his name, he has promised he will
be in the midst of them; what peculiar regard (think we) has he showed
toward those Priests which have preferred the knowledge of his confession
before Country and children? So Reccaredus king of Spain that first abiured
the Arrian heresio, 589. years after Christ, wrate to the Council of Toledo.
Council. Toleta, 3 ca. 2.
I perceived it to be very necessary that your blessedness should assemble
together in one place, giving trust to the Lords words when he says; where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of the^.
for I believe the Godhead of the holy and blessed Trinity to be present in the
sacred Synod, and therefore I have presented my faith in the midst of you as
in the presence of God.

This course the Apostles taught the Church of Christ to follow by their
example, when about the question that troubled the Church of Antioch, Act. 15.
the Apostles and Elders came together to examine the matter, and to verify
their masters words to be true; not only the Apostles, but the whole assembly
wrate thus in their letters; Ibidem, v. 28.
It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us. for if it be sure which the
Apostle said; Act. 20.
the holy Ghost made you overseers to feed the Church: And if our Savior
could not be deceived when he said; Luc. 11.
he that hears you, hears me; etc. this must be verified as well of Pastors
assembled, as singled; yea, Pastors gathered together in Christ's name, are
rather assured of his direction and assistance, then when they be severed,
Council. Africa. ca. 138. epistola ad Celestinum.
unless there be any that thinks God inspireth one particular person with
righteousness, and forsakes a number of Priests assembled in Synod; which
the Council of Africa reputeth to be very absurd and repugnant to Christ's
promise, so long as they meet together in his name, and not to deface his
truth, nor oppress their brethren.

This has in all Ages, as well before, as since the great Council of Nice
been approved and practiced as the lawfullest and surest means to discern
truth from falshoode, to decide doubts, end strifes, and redress wrongs in
causes ecclesiastical; yea, when there were no believing magistrates to assist
the Church, this was the only way to cleanse the house of God, as much as
might be, from the loathsome vessels of dishonor; and after Christian Princes
began to profess and protect the truth, they never had, nor can have any
better or safer direction amongst men, then by the Synodes of wise and godly
Pastors. A Synod at Antioch about three score years before the Council of
Nice, condemned and deposed Paulus Samosatonus for heresy; and when he would
not yield the Church, but kept it by violence; upon complaint made to
Aurelianus the Emperor, though he were an Ethnike, Samosatenus Eusebius. l. 7.
ca. 30
was with extreme shame driven from the church by the worldly Prince. Three
score and ten years before that, many Synodes were assembled in diverse places
for the keeping of Easter, as in Eusebius. l. 5. ca. 23. and 24.
Palestine under Theophilus and Narcissus; in Eusebius. l. 5. ca. 23. and 24.
Rome under Victor, in Eusebius. l. 5. ca. 23. and 24.
Pontus under Palinas, in Eusebius. l. 5. ca. 23. and 24.
France under Irenaeus, in Idem li. 7. ca. 5. and 7.
Asia under Polycrates. The like we find in the days of Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, of Idem li. 6. ca. 43
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, of Council. Carthaginens. sub Cypriano.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage; and the like no doubt was observed in all Ages of
the Church even from the beginning, as necessity forced, and the safety of
the time permitted.

The great Nicene Council perceived, and by their decree witnessed how
needful the use of Synodes was, and would be in the Church of Christ. Council.
i Niceni, ca. 5.
It seems (unto us) very requisite (say they) that in every Province twice
every year there should be a Synod, that all the Bishops of the Province
meeting together, may in common examine such questions as are occurrent in
every place. The Council of Antioche continued the same course; Concilii
Antioch. ca. 20.
for ecclesiastical businesses, and the determining of matters in
controversy, we think it very fit that in every Province, Synodes of Bishops
should be assembled twice every year. So did the general Council of
Constantinople. Concilii Constantinopolitanis 1. ca. 2.
It is evident that the Synod in every Province, must govern the causes of
every Province, according as it was decreed in the Council of Nice. The great
Council of Chalcedon reproved the slacknesse of Bishops in omitting the
prescribed number of Synodes. Concilii Chalce^lonensis, ca. 19
It is come to our ears, that in (some) Provinces the Synodes of Bishops are
not kept, which are appointed by the Canons; and thereby many ecclesiastical
matters, which need reformation, are neglected. This sacred Council therefore
determines, according to the Canons of our godly Fathers, that the Bishops of
every Province shall twice every year assemble together at the place where the
Bishop of the Mother City (that is the Metropolitan) shall appoint, to amend
all matters emergent (within their Province,) The tedious length of the
journey, and poverty of the Churches in some places, forced the Bishops to
assemble but once in the year. so the Council of Toledo determined for
Spain. Concilii Toletant, 3. ca. 18.
This holy and general Council decrees, that the authority of the former
Canons standing good, which command Synodes to be kept twice in the year, in
respect of ye length of the way, and poverty of the Churches of Spain, the
Bishops shall assemble once in the year at the place which the Metropolitan
shall appoint. The 2. Council of Turon took the same order for France, in cases
of necessity. C^nci^ii Turo^. 2. ca. 1.
It has pleased this holy council, that the Metropolitan and the bishops of
his Province shall meet twice every year in Synod at the place which the
Metropolitan by his discretion shall choose; or if there be an inevitable
necessity, then without all excuse of persons, and occasion of pretenses, once
in the year shall every man make his repair. And if any Bishop fail so to
come to the Synod, let him stand excommunicate by his brethren of the same
Province until a greater Synod, and in the mean time let no Bishop of an
other Province presume to communicate with him.

There is no Christian Realm nor Age, wherein the use of Synodes has not been
thought needful, as well under believing magistrates for consultation and
direction, as under Infidels for the stopping of irreligious opinions,
withstanding wicked enterprises, and procuring the peace and holiness of the
Church, as appears by the Councils that have been kept in all kingdoms and
countries since the Apostles times, when any matter of moment came in question,
which are extant to this day; and likewise by the Synodes that every Nation and
Province did yearly celebrate according to the rules of the great Nicene and
Chalcedon Councils, which can not be numbered, and were not recorded. Neither is
the continuance of Provincial Synodes prescribed only by Councils; the
Imperial laws command the like. Nouella constitutio. 123. ca. 10.
That all the ecclesiastical State and sacred rules may with more diligence be
observed, we require (says the Emperor) every Archbishop, Patriarch, and
Metropolitan, to call unto him once or twice every year the Bishops that are
under him in the same Province, and thoroughly to examine all the causes which
Bishops, Clerks, or Monks have amongst themselves, and to determine them, so
as what so ever is trespassed by any person against the Canons, may be
reformed. The laws of Charles alleging the Councils of Antioch and Chalcedon;
Legum Francia i^. 1. ca. 13.
that the Bishops of every Province with their Metropolitan, should assemble
in Council twice in the year for the causes of the Church, command that
course to be continued, and Ibidem ca. 127.
twice every year Synodes to be assembled. And unless you give the Pastor and
Presbyters of every parish full and free power to profess what religion they
best like, to offer what wrongs they will, to use what impiety and tyranny
they themselves list, without any restraint or redress, which were an
heathenish, if not an hellish confusion; you must where there is no christian
magistrate, (as oftentimes in the Church of Christ there has been, and may be
none) yield that liberty to the Church of Christ, which every humane society
has by the principles of nature; to wit, that the whole may guide each part,
and the greater number overrule the lesser, which without assembling in Synod
can not be done.

We never meant to deny the authority or use of lawful Synodes; we confess
De Ministrorum euangolii gradebus. ca. 23. fol. 159.
they are a sure remedy against all confusion: but this we dislike, that you
give the power to call Synodes from the Magistrate to the Metropolitan, thereby
maintaining a needelesse difference amongst Bishops, and suffer none but such
as you term Bishops to have voices in Councils, whereas every Pastor and
Preacher has as good right to sit there, and by consent and subscription to
determine, as they have.] What right we yield to Christian Magistrates to
call Synodes within their Territories, shall soon appear; in the mean time
you must tell us, who called Synodes in the Primitive Church before Princes
favored Christian Religion. was it done by Magistrates, who then were
Infidels? or by Metropolitanes? And when Princes protected the truth, did they
moderate provincial Councils by their substitutes? or was that charge
committed to the Bishop of the chief and mother Church and City in every
province? you challenge to be men of learning and reading; speak of your
credites, who called in ancient times provincial Synodes, or at any time who
moderated them besides Metropolitanes? If your Presbyteries by Gods essential
and perpetual ordinance must have a President to rule their actions for
avoiding of confusion; how can Synodes be called and governed without one to
prescribe the time and place, when and where the Pastors shall meet; and when
they are met, to guide and moderate their assemblies? perceive you not that men
living in diverse cities and countries, and assembling but seldom, have more
need of some chief to call them together, then those that live in one place
and every day meet? And if confusion and disorder in Presbyteries be
pernicious to the Church, is it not far more dangerous in Synodes? Wherefore
you must either clean reject Synodes, and so make the Presbyters of each
parish supreme and sovereign Judges of all Ecclesiastical matters; or if you
receive Synodes, you must withal admit some both to conuocate and moderate
their meetings.

The Magistrate may callthem together; and themselves, when they are assembled,
may choose a director and guider of their actions.] But when the Magistrate
does not regard but rather afflict the Church, as in times of infidelity and
heresy, who shall then assemble the Pastors of any province to deliverate and
determine matters of doubt or danger: Shall error and injury ouerwhelme the
church of God without any public remonstrance or refusance: In questions of
faith, cases of doubt, matters of faction, offers of wrong, breach of all order
and equity, shall each place and Presbytery be free to teach and do what
they please, without depending on, or so much as co^ferring with the rest of
their brethren: Call you that the discipline of Christ's Church, and not rather
the dissolution of all peace, and subversion of all truth in the house of God:
I think you be not so far besides your selves, that you strive for this
pestilent kind of anarchie to be brought into the world. our age is giddie
enough without this frenzy to put them forward. Howbeit we seek not what new
course you can devise after fifteen hundred years to govern the Church: but
what means the ancient and Primitive Church of Christ had, before Princes
embraced the truth, to assemble Synodes, and pacify controversies as well
touching religion as Ecclesiastical regiment, and if in the Church stories you
find any other besides Metropolicanes, that called and governed Provincial
Councils, name the men, and note the places, and we yield you the prize.

Metropolitanes were first established, if not devised by the Council of Nice;
before that, we read nothing of any Metropolitan.] If that were their first
original, they need not be ashamed of it. all Christendom these twelve
hundred years has reverenced and followed the decrees and judgment of the
Nicene Fathers; the founders of your new discipline compared with them in
antiquity and authority, come a great way behind them: but if you look
better about you, you shall find that Metropolitanes are far elder then the
Nicene Council. They are not devised, but acknowledged in the Council of Nice
by these words; Coucil. Nicon. ca. 6.
(...). Let the ancient usage continue still in Egypt, Libia and Pentapolis,
that the bishop of Alexandria have (...) power (and authority) over all these
places. Likewise at Antioch and in other provinces (...), Let the churches
keep their prerogatives. What those prerogatives were, which anciently
belonged to the Metropolitan Churches and their Bishops; though the Council
does not express them all, yet these two are there mentioned. In the 4.
Canon; Council. Nicen. ca. 4.
(...). The chief authority (or ratification) of things done, must belong in
every province to the Metropolitan. and in this very Canon the next words are;
Council. Nicen. ca. 6.
In all places (or provinces) this is evident, that if any man be made a bishop
without the knowledge (or consent) of the Metropolitan, this great Council
determines he must be no Bishop. So that neither could Synodes be called, nor
Bishops ordained without y^ Metropolitan, by the Canons of the Nicene Council,
and their power and prerogative within their own province began not first in
that Council, but is there witnessed to be (...) an ancient use, and as they
speak in the 7. Canon, (...) an ancient tradition.

The Council of Antioch that assembled fifteen years after the Council of
Nice, concluded as much as I do out of the Nicene Canons; Council. Antioch. ca.
19.
A Bishop must not be ordained without a Synod, and the presence of the
Metropolitan; the Bishops of each Province to make a Synod, the
Metropolitan by his letters must call together. Ca. 20.
It is very requisite that in every Province Councils be kept twice in the
year; to the which Presbyters, Deacons, and all others that think they have
wrong, may repair to receive justice from the Synod. It is not lawful for
any to assemble (Synodes) of themselves, without those to whom the in other
Cities are committed. Ca. 16.
For that is a perfect Council where the Metropolitan is present. What power
the Metropolitan had above the rest, they likewise express. Council. Antioch.
ca. 9.
The Bishops of every province must agnise the Metropolitan to have the
ouerfight and care of the whole Province. Wherefore we think it meet, that in
honor he be before them, and the rest of the bishops do nothing without him,
according to the canon of our fathers that has anciently prevailed, but only
such things as pertain to their own (charge and) Dioecese. Further they
shall enterprise nothing without the Metropolitan, nor the Metropolitan
without the consent of the rest. The general Council of Ephesus affirms,
that Metropolitanes had their preeminence from the beginning of the Church.
Council. Ephesians. edictum post aduentum episcop^rum Cypri.
It seems good to this sacred and Occumenicall Council to reserve unto every
province untouched and undiminished the rights which they have had (...) from
the first beginning, every Metropolitan having liberty (...), to take the
copy of our Acts, for his own security, according to the use anciently
confirmed. These 3. Councils confess, that Metropolitanes were no late nor
new devise, first authorized by the Council of Nice; but their right and
preeminence was an ancient usage and Canon of the Church even from the
beginning.

Now that all Christendom ever after the Nicene Council embraced this kind
of government by Metropolitanes, is a case so clear, that no shift can refuse
it. The second Council of Arle in France that immediately followed the
Council of Nice, says; Council. Ar^latens. 2. ca. 5.
Nullus episcopus sine Metropolitani per missa, nec Episcopus Metropolitanus
sine tribus Episcopis comprouincialibus praesumat Episcopum ordinare. Let no
Bishop presume to ordain a Bishop without the permission of the Metropolitan,
nor the Metropolitan himself without three Bishops of the same Province. Ca.
6.
For this is first evident, that he which is made a Bishop sine conscientia
Metropolitani, without the consent of his Metropolitan, he ought to be no
Bishop, according to the great Council (of Nice.) And so for Synodes. Ca. 18.
The Synod shall be assembled at the discretion of the Bishop of Arle, and if
any being summoned cannot come by reason of sickness, he shall send another to
supply his place. Ca. 19.
But if any shall neglect to be present, or depart before the Council be
dissolved, let him know he is excluded from the communion of his brethren, and
may not be received, unless he be absolved in the next Synod. The Council of
Laodieea in Phrygia. Council. Laodi^ea. ca. 12.
Let Bishops be appointed to the regiment of the church by the judgment of the
Metropolitan and the Bishops adjoining; and Ca. 40.
being called to the Synod, they must not neglect it, but go thither and teach
or learn (what is requisite) for the direction of the Church and the rest (of
their brethren.) The second Council of Carthage in Africa. Council.
Carthaginens. 2. ca. 12.
We all think good, that (the Primate of every Province being not first
consulted) no man presume though with many Bishops in what place soever without
his precept to ordain a Bishop. but if necessity force, three Bishops
wheresoever with the Primates precept may ordain a Bishop. The fifth Council of
Carthage. Council. Carthaginens. 5. ca. 7.
We think good that the Primates of every Province be written unto, that
when they assemble Councils in their own Provinces, they hinder not the day
(limited for the general meeting.) The Mileuitane Council. Council. Mileuitan.
ca. 13.
Aurelius (Bishop of Carthage) said; This is a common cause, that every one of
us should acknowledge his order allowed him by God, and the lower (Bishops)
yield to those that are above them, and not presume to do anything without
them. Wherefore they which attempt to do ought without regard of their
superiors, must be accordingly repressed by the whole Synod. All the Bishops
answered; This order has bin kept by our fathers and forefathers, and by Gods
grace shall be kept of us. The Council of Rhegium in Italy. Council. Rhegiens.
ca. 1.
The ordination which the Canons define to be void, we also determine to be
frustrate, wherein since there were neither three present, nor the Letters of
the Comprouinciall Bishops, nor the Metropolitanes good will obtained, there
was utterly nothing that should make a Bishop. And again; Ca. 6.
Let no (Bishop) repair to the Church, which has not her chief priest,
except he be invited by the letters of the Metropolitan, lest he be
circumuented by the people. The Council of Tarracon in Spain; Council.
Tarrac^nens. ca. 6.
If any Bishop warned by the Metropolitan, neglect to come to the Synod,
except he be hindered by some corporal necessity, let him be deprived of the
communion of all the Bishops until the next Council, as the Canons of our
fathers have decreed. The Epaunine Council. Council. Epa^nens^ca^^*
Prima and immutabili constitutione decretum est, vt cum Metropolitanus fratres
vel Comprouinciales suos ad Concilium, vel ad ordinationem cuiusque
Consacerdotis crediderit vocandos, nisi causa euidens extiterit, nullus
excuset. By an immutable constitution we first decree, that when the
Metropolitan shall think good to call his brethren the Bishops of the same
Province either to a Synod, or to the ordination of any of his fellow Bishops,
none shall excuse without an evident cause. The like, as well for ordaining of
Bishops, as calling of Synodes by the Metropolitan, may be seen in the
Councils of Agatha, ca. 35. of Taurine, ca. 1. of Aurelia the second, ca. 1. 2.
the fifth, ca. 18. of Turon the second, ca. 1. 9. of Paris, ca. 8. of Toledo the
third, ca. 18. the fourth, ca. 3. and in diverse others. All which testify that
as the Metropolitanes power in the government of the Church was a thing
received and confirmed by use long before the Nicene Council; so it continued
throughout Christendom till the bishop of Rome wholly subverted the freedom of
the church, and recalled all things to his own disposition.

The power of Metropolitanes was rather lengthened, then shortened by the Bishop
of Rome. for who suppressed Provincial Synodes, and brought Bishops and
Archbishops to this height of pride they are at, but only the Romish Decretals
of Antichrist?] If your wisdom serve you to call that Antichrists pride,
whereto godly councils were forced for their own ease, and wherewith religious
Princes were contented for the better execution of their laws; my duty to the
church of God and the magistrate stays me from reueiling or disliking that
course, which I see both Councils and Princes by long and good experience were
driven unto. As for Antichrist, he usurped all men's places, and subjected all
men's rights to his will and pleasure; otherwise I do not find, what increase
he gave to the power of Metropolitanes. Let them eni^y that which the councils
and princes of the Primitive church by trial saw needful to be committed to
their care; and we strive for no more. I trust you will not call that
Antichristian pride when they are required by christian Princes to see their
Laws and Edicts touching causes Ecclesiastical put in practice.

The fault we find is, that Archbishops have suppressed the liberty of
Synodes, and reserved all things to their own jurisdiction.] A greater fault
then that is; you be so inflamed with disdain, that you know not what you say.
Who, I pray you, prohibiteth the use, or abridgeth the power of Synods to make
rules and determine causes ecclesiastical? the Metropolitan, or the Prince?
Take good heed, lest by eager and often calling for the indictio^ and decision
of Synodes at the Metropolitans hands without the princes leave, you erect a
new form of Synodes, not to advise and guide the Magistrate, when they be
thereto required, but to straighten or forestall the Princes power. True it is,
that with us no Synodes may assemble without the Princes warrant, as well to
meet, as to consult of any matters touching the state of this Realm; and why:
They be no Court separate from the prince, nor superior to the Prince, but
subjected in all things unto the Prince, and appointed by the Laws of God and
man in truth and godliness to assist and direct the Prince, when and where
they shall be willed to assemble. Otherwise they have no power of themselves to
make decrees, when there is a christian Magistrate, neither may they challenge
the judicial hearing or ending of Ecclesiastical controversies without or
against the princes liking. Now judge your selves whether you do not grosely
betray your own ignorance, I am loath to say malice, when you declaime against
the Metropolitan for want of that which is not in his power to perform but in
the princes; and be more silent hereafter in these cases (if you be wise) lest
you traduce the Princes power under the Metropolitanes name. If waspishnesse
would suffer you soberly to consider, not only what things are changed in our
times, but also why, and by whom; you should better satisfy your selves, and
less trouble the realm then now you do.

Before princes began to profess christianity, the church had no way (as I
noted before) to discuss right and wrong in faith, and other ecclesiastical
causes, but by Synodes and assemblies of religious and wise pastors. that
course always continued in the church (even when the sword most sharply pursued
the church) from the Apostles deaths to Constantines reign; and was ever found
in the church, when christian Princes were not. Those Synodes were assembled
and governed by the Bishops of the chief and mother churches and cities in
every province, who by the ancient Councils are called Metropolitans. When
princes embraced the faith, they increased the number of Synods, and confirmed
not only the canons of general Councils; but also the judgments and
decisions of provincial Synodes, as the best means they could devise to
procure peace, and advance religion in every place. for as by their laws they
referred Ecclesiastical causes to Ecclesiastical Judges; so lest matters
should hang long in strife, they charged each Metropolitan to assemble the
Bishops of his Province twice every year, and there to examine and order all
matters of doubt and wrong within the Church. The rules of the Nicene Council,
touching that and al other things, Constantine ^atified as Eusebius witnesses,
and like wise the sentences of Bishops in their Synodes, kept according to that
appointment. Eusebius. de vita Constantins lib. 3
(...). The decrees of the (Nicene) council Constantine confirmed with his
(consent) seal (or authority.) And reporting the laws made by him in favor
of Christians, Eusebius says; Idem lib. 4. de vita Constantini.
The determinations of Bishops delivered in their Synodes he sealed (or
ratified) that it might not be lawful for the Rulers of Nations to infringe
their decrees, since the Priests of God (as he thought) were (more approved
or) better to be trusted then any Judge. yea whatsoever is done in the holy
assemblies of Bishops, Idem lib. 3.
(...), that (says Constantine) must be ascribed to the heavenly will (or
counsel of God.) Concerning the four first general Councils, Justinian says;
Nouella constitutio 1^1. ca. 1. de 4 sanctis conciliis.
We decree that the sacred Ecclesiastical rules, which were made and agreed on
in the four (first) holy Councils, that is, in the Nicene,
Constantinopolitane, Ephesine, and Chalcedon, shall have the force of
(Empertall) Laws. for the rules of the four above named Councils we observe
as Laws.

In tract of time, when causes multiplied, and Bishops could neither support
the charge they were at in being abroad, nor be absent so long from their
Churches, as the hearing and concluding of every private matter would require;
they were constrained to assemble but once in the year, and in the mean space
to commit such causes as could abide no such delay, or were too tedious for
their short meetings, unto the hearing and judgment of the Metropolitan or
Primate of the province and country, where y^ strifes arose. The Council in
Trullo says; Council. in Trul^^. ca. 8.
The things which were determined by our sacred Fathers we will have to stand
good in all points, and renew the Canon, which commands Synodes of Bishops
to be kept every year in every Province, where the Metropolitan shall
appoint. But since by reason of the invasions of the Barbarians, and diverse
other occasions, the Governors of the Church cannot possibly assemble in Synod
twice every year; we decree, that in any case there shall be a Synod of
Bishops once every year for Ecclesisticall questions likely to arise in every
Province, at the place where the Metropolitan shall make choice. The second
Nicene Council; Synod. Nicen. 2. ca. 6.
Where the Canon wills, judicial inquisition to be made twice every year by
the assembly of Bishops in every Province; and yet for the misery and poverty
of such as should travel, the Fathers of the sixth Synod decreed, it should be
once in the year, and then things amiss to be redressed; we renew this
(later) Canon: insomuch, that if any Metropolitan neglect to do it, except he
be hindered by necessity, violence, or some other reasonable cause, he shall
be under the punishment of the Canons. The Council of Africa. Council Africani.
ca. 138 in epist. ad Celestinu^.
The decrees of the Nicene Council did most plainly leave, both inferior
Clerks and Bishops TO THEIR OWN METROPOLITANES. They did wisely and rightly
perceive, that all causes ought to be ended in the places where they did first
spring. for they d^d not think any Province should be destitute of the grace
of the holy Spirit, whereby justice should be prudently discerned, and
constantly pursued by the Priests of Christ; specially when as every man has
liberty, if he find himself grieved with the censure of those that examine
his cause, to appeal to the Synodes of the same Province, or to a general
Council. And again, Council. Africani ca. 127. and ca. 28.
It has pleased us that Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferior Clergy men,
if they complain of the judgments of their own Bishops, shall be heard by
the Bishops adjoining. And if they think good to appeal from them, let them
not appeal but either to the Synodes of Africa, OR TO THE PRIMATES of their
own Provinces. So the Council of Sardica. Council. Sardicens. ca. 14.
If a Bishop in a rage will by and by cast a Presbyter or Deacon out of the
Church, we must provide, that being innocent, he be not condemned, nor deprived
the communion. Al (the Bishops) answered; Let him that is eiected have liberty
TO FLY TO THE METROPOLITAN of that Province. The Emperor confirmed the same.
Nouella constitutio 123. ca. 22.
If the Bishops of one Synod have any matter of variance betwixt themselves,
either for Ecclesiastical right or any other occasions; first the Metropolitan
with other Bishops of that Synod shall examine and determine the cause; and if
either part dislike the judgment, THEN THE PATRIARCH of that Dioecese shall
give them audience ACCORDING TO THE ECCLESIASTICAL CANONS AND OUR LAWS,
neither side having liberty to contradict his judgment. But if any of the
Clergy, or whosoever complain against his Bishop for any matter, LET THE
CAUSE BE IVD^ED BY THE METROPOLITAN, answerable to the sacred Rules and our
Laws. And if any man appeal from his sentence, let the cause be brought TO
THE ARCHBISHOP and Patriarch of that Dioecese, and he according to the Canons
and Laws shall make a final end.

So that not Antichrist, but ancient Councils and Christian Emperors
perceiving the mighty troubles and intolerable charges, that the Bishops of
every province were put to by staying at Synodes for the hearing and
determining of al private matters and quarrels occurrent in the same Province;
and seeing no cause to busy and employ the bishops of the whole world twice
every year to sit in judgment about petite and particular strifes and
brables, till al parties were satisfied, but finding rather, that by that means
all matters must either be infinitely delayed, or slenderly examined, and
hastily posted over; as well the Princes as the Bishops, not to increase the
pride of Archbishops, but to settle an indifferent course both for the parties
and the Judges; referred, not the making of Laws and Canons, but the execution
of them already made to the credit and conscience of the Archbishop. And
though the Fathers leave an appeal either to the Councils, or to the Primates
of every Nation and Country; yet the Emperor seeing howelong causes would
depend before Councils could duly examine and determine them; and that to
bring all private matters from Provincial Synodes to National Councils, were
to breed a worse confusion then the former was; decreed that all appeals
should go to the Archbishop.

If you murmr at this alteration first established by the Roman Emperors,
and still continued by the Laws of this realm now in force; remember how
unreasonable and intolerable a matter it were for all the bishops of this realm
to assemble, and at their own charges to stay the hearing, examining and
sentencing of all the doubts, wrongs, quarrels and contentions which all the
Consistories throughout England at this day do handle and determine. Did you
exclude matters of tithes, testaments, legacies, contracts, marriages and such
like, which the ancient Laws of all Nations commit to episcopal audience, and
reserve only matters of correction for Synodes; see you not by experience, how
long causes by reason of the number and weight of them depend in the Arches, in
the Audience, before the high Commission, though the Judges thereof sit all the
year long at the days prefixed without intermission? were it not a proper
piece of work for your pleasures to bring all the pastors of this land to
keep continually in one place, and to do nothing else but attend for
appeals, that must and would be sent from all the shires and quarters of
this realm? who should teach and administer the Sacraments to the people in
the mean time? who should defray the expenses of so many hundred pastors, as
are not able to maintain their families at home, and themselves abroad? who
shall instruct them in the knowledge of the Laws, without which they shalldoe
more wrong then right? How long will it be before so great a number, or the most
part of them concur in one mind to conclude every cause that is brought
unto them? And when all these inconveniences be endured, and absurdities
digested; to what purpose, since every man may presently appeal from them to
the Princes power and delegates? If Synodes were supreme Tribunals, though it
were not worth their pains and expenses, yet they should end strifes; but
now you would have them waste their time, spend their livings, and weary
themselves in loosing their labor, whiles euerieman that likes not their
order, may forthwith appeal, and frustrate their proceedings.

We could devise many ways to prevent all this that you object, if we might be
suffered. for we would have standing Synodes in every City that should consist
of the Pastors, and some grave and wise Lay Elders there dwelling to determine
matters emergent within a circuit to be appointed unto them; and from them
appeals to be made to the Synod of Pastors and Elders residing in some
Principal and chief City within this Realm; so that unless the matter were
of very great weight, the Pastors at large should not be troubled to
assemble together; and when they assembled, their abode not to be long, for
saving of time and charge; which men of their calling neither should loose,
nor can spare; lest we busy them rather as Judges of men's quarrels, then
Stewardes of Gods mysteries.] The chief ground of your Discipline is your own
devise, as may well appear in that no part of it is ancient, or was ever used
in the Church of Christ; and the joints of it hang together like sick men's
dreams. The Pastors and Lay Elders of every Church served at first to fill
up your Presbyteries; and now your bessels are so low drawn, that you use them
for Synodes. And where you could not abide, that Bishops should have Dioceses;
now you be pleased, that Presbyteries shall have circuits, and Ecclesiastical
regiment, without their Church and City. Metropolitanes were not long since
the height of Antichrists pride; and now you are forced for repressing of
disorders and enormities in every parish, to allow some chief and mother
Cities; and to yield their Presbyteries Metropoliticall jurisdiction over
whole provinces. And all this, your selves being private men, take upon you to
devise and establish without precedent to induce, or authority to warrant your
doings; and yet you think it not lawful for the Prince and the whole Realm
to imitate the example of the Primitive Church, nor to follow the steps of
religious and godly Emperors, that appointed Metropolitanes to call and
moderate provincial Councils; and for ease of all sides, to examine such
matters before hand as were not worthy to molest and trouble full Synodes.
Wherein, what else do you, but show your inconstant and inconsiderate humors;
that would have the Church guided by Presbyteries and Synodes parochial and
provincial, and admit Presidents and chief Governors of either; and yet
cannot abide that Princes should retain the ancient and accustomed form of
Ecclesiastical regiment by Bishops and Metropolitanes, settled so long ago in
the Church, and ever since continued without interruption? But I pray you, what
places or voices have Lay Elders in Synodes? what example or reason can you
pretend for it?

If they may judge in Presbyteries, why not in Synodes? Belike you would have
none but Bishops have decisiue voices in Councils according to the Romish order
of celebrating Synodes.] If you were as far from novelty, as I am from
Popery, we should soon agree; howbeit every thing used or believed in the
Romish Church is not rashly to be disclaimed. You make it a resolute
conclusion, that Lay Elders were part of the Presbyteries in the Primitive
Church; but when we come to examine your proofs, we find the^ as weak, as
your imagination is strong. Now though the Pastors of each parish, when they
are single, might happily need, as you think, the advice and assistance of
Lay Presbyters; yet that Pastors assembled in Synodes, where their number is
great, and their gifts of all sorts, should stand in like need of Lay Elders
to lead or direct them, is neither consequent to reason, nor coherent with the
rules of the sacred Scriptures. for to whom has the Lord committed Matthew. 28.
the teaching of all Nations? to pastors, or to Lay Presbyters? who by Gods law
are appointed Ezech. 3.
watchme^ in y^ house of Israel, 1. Corinthians. 4.
Stewards over his family, Act. 20.
Bishops over his Church, and Heb. 13.
Leaders of his flock? Lay Elders, or Christ's Ministers? If in the Church the
sheep must John. 10.
hear and follow their sheepeheardes, as well for truth of doctrine as
holiness of life; by what commission bring you Lay Presbyters into Synodes,
where the Teachers and Pastors of an whole province or nation are assembled?
Shall your Lay Elders by Christ's commandment be scholars in the Church, and
teachers in the Synod? Or do the gifts and graces of preachers so change, that
in pulpit each one must be believed and obeyed, in Council all joining
together must'be restrained and directed by Lay Elders? If you have reason or
authority for it; let us hear it: if neither; you trouble the Church of God
with a pang of your wilful contradiction, and take upon you to overrule
Christian princes and churches with greater surlines, then ever did Patriarch
or Pope.

In the Apostles Council were not only the Act. 15.
Presbyters, but all the brethren of the Church of Jerusalem, and the letters
of resolution, were written in all their names: and now you disdain that any
Lay men should be present at your Provincial Synodes and Councils, which you
see the Apostles did not refuse.] To be present at Synodes is one thing: to
deliberate and determine in Synod is an other thing. If you think that either
Presbyters or Brethren were admitted to the Apostles Council to help and aid
the Apostles in their debating or deciding the matter there questioned, you be
much deceived. The Apostles singled, were sufficient to decide a greater doubt
then that was; much more then, the whole assembly of the Apostles able to
search out the truth thereof without their assistance. The reason why all the
church was admitted to be present and to join with one accord in sending those
letters, I noted before. not only the gainsaiers, but the whole Church were to
be resolved in a case that touched them all. Otherwise as well the people as the
teachers of y^ Jews would s^il have abhorred the Gentiles, though beleuers, as
profane persons, until they had bin circu^cisd, which was the high way to
euacuate the cross of Christ, and to frustrate his grace. And therefore not
for deliberation, or for determination, but for the satisfaction of
contradictors, and instruction of the rest was the whole Church assembled, and
upon the full hearing and concluding of the question by the Apostles, the rest
joining with them acknowledged by their letters and messengers that it pleased
the holy ghost, the Gentiles should not be troubled with circumcision nor the
observation of Moses Law; but that the partition wall betwixt them was broken
down, by the blood of Christ, and they which were Ephesians. 2.
Aliens from the common wealth of Israel and strangers from the covenants of
promise, were now citizens with the Saints, and of the household of faith,
without the legal obseruances of Moses Law. S. Luke himself witnesses, that
to Acts 15. verse. 6.
discuss the matter, the Apostles and Elders assembled together, and after
great disputation on either side, Peter and James concluded the cause, whereto
the rest consented.

Yet then Elders were admitted to deliberate with the Apostles in that Synod,
whereas you suffer none but Bishops to have voices in Councils.] I make no
doubt but Presbyters sat with the Apostles in Synod to consult of this cause:
all the scruple is, what kind of Presbyters they were. Lay Presbyters I read
of none, and therefore I can admit none to be of that Council. Besides, such of
the seue^ty and such other Prophets, as assisted James in the regiment of the
church of Jerusalem, are in all reason expressed by that name. for since the
whole church there is divided into Apostles, Presbyters, and Brethren; the
helpers and coadiutors of the Apostles, were they Prophets or Evangelists that
either came with Paul and Barnabas from Antioch, or were commorant with James
and the rest at Jerusalem, must rather be contained in the name of Presbyters,
the^ sorted with the general multitude. for if they were of the many, what men
of more worthiness were there to be honored with the title of Presbyters? I hope
the next degree to Apostles are not your Lay Elders; S. Paul was then fowly
ouershot, to set 1. Corinthians. 12
first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, and to reject Governors,
which you take for your Lay Presbyters, into the 7. place. Howbeit unless you
make some fresher and better proof for them; then yet I see; your Lay Elders
are no where numbered by S. Paul for church governors.

As for Presbyters y^ were beneath Apostles (understand by that name prophets,
evangelists, pastors, teachers or whom you will, so no lay Elders,) we deny
the^ neither places nor voices in Synods, so long as they have right to teach
or speak in the church. for we esteem Synodes to be but the assemblies and
conferences of those to whom the Churches of any province or nation for the
word and doctrine are committed. And therefore to our Synodes are called, as
your selves know; not only bishops, but deanes, archdeacons, and other clerks
as well of the principal and cathedral Presbytery, where the episcopal seat
and church is, as of the Diocese at large. And though some Romish writers do
stiffly maintain, that none but bishops have voices in Councils; yet you see
the ancient institution of our synodall assembly in this realm overthrows
their late and new assertion. Neither lack we examples of the course which we
keep, even from the beginning.

The Synod of Rome called by Cornelius against Nouatus about the year of
Christ 255; consisted of Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 43.
60. Bishops and many Presbyters and Deacons, as Eusebius. notes. From the Synod
of Antioch, that deposed Paulus Samosatenus about the year of our Lord 270.
wrate not only Bishops, but Idem li. 7. ca. 30
Presbyters and Deacons, as appears by their epistle. In the Council of
Eliberis about the time of the first Nicene Council sat besides the Bishops,
Subscriptiones Eliberini Council. fol. 282.
36. Presbyters. In the second Council of Arle about the same time subscribed
Subscript. Arelatens. Council. 2. fol. 293.
12. Presbyters, besides Deacons and other Clergy me^. The like may be seen in
the Councils of Rome Tomo Conciliorum 1. fol. 951.
under Hilarious; and under Gregory, where Epistolarum lib. 4 ca. 88.
34. Presbyters subscribed after 22. Bishops; and in y^ first under Symmachus,
where after 72. bishops subscribed Tomo Conciliorum 1. fol. 1002.
67. Presbyters. so in the third, fifth, and sixth under the same Symmachus.
Felix also bishop of Rome kept a Council of 43. bishops, and Tomo Conciliorum
1. fol. 959.
74. Presbyters; and after the same manner have diverse other Metropolitanes
assembled in their prouincial synods, as well Presbyters, is bishops. The council
of Antisiodorum says, Council. Antisiodorens. ca. 7.
Let all the Presbyters being called, come to the Synod in the city. The 4.
council of Toledo describes y^ celebrating of aprouinciall council in this
wise. Concilium Toletanum 4. ca. ^.
Let the bishops assembled go to the church together, and sit according to the
time of their ordination, After all the bishops are entered and set, let the
Presbyters be called, and the Bishops sitting in a compass, let the Presbyters
sit behind them, and the Deacons stand before them. The Council of Tarracon
1100. years ago prescribed almost the very same order that we observe at
this day. Tarraconens. Council. ca. 13.
Let letters be sent by the Metropolitan unto his brethren, that they bring
with them unto the Synod, not only some of the Presbyters of the Cathedral
church, but also of each Dioecese. And why should this seem strange even to
the Romish crew, when as in the great Council of Lateran, as they call it,
under Innocentius the third, there were but 482. Bishops, and of Abbats and
Priors conuentuall almost double the number, even Platina in Innocentio 3.
eight hundred?

If Presbyters have right to sit in Prouincial Synodes, why are they excluded
from general Councils?] Many things are lawful which are not expedient. I make
no doubt but all pastors and teachers may sit and deliberate in Council; yet
would it breed a sea of absurdities to call all the pastors and preachers of
the world into one place, as often as need should require to have any matter
determined or ordered in the Church. As therefore in civil policy, when a
whole realm assembleth, not al ye persons there living are called together,
but certain chief over the rest or chosen by ye rest, to represent the state,
and to consult for the good of the whole common wealth; so in the government
of the Church it were not only superfluous and tedious, but monstrous to send
for all the Pastors and Presbyters of the whole world into one City, and
there to stay them from their cures and Churches till all things needeful could
be agreed and concluded. It is more agreeable to reason, and as sufficient in
right, that some of every place excelling others in dignity, or elected by
general consent, should be sent to supply the roumes of the rest that are
absent, and to confer in common for the directing and ordering of the whole
Church. And therefore Christian Princes in wisdom and discretion never sent
for all the Presbyters of the world to any general Council, but only for the
chiefest of every principal church and city; or for some to be sent from
every realm far distant, as legates in the names of the rest, and by that
means they had the consent of the whole world to the decrees of their
Councils, though not the personal appearance of all the Pastors and
Presbyters that were in the world.

So to the Council of Nice the first christian Emperor sent for by his letters
not all the Preachers and Presbyters of the world, but Socrat Li. 1. ca. 8.
(...), the Bishops of every place; and there came, Socrat Li. 1. ca. 8.
from all the Churches through Europe, Asia and Africa, (...), the best (or
chiefest) of the Ministers of God; each country sending not all their Bishops,
(for then would they farrc have exceded the number of 318.) but Ibidem.
(...), the most special and selected men they had; and though there were
present Ibidem.
an infinite number of Presbyters and Deacons, that came with the Bishops; yet
the Council consisted of 318. Bishops and no more, by reason the Emperor sent
not for the Presbyters of each place, but for the Bishops. The like examples
are to be seen in the three general Councils that followed, where only
Bishops determined matters in question; and the Presbyters that subscribed, in
the Councils of Constantinople and Chalcedon supplied the places of Bishops, as
their Legates and substitutes, which in the Vide Subscriptiones episcoporum,
actio 1. 3. 6, 16. concilti Chalesdonensis.
Council of Chalcedon is more fully expressed.

But what need we rip up these things at large, which pertain not so much to
our purpose: we seek now for the antiquity and authority of Metropolitanes;
and those we find not only received and established in the four first
general Councils, but confessed by them to have anciently continued in the
Church even from the beginning. And surely, if you grant Provincial Synodes
to be ancient and necessary in the Church of Christ, which you cannot deny;
Metropolitanes must needs be as ancient and requisite, without whom the Synodes
of each Province can neither be conuocated nor moderated.

If to avoid Metropolitanes you would have the prerogative of calling and
guiding Synodes to run round by course, which order you fansied before in
Bishops; our answer is easy: we look not what you can invent after 1500.
years to please your own humors; but what manner of ecclesiastical
government the Church of Christ from the Apostles times established and
continued by the general consent of the whole world; and that we prove was
not only in every Church and diocese to have a Bishop chief over the
Presbyters, but in every Province to appoint a Mother Church and City; and the
Bishop thereof to have this honor and dignity above the rest of his brethren,
that he might by letters consult, or call together the Bishops of his Province
for any question or cause that touched the faith or peace of the Church, and
not only moderate their meetings, but execute their decrees; and see them
performed throughout his Province. This was the ancient and original use of
Christ's Church, long before any Princes professed the truth; and when they
began to use their swords, for the doctrine and Church of Christ, then did
Synodes serve for the direction of Christian Princes; and Metropolitanes had
the execution as well of Princes laws, as Synodall decrees committed to their
power and care throughout their Province.

This course if you disdain or dislike, you condemn the whole Church of
Christ from the first increasing and spreading thereof on the face of the earth
to this present age; and prefer your own wisdom, (if it be worthy that
name, and not rather to be accounted self love and singularity,) before all
the Martyrs, Confessors, Fathers, Princes and Bishops that have lived, governed
and deceased in the Church of God since the Apostles deaths. How well the
height of your conceits can endure to blemish and reproach so many religious
and famous lights of Christendom, I know not; for my part I wish the Church
of God in our days may have the grace for piety and prudencie to follow their
steps, and not to make the world believe that all the servant of Christ
before our times, favored and furthered the pride of Antichrist, till in the
ends of the world, when the faith and love of most men are quenched or
decayed, we came to restore the Church to that perfection of discipline, which
the Apostles never mentioned, the ancient Fathers and Councils never
remembered, the universal Church of Christ before us never conceived nor
imagined.

We want not the witness of ancient Fathers and stories that reprove the
ambicious and tyrannous dominion of Metropolitanes and Archbishops. Socrates
says, Socrat. li. 7. ca. 11.
The Bishoprike of Rome, as likewise that of Alexandria, were long before his
time grown from the bonds of Priesthood unto worldly dominion. Nazianzene not
only lamenteth the mischiefs which follow these diversities of degrees, but
heartily wishes there were no such thing, that men might be discerned only
by their virtues. His words are worth the hearing. Nazianz. or atio post suum
in vrbem reditum.
For this (presidencie of Bishops) all our estatetottereth and shakes; for
this the ends of the earth are in a jealousy and tumult both senseless and
namelesse; for this we are in danger to be thought to be of men, which in deed
are of God, and to loose that great and new name. Would God there were neither
prioritie of seat, neither superiority of place, nor violent pre-eminence,
that we might be discerned only by virtue. But the right hand and the left,
and the midst; the higher and lower seat; the going before, and going even
with, have to no purpose done us much hurt, and cast many into the ditch, and
brought them to be goats, and those not only of the inferior sort, but even
of the shepeheards, which being masters in Israel knew not this.] You may soon
find of the ancient Fathers that misliked the contention, ambition, and pride
of many Bishops in the Primitive Church; but any that misliked their calling,
you cannot find. The sharper they were in reproouing their vices, the sounder
witnesses they are in allowing their office. If either Socrates or Nazianzene
had opposed themselves against the judgment of the Nicene Council; yea,
against the whole church of Christ before and after them; their credites would
not have counteruailed the weight of that antiquity and authority, which the
others carried: but in deed neither of the^ dispraiseth the wisdom of the
Council, or custom of the church; only they tax the vices of some persons and
ambition of some places, which not content with the christian moderation of
their predecessors, daily augmented their power and their pride by all means
possible.

Socrates says, the bishops of Rome and Alexandria were grown beyond the
limits of their Episcopal function, (...), unto power and dominion. The fault
he finds in that place with Celestinus bishop of Rome, was for Socrat. li 7.
ca. 11
taking from the Nouatians their churches, and compelling their bishop to live
at home like a private man. But herein Socrates leaned a little too much in
favor of the Nouatians, to mislike more then he shows cause why Would God
the bishop of Rome had never worse offended then in so doing. He touches Li.
7. ca 7.
Cyrillus bishop of Alexandria with like words for the same cause; how justly,
let the wise judge. If otherwise either of them aspired above the compass of
their calling, I am far from defending any pride in them, or in whomsoever.

Nazianzene lighted on very tempestuous and troublesome times, heresy so raging
on the one side, and discord afflicting the Church on the other, that he
thought best to leave all, and betake himself to a quiet and solitary kind of
contemplation. Of the councils in his time he says; Nazianz epistola 42. ad
Procop^um.
I am minded, if I must write you the truth, to shun all assemblies of
Bishops; because Ineuer saw a good event of any Council, that did not rather
increase then diminish our evils. Their contention and ambition passes my
speech; not that he condemns all Councils, (for what folly had that been in
so wise a man:) but he notes the diseases of his time, the Church being so
rent in pieces under Valens, that it could not be restored nor reformed in many
years after. Even so in the words which you allege, he traduceth not the
vocation or function of Bishops, as a thing superfluous or dangerous to the
Church of God, but she weth how far the thirst of honor and flame of discord
had carried many, even to the disturbance of the whole world, and shaking of the
Christian profession in sunder. His words are, Idem in Maximum post reditum in
vrbem.
Will they deprive me of the chief seat? which heretofore some wise men have
admired; but now as I think, it is the first point of wisdom to decline it.
Then follow those words which you allege; for which our whole estate is
troubled and shaken, for which the uttermost parts of the world are in an
hart-burning and dissentio^ that cannot be appeased, nor expressed; for which
we are in danger to be thought to be of men, when we are of God, and to loose
that great and new name.

The occasions of this speech, as may be seen in his life, were the horrible
tumult that Maximus raised in aspiring to the Bishoprike of Constantinople; the
inconstancy of Peter bishop of Alerandria, who first by letters confirmed him
in the place, and yet after sent some to ordain Maximus against him; and the
general dislike the Bishops of Egypt and of the West parts had of him,
(though they could not but commend the man) because he was placed without their
consent. Seeing himself therefore undermined and betrayed by his familiar
friends, deserted and forsaken by the Bishop of Alerandria, after the death of
Miletius Bishop of Antioch, murmured and repined against by so many, for not
expecting their presence, and the Bishops ready to war one with another
about his election and ordination; he wisely and stoutly came into the
Council, and said; Gregorius Presbyter in vi^a Nazianzeni.
Ye men that are my fellow Pastors of the sacred flock of Christ, it will be
a shame and very unseemly for you, teaching others to be at peace, if you be
at war amongst your selves. for how shall you persuade them to agree, if you
vary in your own opinions. I beseech you rather by the (blessed) Trinity
that you dispose of your matters wisely and peaceably. And if I be a cause of
strife unto you, I am not better then Jonas the Prophet; cast me into the Sea,
and let this troublesome tempest cease from among you. I am content to endure
any thing for your concord, though I be guiltles; thrust me out of my throne,
drive me from the City, only embrace you truth and peace. Thus christianlie
preferred he the unity of Gods Church before his own safety, and made more
account of quietness and secrecy, then of honor and dignity.

At the first rising of this tumult, Nazianzene was absent from the City; and
upon his return, when Maximus and the rest of that faction threatened him with
many things, he presently and pithilie made that oration to the people, whence
your words are taken. Hence you may prove there were many contentious and
ambitious heads in Nazianzens time; which in no time before or after, did, or
will want; but you can infer nothing out of these words against the lawful
use of Episcopal or Metropoliticall moderation and superuision prescribed and
limited by the Canons of grave and godly Councils, which Nazianzene neither
did, nor could mislike. If you think I restrain his meaning, examine his
words.

The time was (says he) when a wise man might admire this presidencie, but
now, it is the first point of wisdom in my judgment to shun it; not because
it was then more unlawful then before, but by reason of the manifold troubles,
dislikes, and dissentions, that then oppressed the Church. The ends of the
earth (says he) are (for this) in suspicion and war, which has no ears
nor name; that is, whose cause and remedy are both unknown: for this, we
which are of God, are in danger (says he) to be thought to be of men, and to
loose that great and new name. He cleerelie confesses, they were of God;
that is, their calling and function was ordained and approved by God:
wherefore he wills them to beware, least by their quarelling and contending,
they occasioned others to suppose they were not of God, but of men. Does this
place, think you, confute, or confirm the vocation of Bishops: What more
could be said for them, then that they are of God, and not men? After this,
whatsoever he says, it touches not the unlawfulness of the office, but the
unruliness of the persons; and the vices of men he might traduce, without any
prejudice to their calling.

He says, the name (of Bishops) was new; and wishes there were no
superiority nor pre-eminence amongst them, but that every man might be known
by his virtues.] The newness of the name does not so much disgrace the
office, as the greatness of the name does commend it. Let it be new, so it
be great, and both of God. In what sense Nazianzene calls the name of Bishop
new, (if he mean the name of Bishop, as one of the greatest Patrones of your
discipline precisely notes;) is not so soon agreed on. If he mean a new
name, as the prophet Esaias does, when he says; Esaias 62.
thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name;
or as S. John does, when he reports the words of Christ to the Angel of the
Church of Pergamus; Apoc. 2.
I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written; if he
allude I say, to either of these places, as he may welldoe; he could not give
the name of Bishop an higher praise, then to call it great and new, and that
from God. If by new, you would have him understand a name lately devised by
men, not authorized by God, as it seems you would; you make Nazianzene very
forgetful, and your selves were scant waking, when you made that observation in
his words (De Ministrorum Euangelii gradibus, ca. 23. fol. 164.
nempe Episcopi) as though the name of Bishop had been new in Nazianzenes time.
for could that name be new to Nazianzene, which the holy Ghost has so
aunciently, so often, so honorably mentioned in the Scriptures? Read you not
this alleged by Peter out of David, Act. 1.
Let another take his Bishoprike? And again, Act. 26.
the holy Ghost has made you Bishops? As also, 1. Tim. 2. Tit. 1.
a Bishop must be blameless? And likewise, 1. Pet. 2.
you are returned to the Shepeherd and Bishop of your souls? How could that
name be new, which is so authentically recorded in the Apostolic writings?

Happily you will shrink from that, and say the name was newly theirs, because
in the Scriptures it is general to all Presbyters, and here it is special to
Bishops; but that is neither true, nor any part of Nazianzenes meaning: for
even the seuering of chief Pastors from Presbyters by the name of bishops,
was no late nor new devise in Nazianzenes time. That very distinction of names
had continued at Alexandria from the death of Mark the Evangelist, as Hiero.
epistola ad Euagrium.
Jerome affirms. In all histories and writers before Nazianzene lived, there
is no word so common and usual to signify the President and Ruler of the
Presbytery, as the name of Bishop; and therefore it could not then be new.
Besides, Nazianzene reputeth it a wonderful inconvenience to loose that great
and new name; and to be all one, as if they should be taken not to be of
God. Now, if the name were new, and lately invented by men, the loss thereof
were not great; yea, retaining the name, they must be known to be of men, and
not of God; which is contrary to Nazianzenes words. Wherefore by the great and
new name, he means the name of Christians, grounding his speech on the words
of Esaias, that says; the Church Esaias 62.
shall be called by a new name; or if he refer it to bishops, he speaks
rather in praise of the greatness, the^ in dispraise of the newnes of the name;
and accounts it to be great and new because it was first used by ye holy
Ghost in ye new Testament.

He wishes there were no pre-eminence, nor prioritie amongst Bishops, and
calls their superiority tyrannical.] He wishes, if it were possible, that
pre-eminence and prioritie amongst Bishops went not by the mightiness of their
Cities, but by the deserts of their virtues; not that the first is vulawfull,
but that the second is far more commendable. Nazianz. in oratione post
reditum in vrbem.
O that there were, says he, (...), etc. neither prioritie of See, nor
privilege of place and tyrannical pre-eminence, that we might be distinguished
only by virtue. If this last were possible, the former might well be wished
out of the Church. for then should none but fit and worthy men have the places
of government, where otherwise the worst are often highest, and rule as
impotently, as they aspire unshamefastly. This is the sum of Nazianzens
speech, and what fault to find with it, truly I know not. Happy were the
Church of God, not if all were equal, as you would have them, but if each man
had superiority according to his integrity. So should the Church of Christ
never be be^ieged with ambition, nor surprised with corruption, nor wasted with
dissension, but the chief would circumspectly and wisely lead, and the rest
would gladly and quietly follow; where now aspiring and striving for places of
dignity, has subverted many not of the meanest, but of the highest degree. So
says Nazianzene. But now (when men are superior by their Cities, and 3
Ibidem.
not by their virtues) the right hand and the left, and the midst, the higher
and the lower seat, the precedencie, or going cheek by cheek, has made many
breathes amongst us to no purpose, and cast many into the ditch; and made them
goats not only of the inferior sort, but even of the shepeheards, who being
masters in Israel knew not this. He misliketh not generally the calling of
Bishops, nor their diversities of degrees, but the falling of some of them into
the ditch, and becoming goats, whiles they pressed over eagerly to the higher
places; otherwise, he must first have condemned himself, who accepted and
retained one of the chiefest seats of honor, though after to conserve the
peace of the Church, he resigned it.

Lastly, the wishing of a better way, if it were possible, is no defacing of
that which was already settled; by reason it cannot be expected that
Nazianzenes wish should take place. for that all men should be sincerely
regarded and honored according to their virtues, is rather an heavenly, then
an earthly condition; and sooner to be wished for, then to be looked for at
men's hands; yea, that course which he wishes, unless the execution might be
answerable to his wish, would do more harm then good. For it would not quench
ambition and contention, as some men dream, which are the vices that he
complains of, but rather inflame them, whiles every man conceiving well of
his own virtues, would make small account of other men's gifts and deserts. If
to decide the strife, you reserve the judgment thereof to other men's voices;
you amend the matter nothing at all. for if all men setting aside corrupt and
partial respects, would choose the best to every place, the Church of Christ
would soon flourish without any wishing; and wish what you will, except that
be first brought to pass, all the rest will do you no good.

An equality amongst the Pastors must needs slake ambition.] If you could
reduce the Cities, Churches and parishes of each common wealth to aiust
proportion: that one should not exceed another in any thing, you might chance
with a general equality of the places, somewhat to temper ambition; but if
you leave any difference in the things, you shall soon find a difference in
men's affections. Now when, or how that may be compassed, I leave you to
consider, that are so good at devising. I think you may sooner undertake to
new build all Cities and Towns to make them equal, then suffering them as they
are, to bring them to a just and even proportion. If leaving an inequality of
the places, which you must needs; you settle a general equality amongst the
Pastors and ministers of Christ's Church; what fresh experience the later end
of the world may teach us I will not foretell; I am sure, the mean to prevent
schisms and dissentions in the primitive Church, when the graces of Gods
spirit were far more eminent and abundant then now, was not to make all
equal; but to appoint some chief to ouersee and moderate the rest. That
course the Apostolic times embraced, and the Church of Christ ever since
preferred, as the safest and readiest way to resist confusion, and stay
contention in the Church of God. Jerome says: Hieron. contra ^ouinianum. li.
1.
Propterea inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto, schismatis
tollatur occasio. Amongst the twelve (Apostles) one was therefore chosen, that
a chief being appointed, occasion of dissension might be prevented. If the
twelve were not likely to agree; except there had been one chief amongst them,
I marvel how you imagine, that equality would keep all the Pastors of the
world in peace and unity. If every Presbytery by Gods ordinance must have
a Ruler as your selves avouch, least they grow to dissension and confusion,
how shall the Bishops of a whole Province or kingdom meet, confer, and
couclude, as often as need requires, without one to call and moderate their
assemblies?

We mislike not that so much, as that you give the Metropolitan, dominion and
imperie over the rest.] Your Presbyteries have an other manner of dominion then
we give either to the Diocesans, or to Metropolitanes. for they determine all
matters by discretion; which is even as much, or more then Princes have with
us. As for Bishops and Archbishops, I see no such dominion in this Realm
allowed them. We have Laws consisting partly of Synodal constitutions, partly
of the royal edicts of Princes, and by the tenor of them it is prescribed
what the Bishop or Metropolitan shall require at each man's hands; not what
they list, but what the Canons of former Councils and laws of Christian
Princes have thought meet to be performed by every one to the glory of God
and good of his Church. Now if the execution of Laws be Dominion and Imperie
in your conceit; when as there is a present remedy by appeal to the Princes
audience, if any wrong or hard measure be offered; what will you call it, to
judge by discretion, as your Presbyteries doe': which is the greater kind of
Imperie to determine all matters as you list, or to be limited in every point
by the Laws of the Realm, what you shall do; and if you transgress never so
little, to give account thereof to the supreme Magistrate': If I understand any
thing, it were more livertie for Bishops to be referred to Synodes, where they
should bear some sway; then to be restrained to Laws, from which they may
not shrink. The execution of your Presbytericall decrees, you give to the
moderatour of your Presbytery; and yet you give him no dominion nor imperie.
Why then are you so inconsiderate or so intemperate, as to call the execution of
ecclesiastical Laws by the Diocesane or Metropolitan, a tyrannical power and
dominion over their brethren':

Would you have no Laws at all; but every case as it falls out, so to be
censured at the pleasure of the Presbyters': That were a right tyranny in
deed, and not tolerable in any common wealth that has a Christian Magistrate.
If you admit every matter to be ruled by writtten Laws; and leave appeals in
all causes for such as find themselves grieved to the Prince, which is observed
in this Realm; the execution of Laws is rather a burden imposed, then an
honor to be desired; and but that some men must needs undertake that charge,
it were more easy for Bishops to be without it, then always to trouble, and
often to endanger themselves with the difficulties and penalties of so many
Laws as we have, and must have to guide those causes that are committed to
their Consistories.

They have others to discharge it for them.] They must have some to assist
them, except you will have Bishops to bestow more time in learning humane laws,
then in meditating yt divine Scriptures. And therefore your inueighing at the
Arches and other places of judgment, she weth you little understand what you
say. Were your Presbyteries or Synodes at their perils to handle and determine
so many and so weighty causes as they are, you would reverence them as much
as ever you disgraced them; and see your own folly in impugning that which
cannot be wanted. But what stand I on these things, which experience will prove
to be requisite in a Christian common wealth, better then speech. It suffices
me that Metropolitanes were long before the Nicene Council accepted and used in
the Church of Christ as necessary persons to assemble the Synodes of each
Province upon all occasions; and to ouersee as well the election, as ordination
of Bishops within their charge. This if you grant, necessity will force you
to yield them the rest, as it did yt Councils and Princes, that were long
before our times. If you like not the wisdom and order of the universal and
ancient Church of Christ, you must tell us in your new platform, who shall
call and moderate Provincial Synodes, when occasion requires; or whether your
Presbyters shall be supreme Moderators of all matters, without expecting or
regarding any Synodall assemblies or Judgments.

Synodes we admit, and some to gather and govern those assemblies; but to
prevent ambition we would have that privilege to go round by course to all
the Pastors of every Province.] You may do well to change Deacons every day,
Bishops every week, Presbyters every month, and Metropolitanes every quarter,
that the government of the house of God may go round by course. And surely you
miss not much of it. Deacons and Presbyters dure with you for a year; Bishops
you think in the Apostles times were changed every week; what space, you will
appoint to Metropolitanes, we yet know not; longer then one Synod I presume
you will have no man to continue. But what reason or example have you for it':
Examples perhaps as you care for none, so you seek for none. for if examples
might prevail with you, we have the settled and approved order of the
primitive Church against you, that Metropolitanes never went by course. Yea the
name it self does infer as much for if he be Metropolitan, that is Bishop
of the Metropolis or Mother city; the mother City remaining always one and
the same, the privilege of the Metropolitan could never change by course.

To ask you for reason, which lean only to your wills and regard no men's
judgments but your own, will seem strange; yet hear the resolution of one
that highly favors your new found discipline; who positiuely concludes,
that this circular regiment by course, as it is not able to resist ambition and
adulation, so it will breed contempts and factions in the Church of God. His
words be: Bezaresponsio ad tract. de ministrorum euangelii gradious sol. 143.
Dicamus ergo primatum illum ordinis per mutuae successionis vices, ipsa tandem
experie^tia compertum fuisse, non satis virium, nec aa ambitiosos Pastores, nec
ad auditores alios quide^ vanos, alios vero adulatorio spiritu praeditos
compescendos habuisse, communicata videlicet singulis Pastoribus per vices
huius primatus dignitate. Itaq^e quod singulorum se cundum successionem commune
fuit, visum fuit aa vnum, and eum quidem totius Presbyterij iudicio delectum
transfer, quod certe reprehendinec potest, nec debet: quum praesertim,
vetustus hic mosprimum Presbyterum deligendi, in Alexa^drina celeberrima
ecclesia iam inde a Marco Euangelista esset obseruatus. Alteram causam affert
Ambrosius, long maximi momenti, nempe quod primatu sic ad singulos per vices
perueniente, singulis Pastoribus non semper ad hanc gubernationem suscipiendam
sdoneis compertis, it a fieret vt indigni inter dum praeessent, quaeres tum
Presbyterij contemptum secum trahebat, tum aditum factionibus aperiebat. Let us
then avouch that this Primacie of order (going round) by course of mutual
succession, was at length by very experience found not to have force enough to
repress ambitious Pastors, neither vain and flattering Auditors, whiles every
Pastor in his course enjoyed this superiority. Therefore that which was
common to all by succession, it seemed good to transfer to one chosen by the
judgment of the whole Presbytery; the which neither can, nor ought to be
reprehended; especially since this ancient manner to choose the chief of the
Presbytery was observed in the famous Church of Alexandria even from Mark the
Evangelist. Another cause of greatest weight without comparison, does Ambrose
allege, that this Primacie so going round to every one by course, some
Pastors sometimes were found unfit to undertake this government, and thereby
it came to pass, that such as were unworthy, often times ruled the rest, which
brought with it the contempt of the Presbytery, and opened a gappe unto
factions.

How far Ambrose is mistaken, I have showed before; he says the Presbyters
succeeded in order, when the place was void, but that they changed by course,
he says no such thing. It was a plain oversight (I will say no worse) in
him that first wrested Ambroses words to that conceit. In the mean time we
have master Bezaes full confession, that the going round by course to govern
the Church, does maintain disorder and faction, and no whit decrease
ambition; and the choosing of one to continue chief (for his life) began at
Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, (six years before Peter and Paul were
martyred, and six and thirty before the death of Saint John;) in which there
is NOTHING THAT can, or ought to be misliked.

How truly he speaks, if he should recall, or you refuse his words,
reason and experience will easily teach us. for first in this circular change,
it is not casual, but essential, that all in their course, be they fit or
unfit, must have the ruling of the rest. Now if to choose one good amongst
many, be a matter of difficulty; how impossible then is it, that all should
be good? And yet by your rolling regiment, all, be they never so wicked or
unworthy, must have as much time and power to neglect and hurt the Church of
God, as the well minding and godly Pastors shall have to assist and help the
same. Again, what good can be done by any, when in every action, one must
begin, and another proceed, and a third conclude? If an evil man light on
the beginning, middle or ending, he may soon mar all. And be the men not
evil, except they be like affected and like instructed, when will they agree
in judgment, or tread one in another steps? If any faction arise, I need
not put you in mind what contradicting and reuersing will be offered by your
weekly or monthly Governors. Who shall dare do any thing to a Presbyter or
Bishop but he must look for the like measure, when their course comes? What
can be one week made so sure, but it may be the next week undone by him that
presently follows? This is the right way to make a mockery of the Church of
Christ; and to permit it to every man's humor and pleasure whiles his time
lasts. If you trust not me, distrust not your selves; It breeds contempt,
and opens the high way to factions.

As for Ambition, which is an other of the mischiefs that you would amend by
your changeable government, you cure that, as he does, which to cool the
heat of one part of the body, sets all the rest in a burning fever. To
quench the desire of dignity in one man; you inflame all the Pastors of
every province with the same disease. for you propose the like honor and power
for the time unto all; which we do to one. And so you heal ambition by making
it common, as if patients were the less sick, because others are touched with
y^ same infection, for if one man cannot have this Metropoliticall preeminence
without some note of pride; the rest ca^ neither expect it, nor enjoy it in
their courses, but with some taint of the same corruption. fruition and
expectation of one and the same thing, are so near neighbors, that if one be
vicious, the other cannot be virtuous. Wherefore, either grant, the
superiority and dignity of Bishops and Metropolitanes may be christianly
supported by one in every Presbytery and province as we affirm; or else we
conclude, it can not be expected and enjoyed of all every where by course, as
you would have it, but very unchristianly.

You give more to your Bishops and Metropolitanes then we do, and that
increases their pride.] We give them no power nor honor by Gods Law, but what
you must yield to your Pastors and presidents, if you will have any. And as for
Magistrates, we may not limite the^ on whom they shall lay the execution of
their Laws, nor what honor they shall allow to such as they put in trust, so no
part thereof be contrary to the doctrine of the Scriptures. Agnise first their
callings, and then measure their offices by the ancient canons of Christ's
Church; and if they have any other or further authority then stands with
good reason and the manifest examples of the Primitive Church, we strive not
for it; reserving always to christian princes their liberty, to use whose
advise and help they think good; and to bestow their favors where they see
cause; without crossing the voice of the holy Ghost, or the wisdom of the
Apostolic and Primitive Church of Christ. for the government of the Church is
committed to them, not that they should alter and overthrow the maine
foundations of Ecclesiastical Discipline at their pleasures; but that they
should carefully and wisely use it to the benefit of Gods Church, and good of
their people, for which they must give account to the dreadful Judge.

It was long after the Apostles times before Provinces were divided, and Mother
Cities appointed, and therefore Metropolitanes are not so ancient as you make
them; as may appear by the 33. canon called Apostolic, where the chief
dignity over each Province, is not attributed to any certain place or City.]
I stand not precisely for the time, when Mother Cities were first appointed in
every Province; howbeit the general Council of Ephesus says; Council. Ephesini
decret. post aduentum episcoporum Cypr^.
Every Province shall keep his rights untouched and unviolated, which it has
had (...), from the beginning upward, according to the custom that has
anciently prevailed; every Metropolitan having liberty to take a copy of
(our) acts for his own security; for so the words, (...), may well be
interpreted, though some embrace another sense. Yet if in this point you press
those Canons called Apostolic, I will not reject them; not that I take to have
bin written by the Apostles, for then they must be part of the Canonical
Scriptures; but that some of them express the ancient discipline of the
Church, which obtained even from the Apostles times, (by whomsoever they were
collected) though many things since be inserted and corrupted in them, and
therefore are justly refused, further then they agree with the stories of the
first times, and the decrees of the eldest Councils.

The Canon which you quote, is this; Canon. Apostolorum 33.
The Bishops of every Nation must know (or acknowledge) (...), him that is
first (or chief) amongst them; and esteem him as (their)head, and attempt no
matter of weight without his opinion (and judgment) neither let him do any
thing without al their aduises (and consents.) Hereby you would prove, there
was a time after the Apostles deaths, when as yet the first place amongst the
Bishops of the same Province, was not affixed to any certain Church or City.
Grant it were so, though this Canon do not exactlie prove so much; then yet
in every nation there was a Primate, before there was a Metropolitan; and
consequently the authority of one to be chief in a province is elder the^ the
privilege of the Metropolis or mother City; which by the witness of the
Nicene and Ephesine Councils was in their times a very ancient custom. Now
what gain you by this, if there were a chief bishop in every province to
assemble and moderate Synodes, before that prerogative was fastened to any
place? It is the office not the place that we seek for. for so you confess
there were Primates amongst the Apostles Scholars; whether they were chosen for
the worthiness of their gifts, or for the greatness of their Cities, we care
not; such there were; and by such were the Synodes of every Province assembled
and guided. When the wonderful gifts of the holy Ghost failed, for which the
first age happily made choice of her Primates, it is not unlike, but as the next
ages following chose the most sufficient men for the most populous Cities; so
they were content the Bishops of the most famous Churches in every province
should have (...), the preeminence amongst their brethren, to call them
together and consult them for the common affairs of the whole Church; which
the four first general Councils with one consent confirmed to every Church;
and commanded to be kept without alteration or diminution, as the ancient
rights and customs of the Church even from the beginning.

The Council of Nice wills Niceni Concilii ca 6. and
(...), the prerogatives to remain to every Church; and again, 7.
(...), reserving (always) to the Mother City her proper dignity. The
Council of Constantinople as Socrates says, Socrat. li. 5. ca. 8
ratified the Nicene faith, and appointed Patriarchs (or Metropolitanes)
distinguishing their Provinces. As namely Nectarius the Bishop of
Constantinople had allowed him Thracia; Helladius bishop of Cesarea in
Cappadocia, Gregory of Nissa, and Otreius of Militene had the regiment of
Pontus; Aphilochius of Iconium, and Optimus of Antioch in Pisidia took the
charge of Asia; the like did Timotheus Bishop of Alexandria for Egypt; and
Pelagius of Laodicea, and Diodorus of Tarsus for the East Churches, reserving
the prerogative of the Church of Antioch, which they delivered unto Miletius
there present: Concilii Constantinopolitani 1. ca. 2.
The Canon that before limited these governments being (always) observed. Of
the Council of Ephesus I spoke even now; wherein, when the Bishops of Cyprus
complained, that the Church of Antioch began to encroch upon them, Exemplar
suggestionum episcoporum Cypri in Concilio Ephesin.
contra Apostolicos Canones, and definitiones Nicenae Synodi, contrary to the
Apostles Canons, and the Decrees of the sacred Council of Nice, and desired
that the Synod of Cyprus might enjoy their right, as they had done, Sicut
initio a temporibus Apostolorum.
even from the beginning ever since the Apostles times; the Fathers rejected
and condemned that attempt of the Bishop of Antioch, as a thing Decretum
eiusdem Synodi pro Episcopu Cypri.
repugnant to the Laws of the Church, and Canons of the Apostles. The great
Council of Chalcedon finding fault, that some Bishops, to increase their power,
obtained the Princes Charter to cut one Province into twain, of purpose to
make two Metropolitanes, where before was but one; decreed, that no Bishop
should enterprice the like without the loss of his office; and notwithstanding
the Imperial letters already purchased, Council. Chalcedonens. ca. 12.
(...), the true (or ancient) Mother City should certainly keep her proper
right; and the other newly erected content themselves with the honor of the
name.

The preeminence then of Mother Cities and Metropolitanes is very ancient in
the Church of God, and if we admit even your own construction of that Canon
called Apostolic, there were Primates elected in every Province before there
were Metropolitanes; and so the office was found to be needful in the Church
of Christ, when as yet the places and Cities, that should have that
privilege, were not appointed nor agreed on.

Some think the Metropolitanes function may be derived from Timothy and Tite,
by reason that Tite had in charge the whole I Will of Creete, and Timothy the
oversight not of Ephesus only, but of Asia also. Of Tite Chrysostom says;
Chrysostom homil. 1. in epist. ad Tit.
This was one of Paul's companions, that was approved. Otherwise Paul would
not have committed unto him an whole Island, and the (triallor) judgment of so
many Bishops. Of Timothy Theodoret says; Theodoret. praefatio in 1. epist. ad
Timoth.
To him divine Paul committed the charge of Asia. And of them both he says;
Idem in 1. ad Timoth. ca. 3.
It a Cretensium Titus and Asianorum Timotheus, so was Tite the Apostle (or
Bishop) of Creete, and Timothy of Asia. In deed Ephesus was a Mother City,
as appears by the first Ephesine Council, but whether it had that prerogative
by the nobleness of the place, or by succession from Timothy I dare not
define. Timothy, as it should seem by Theodoret was chief over all Asia,
and yet were there sundry other Cities in Asia besides Ephesus, that had
Metropolitanes; as Socr. lib. 5. ca. 8.
Iconium, Socr. lib. 5. ca. 8.
Antioch of Pisidia, Vide subscriptiones Council Chalcedonens. actio. 3.
Cyzicum, Vide subscriptiones Council Chalcedonens. actio. 3.
Sardis; Vide subscriptiones Council Chalcedonens. actio. 3.
Rhodos. If any think it unlawful for one man to have the care and oversight
of other Bishops, he may be satisfied or refuted by the example of Tite, to
whom Chrysostom. vt supr.
the whole Island of Creete was committed, as Chrysostom says; and the Hiero.
de scriptoribus ecclesiast. in Titum.
Islands adjoining, as Jerome writes; and by Paul's own testimony, the Tit. 1.
making of Bishops in many Cities. If therefore any man like these places, I am
not against them; but the ancient, evident, and constant course of the
Primitive Church to have Primates or Metropolitanes for the calling and guiding
of Synodes in every province; is to me a pregnant and perfect proof, that
this order was either delivered or allowed by the Apostles and their Scholars;
or found so needful in the first government of the Church, that the whole
christian world ever since received, and continued the same.

Though the office were tolerable, yet the name of Archbishop is expressly
prohibited by the third Council of Carthage, and by the great Council of
Africa; and was never heard of in the Church till the Council of Chalcedon,
which was kept 455. years after Christ. The words of both the Councils
interdicting all such proud titles, are these; Council. Carthag. 3. ca. 26. and
Africa. ca. 6. vel 36.
The Bishop of the first seat must not be called (...), the Prince of Priests
or high Priest, or by any such style, but only the bishop of the first seat.]
If the office be needeful and lawful, the strife for names shall not long
trouble us. Were I persuaded, that Archbishop had no signification but king and
prince of Bishops, the simplicity and integrity of Christ's Church should
soon induce me to give over the name; but if it import no more then the
words, which these Councils like and use; I see no cause for others to stumble
at it. The very Canon lately cited by you, which you De Ministrorum euangelii
gradibus ca. 24. fol. 170.
grant is ancient, though not Apostolic, calls the Metropolitan Canon.
Apostolorum 34.
(...), the first (or chiefest) and wills him to be esteemed, Canon.
Apostolorum 34.
(...), as head amongst the Bishops of the same province. The Councils of
Carthage the second, ca. 12; the third, ca. 7. 28; the fifth, ca. 7. 10; the
Mileuitane Council, ca. 21. 22. 24; the Affricane, ca. 40, 43, 44, 65, 73, 87,
88, 92, use the word (...) for the primate of every Province.

Now if (...) in composition note the first and chief, as well in order and
dignity, as in time and Imperie I see no reason to refuse the name of
Archbishop more then of Primate, which word the Africane Council so often
uses. If you deny that the compounds of (...) signify an order amongst
fellows, as well as a power over subjects; to omit profane Writers by which
we might prove it, (Cicero saying, Cicer. Offic. li. 2.
Qui Archipirata dicitur, nisi aequabiliter praedam dispertiat, aut occidetur a
socijs, aut relinquetur, he that is called Archpirate, except he divide the
prize equally, he shall be slain or forsaken (not of his men, but) of his
fellows;) What think you of the word 1. Thessal. 4. Epistola Judah.
(...), Archangel; does it import order and dignity amongst the Angels, or
power and imperie over them? if matters in heaven be too high for us, what say
you to the word (...) Patriarch? were Hebr. 7.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; in that they were Patriarchs, Rulers and Lords over
the Churchor chief fathers in the Church? The Act. 7.
twelve Patriarchs, that were begotten of Jacob, will you call them the rulers
of their Fathers, or chief fathers of the twelve tribes? Act. 2.
David, shall he be a Patriarch in respect of his kingdom and imperie, or of
his Prophetical graces and dignity? This signification, no doubt the learned
Fathers did follow when they suffered and used in the Church of God the names
of vnde Concilium Chaleedonens.
Archbishop, vnde Concilium Chaleedonens.
Archimandrite, vnde Concilium Chaleedonens.
Archdeacon, not that they made them Lords and Princes over Bishops, Monks and
Deacons, but rather chief amongst the^.

But did the word (...) always import power and authority, which you shall
never prove; must that power be straitwaies so princely and peremptory, that
it may not stand with a bishops calling? Is there no power, nor government
annexed to a Bishops office? Christ says they be set Matthew. 24.
(...), over his family; Saint Paul calls them 1 Thessalonians. 5.
(...), Governors in the Lord. That is (you will say) in respect of their
flock, not of their fellow Pastors. The Council of Nice allows the
Metropolitan Concilium N^ceni ca. 6.
(...), power and authority over his Province. The Council of Sardica, where
were 300. bishops assembled long before the Africane Council gives him the
title of (...), the Ruler of the Province: and adds; Council. Sardicens. ca. 6.
(...), we mean (thereby) the Bishop of the Mother City (or Metropolitan.)
Socrates says the first council of Constantinople, Socrat. lib. 5. ca. 8.
(...), appointed Patriarchs; and calls the charge which they received,
(...), a Patriarkdom, Ignat. epistola 6. ad Philadelph. and 7. ad Smyrnaos.
Ignatius, Nazianz. in epitaph. patr^.
Nazianzen and Chrysostom. homil. 21. ad populum Antiochenum.
Chrysostom. who I think knew the force of their own tongue better then any
ma^liuing in our age, be their skill never so great, spare not to give y^ name
of (...) the chief Priest, unto bishops. Nazianz. speaking to the foresaid
Council of Constantinople about the choice of another in his place, as Theodor.
reports his words said, Theodor. li. 5. ca. 8.
seeking out a man prais-worthy and wise that is able to undertake and well
guide the number of cares (here occurrent) (...) make him Archbish. (of this
place.) And touching Maximus Theodoret says, the same Council deprived him
Ibidem.
(...), of the Archiepiscopall dignity.

Where you say, that De Ministrerum euangelii gradibus ca. 25. fol. 182.
before the Council of Chalcedon, which was about the year of Christ 455. you
never found any subscription in Synod, of any man named Archbishop; either
mine cies be not matches, or you are greatly deceived. for I find not only
that subscription in the general Council of Ephesus before the Council of
Chalcedon, but the maine Council in their letters give that title to the
bishops of Rome, Alexandria and Ephesus. In the first session of the Council
it is said. I^itium Synodi Ephesians Grace conscriptae.
The Synod assembling in the mother City of Ephesus, by the decree of the
most religious and Christian kings; the Bishops sitting in the most sacred
Church, called by the name of Marie; (first) Cyril of Alexandria supplying the
place of Celestinus, (...), the mostsacred and most holy Archbishop of the
Church of Rome. If you take this to be the Notaries fault, read the Mandate
which the whole Council gave their Legates when they sent them to
Constantinople to the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian for the enlarging of
Cyrill and Memnon; and likewise their petition to the two princes for the same
matter. Mandatum quod Synodus dedit Legatis Constantinopol. proficiscentibus
ca. 73.
We pern it you (say they to their Legates) to promise our communion (to the
Bishops of the East) if they will labor with you, (...), that our most sacred
Archbishop Cyril and Memnon may be restored unto us. In their relation to the
Emperors, they give the like title to Celestinus. Relatio Synodi ad Regesmissa
cu^ Legatu ca. 109
This holy and oecumenicall Council (say they) with which sits, (...), the
most sacred Archbishop of your great City of Rome, Celestinus. And though the
Provincial Council of Africa willed the name of (...) to be refrained in
their meetings; yet this general Council of Ephesus usually calls Cyrill
and Memnon Relatio Synodi ad Reges de gestu Orientalium ca. 70.
(...), the chief Leaders and Rulers of the holy Council.

Of the Chalcedon Council you did well to make no doubt; the name of
Archbishop is so often used in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, eight,
tenth, foureteenth and sixteenth actions, not only in the subscriptio^s, but
even in the deliberations and decrees of that Council, that with good
conscience it might not be dissembled. Now if you suppose these three general
Councils of Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon; and all the Greek Divines
and Fathers there assembled, were so void; first of learning, that they knew
not the force of the word (...) in composition; then of religion, that they
would rob Christ of his proper titles, to increase the pride of men against
the truth of the Scriptures; I must confess I utterly dissent from you, the
speech is so hard, that I cannot digest it. if you yield them but reasonable
skill in their own tongue, and moderate understanding in the principles of
faith, I have my desire. for then not only the function and office of
Metropolitanes and Primates is as ancient and necessary in the Church of God,
as the having and guiding of prouincial Synodes, and confirmed unto them as
lawful by the four first general Councils; but their very names and places
were allowed and allotted unto them by the full consent of the Christian world,
even from the beginning, and never since denied or doubted till this present
age wherein we live.

Contention and ambition of Bishops and Primates did much afflict the Primitive
Church, and hinder and disturb the best Councils, the very Nicene Council not
excepted.] Who does marvel that amongst so many thousands of Bishops as the
whole world yielded in so many hundred years, there should be some
contentious and ambitious spirits? Or who can perform that those very weeds
shall not grow as fast amongst Presbyters as ever they did amongst Bishops?
Happily in a city where the Magistrate severely represseth the dissension and
discord of Pastors, some ten or twelve Presbyters may either be kept in
tolerable peace, or presently over ruled by the public state; but come once to
the government of the whole world, as the fathers of the primitive Church did,
and then tell me, not what contentions and factions, but what conflicts and
vproares your paritie of Presbyters will breed. Were the Pastors but of
England, France, and Germany to meet in a free Synod; I will not ask you
when they would agree; but if their tongues be like their pens there wound
be more need of officers to part the fraies, then of Notaries to write the
Acts. Where the primitive Church had one Theophilus and one Dioscorus, we
should have twenty. we may sooner flee their offices then their vices; their
affections will remain, when their functions be altered. Where all are equal,
there is as great danger of pride and contention, as where one is superior;
yea, the prioritie of one man in every province, as we see confirmed by the
practice and experience of the universal Church of Christ since the Apostles
times, is sooner resisted and better endured, then the waywardness and
headiness of so many Governors as you must and would have in your changeable
regiment of Presbyters.

The Lord make us careful to keep the band of peace which he has left us;
and mindful to show that lowliness of heart, which he has taught us; that
we wax not so wise in our own conceits, as to despise all others besides
ourselves; and so resolute in our private persuasions, that we enforce our
devises upon the Church of God, under the name of his holy and heavenly
precepts: even so O Lord, for Christ Jesus sake.

(...).

Amen.
Errata.
In the Epistle, page 7. lin. 26. in the word (...), for, in the word? (...),
page 9. l. vlti^^, chage, for charge.

In the Book, p. 3. l. 15. th, for, in. p. 4. l. 28. Princes, for Priests. p.
10. l. penult. part, for parts. p. 38. l. 27. iudicall, for judicial. In
margin, Proverb. 5. for Acts 19. p. 67. l. 25. (as they say) for (as you say,
p. 68. l. penult. the Churches, for in the Churches. p. 78. l. 1. to the, for
to be. lin. 3. (...), and, for (...), the degree of a Presbyter, and. p. 104.
l. penultima, Evangelist, for Evangelists. p. 122. l. 22. ought, for out. p.
148. l. 17. not erect, for erect not. p. 150. l. 17. of most part, for of the
most part. p. 158. margin, (...), for (...). p. 164 l. 28. thee, for the. p.
185. l. 27. vinculis, for viculis. p. 188. l. 11. at the name of Socrates must
be the figure of 4. l. 14. uch, for such. l. 20. Talerius, for Valerius. l. 23.
Philodelphia, for Philadelphia. p. 193. l. 18.? for, and l. 19.: for? and l.
23. put out the double distinction,: p. 228. l. 36. out, for cut. p. 237. l. 2,
and 1 cons. for and 2 cons. p. 246. l. penult. could not be, for could be. p.
252. l. 14. dured no long time, for dured a long time. p. 257. l. 13. (...),
for (...). p. 259. l. 24. 150. for 1500. p. 274. l. 13. Bishops, for a Bishop.
l. 14. Pothymus, for Pothynus. p. 281. li. 19. vpbolding, for upholding. p.
286. li. 33. nine. Saint, for nine, Saint. p. 316. l. vltima, lay man
Presbyter, for, lay man, Presbyter. p. 336. l. 1. in the 7. chapter. p. 358 l.
34. ishops, for Bishops. p. 359. li. 12. (...), for (...). p. 378. l. 31.
(...), for (...), and 32. (...), for (...). p. 379. l. vlt. from the first
beginning (...), according to the use anciently confirmed, every Metropolitan
having liberty to take a copy of our acts for his own security.


