Devout psalms and colletes, gathered and set in such order, as may be used
for daily meditacions.

Anno, 1.5.6.7.

An exhortacion to prayer.
EMonges all other exercises, (good Christian reader) that god has prepared
for us, that we may exercise our selves in: there is none better, none more
excellent, then is true prayer, cumming from a clean heart, and an unfeigned
conscience. For in the day of temtacion when the old serpent by his subtyl
suggestions shall go about our health to subvert, we shall easily by prayer (as a
present remedy) all his malicyouse and sundry darts extynguishe. Also in the
day of external affliccion (which oftentimes chaunseth for our sins and
wickedness) by prayer we shall either obtain help that it may be mitigated, or
else all together taken away. First of all, this is to be noted yt we must
make our prayers and commen peticions unto god, and to him only: For he is the
geuer of every good and perfect gift. It is one chief operacion and working
belonging unto his divinity, to grant unto us such things as we do ask
and crave of him. They therefore that do ask of other besides him, (somuche
as is in them) do rob god of his power and divinity. It is written in the
epistle of saint James: If any of you want wisdom, let him ask of him that
gives it, that is of god. And god also by his prophet David exhorts us to
make our prayers unto him, his words be these: Call upon me in the day of
tribulacion, and I will deliver the. According to this saint Paul says: How
shall they call upon him, in whom they believe not. Therefore we cannot call on
him for help but in whom we do believe: we cannot believe that our peticions
shall be granted, except we be steyed upon some promise made unto us in the
scripture. The promise in scripture, as concerning our peticions to be
granted, is made by the father only, and that in the name of Christ: wherefore
unto him only our prayers is to be directed. Furthermore this is to be noted
in prayer, yt we must pray with our hearts and minds, not only with our
lips, and our tongue. For if we do: we may well be compared unto the Jews,
unto who^ our savior Christ said: o ye hipocrites Esaie the prophet has
prophesied well of you, saying: This peopell draws nere unto me with there
mouth, and they honor me with ye lyppes, but their heart is far from me. Let
us call to our remembrance the example of Anna mother of Samuel, which prayed
vehemently unto god, and her peticion was heard and granted, and yet she spoke
not one word with her tongue: But powered forth the whole sorrow and anguyshe of
her mind before god. And god said unto Moises, wherefore do thou cry unto
me when Moses spoke nothing with his tongue, but with his heart. Therefore in our
prayers let us lift up our hearts unto God, earnestly desyring those things,
that we have most need of: separating our minds from all cares and desires of
the world, and the flesh.

On the mundaye.
The first psalm. Beatus vir qui non abiit.
BLessed is that man, that has not walked in the counsayl of the ungodly, nor
stand in ye way of sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the scorneful.

But his delight is in the law of the Lord: and in his law will he exercise him
self day and night.

And he shall be like a tree planted by the water side, that will bring forth his
fruit in due season

His leaf also shall not wither, and look whatsoever he does, it shall prosper.

As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chafe which
the wynd scatters away (from the face of the earth.)

Therefore the ungodly shall not be able to stand in the judgment, neither the
sinners in the congregation of the righteous.

But the lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the ungodly shall
perish.

The second. Verba mea auribus. Psalm. v.
POnder my words, o Lord, consider my meditacion.

O harken thou unto the voice of my calling, my king and my God, for unto the
will I make my prayer.

My voice shall thou hear by times, o Lord, early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto the, and will look up.

For thou art the God that has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil
dwell with the.

Such as be folishe, shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate al them
that work vanity.

Thou shall destroy them that speak lesyng: the Lord will abhor both the
bloudthyrsty, and deceitful man.

But as for me, I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

Lead me, o Lord, in thy rightwysenes, because of mine enemies: make thy way
plain before my face.

For there is no faythfulnes in his mouth: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

Their throat is an open sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

Destroy thou them O God, let them perish through their own ymaginacions,
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness: for they have rebelled
against the.

And let all them that put their trust in the, rejoice: they shall ever be
geuyng of thanks, because thou defendest the^: they that love thy name shall be
joyful in the.

For thou Lord will give thy blissyng unto the righteous: and with thy
favorable kyndnesse wylt thou defend him, as with a shilde.

The third. Domine ne. Psalm. vi.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignacion: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O lord, for I am weak: O lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

My soul also is sore troubled: but lord how long will thou punish me?

Turn the, O lord, and deliver my soul: Oh, save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man remembers the: and who will give the thanks in the pit?

I am weary of my gronyng, every night wash I my bed, and water my couche with
my tears

My beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

Away fro me all ye that work vanity: for the lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

The lord has heard my peticion, ye lord will receive my prayer

All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed, they shall be turned back
and put to shame suddenly.

The fourth. Domine dominus noster. psalm. viii.
O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world, thou that
have set thy glory above the heavens?

Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklinges have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the auenger.

For I will consider thy heavens, even the works of thy fyngers: the Moon and
the stars which thou have ordained.

What is manne that thou art myndefull of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him?

Thou made him lower then the Angels, to croune him with glory and worship.

Thou make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou have
put all things in subjection under his feet.

Al sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field.

The fowls of the air, and the fyshe of the sea, and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas.

O lord our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world.

Let us pray.
ALmighty God the father of mercy, and God of all comfort, the which only
forgeuest sin, forgive unto us our sins good lord, forgive unto us our
sins, that by the multitude of thy mercy, they may be covered and not imputed
unto us, and by the operacion of the holy ghost, we may have power and strength
hereafter to resist sin: by our savior and lord Jesus Christ. Ame^.

The Letany. The lords prayer, The twelve articles of our belief. The ten
commandments. The places concerning Baptism. The places concerning the
supper of the lord.

Let us pray.
O Almighty God and mercyful Lord which geuest. etc.

On the tuysday.
The first. Saluum me fac. psalm. xii.
Help (me) lord, for there is not one godly man left.

For the faithful are minished from among the children of men.

They talk of vanity, every one with his neighbor: they do but flatter with
their lips, and dissemble in their double heart.

The Lord shall rote out all deceiptful lips, and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

Which have said: with our tongue will we prevail: we are they that ought to
speak, who is lord over us?

Now for the comfortless troubles sake of the neady, and because of ye deep
sighyng of the poor,

I will up (says the lord) and will help every one, from him that swells
against him, and will set them at rest.

The words of the Lord are pure words even as the silver, which from earth
is tried and purified seven times in the fire.

Thou shall keep them (O lord) thou shalt preserve him from this generation
for ever.

The ungodly walk on every side: when they are exalted, the children of men
are put to rebuke.

The second. Dixit insipiens. psalm. xiiii.
THe fool has said in his heart there is no God.

They are corrupt, and become abominable in their doings, there is not one
that does good (no not one.)

The lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that would understand and seek after God.

But they are al gone out of the way, they are al together become abominable:
there is none that does good, no not one.

Their throat is an open sepulcher: with their tongues they have disceiued, the
poison of aspes is under their lips.

Their mouth is full of cursyng and bitterness: their feet are swifte to shed
blood.

Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace have they
not known, there is no fear of God before their eyes.

Have they no knowledge that they al are such workers of mischief, eating up
my people as it were bread, and call not upon ye lord.

There were they brought in great fear (even where no fear was) for God is in
the generacio^ of the righteous.

As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsel of the poor, because he
puts his trust in the lord.

Who shall give salvation unto Israel, out of Syon?

When the lord turns the captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoice,
and Israel shall be glad.

The third. Domine quis habitabit. psalm. xv
Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest upon thy holy hyl?

Even he that leads an vncorrupt life, and does the thing which is right,
and speaks the truth from his heart.

He that has used no disceipte in his tongue, nor done evil to his neighbor,
and has not slaundred his neighbors.

He that sets not by him self: but is lowly in his own eyes, and makes
much of the^ that fear the Lord.

He that swears unto his neighbor and disapointeth him not, though it were
to his own hynderaunce.

He that has not given his money upon usury, nor taken reward against the
innocent.

Who so does these things, shall never fall.

The fowerth. Deus deus meus. psalm. xxii.
MY God, my God: (look upon me) why have thou forsaken me: and art so far fro
my health, and from the words of my complaint?

O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and in the night
season also, I take no rest

And thou continuest holy, O thou worship of Israel.

Our fathers hoped in the, they trusted in the, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon the, and were helped: they put their trust in the and were not
confounded.

But as for me I am a worm and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast
of the people.

All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shote out their lips and
shake their head saying: He trusted in God that he would deliver him: let him
deliver him if he will have him.

But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope when
I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

I have been left unto the ever syns I was borne: thou art my God even from my
mothers womb.

O go not fro me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help me.

Many oxen are come about me fat bulls of Basan close me in on every side.

They gape upon me with their mouths as it were a rampyng and roryng Lion.

I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of ioynte: my heart also
in the midst of my body, is even like meltyng wax.

My strength is dried up like a potsherde, and my tongue cleueth to my gummes:
and thou shalt bring me into the dust of death.

For (many) dogs are come about me, and the counsel of the wicked lay siege
against me.

They pearsed my hands, and my feet, I may tell al my bones: they stand
staryng and lokyng upon me.

They part my garments among them, and cast lottes upon my vesture.

But be not thou far from me O lord: thou art my succor, have the to help
me.

Deliver my soul from the swearde, my dearelyng from the power of the dog.

Save me from the lions mouth: thou have heard me also from among the horns of
ye unicorns.

I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise the.

O praise the lord ye that fear him: magnifye him all ye of the seed of
Jacob, and fear him all ye seed of Israel.

For he has not dispysed nor abhorred the low estate of ye poor: he has not
hyd his face from him, but when he called unto him, he heard him.

My praise is of the in the great congregation, my vows will I perform in
the sight of them that fear him.

The poor shall eat, and be satisfied: they that seek after the lord shall
praise him, your heart shall live for ever.

All the ends of the world shall remember the^ selves, and be turned unto the
lord: and all the kinredes of the nations shall worship before him.

For the kingdom is the Lords, and he is the governor among the people.

Al such as be fat upon earth, have eaten and worshipped.

Al they that go down into the dust, shall kneel before him, and no man has
quickened his own soul.

My seed shall serve him: they shall be counted unto the lord, for a generation.

They shall come, and (the heavens) shall declare his righteousness, unto a
people that shall be borne, whom the lord has made.

Let us pray.
O Lord God which dispisest not a co^trite heart, and forgettest the sins
and wickedness of a sinner, in what hour soever he does mourn and lament his
old manner of living: Grant unto us O lord now gathered to gether in thy name,
true contricion of heart, that we may vehemently despise our sinful life
past, and wholely be converted unto the, by our savior and lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

The lords prayer. etc. as upon monday.

On the wednisday.
The first. Ad te domine leuaui. psalm. xxv.
Unto the (O lord) will I lift up my soul.

My God, I have put my trust in the:

Oh let me not be confounded: neither let mine enemies triu^ph over me.

For all they that hope in the shall not be ashamed: but such as transgress
without a cause, shall be put to confusion.

Show me thy ways O lord, and teach me thy paths.

Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me, for y^ art the God of my
salvation: in the has been my hope all the day long.

Call to remembrance (O lord) thy tender mercyes, and thy loving kyndnesses,
which have been ever of old.

Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according unto thy
mercy think thou upon me (O lord) for thy goodness.

Gracious and righteous is the lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the
way.

Them that be meke shall he guide in judgment, and such as be gentle, them
shall he learn his way.

All the paths of the lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.

For thy names sake O lord, be mercyful unto my sin, for it is great.

What man is he that fears the lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall chose.

His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the land.

The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he will show the^
his covenant.

Mine eyes are ever lokyng unto the lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

Turn the unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged.

O bring thou me out of my troubles.

Look upon mine adversity and misery, and forgive me al my sin.

Considre mine enemies how many they are, and they bear a a tyrannous hate
against me.

O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in the.

Let perfectnes and righteous dealyng wait upon me, for my hope has been in
the.

Deliver Israel O God, out of al his troubles.

The second. Dominus illuminatio. psalm. xxvii
THe lord is my light and my salvation: who^ then shall I fear?

The lord is the strength of my life: of whom then shall I be afraid?

When the wicked (even mine enemies and my fooes) came upon me, to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell.

Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid:
and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

One thing have I desired of the lord, which I will require: eue^ that I may
dwell in the house of the lord all the days of my life to behold the fair
beauty of the lord: and to visit his temple.

For in ye time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea in the
secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of
stone.

And now shall he lift up my head above mine enemies round about me.

Therefore will I offer in his dwelling, an oblacio^ with great gladness.

I will sing and speak praises unto the Lord.

Harken unto my voice O lord, when I cry unto the, have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

My heart has talked of the: Seek ye my face: thy face O lord will I seek.

O hyde not thou thy face fro me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succoure, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

When my father and mother forsake me, ye lord takes me up.

Teach me thy way O lord, and lead me the right way because of mine enemies.

Deliver me not into the will of mine adversaries, for there are false witnesses
risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

I should utterly have fainted but that I believe verily to se the goodness of
the lord in the land of the living.

O tarry thou the lords leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart,
and put thou thy trust in the lord.

The third. In te domine speraui. psalm. xxxi.
IN the lord, have I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion: deliver me
in thy righteousness.

Bow down thine ear to me, make have to deliver me.

And be thou my strong rock, and house of defense, that thou may save me.

For thou art my strong rock, and my castle.

Be thou also my guide, and lead me for thy names sake.

Draw me out of the net that they have laid privily for me, for thou art my
strength.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O lord thou
God of truth.

I have hated them that hold of supersticious vanities, and my trust has been
in the lord.

I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have co^sidred my trouble,
and have known my soul in adversities.

Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy, but have set my feet
in a large rowme.

Have mercy upon me O lord, for I am in trouble, and mine eye is consumed for
very heaviness, even my soul and my body.

For my life is waxen old with heauynes, and my years with mournyng.

My strength fails me because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.

I became a reprofe among all mine enemies, but specially among my neighbors,
and they of mine acquaintance were afraid of me, and they that did se me
without, co^ueied them selves fro me.

I am clean forgotten, as a dead man out of mind: I am become like a broken
vessel.

For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude: and fear is on every side
while they conspire together against me, and take their counsel to take away
my life.

But my hope has been in the, O lord, I have said: thou art my God.

My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from
them that persecute me.

Show thy servant the light of thy countenance, and save me for thy mercies
sake.

Let me not be confounded, O lord, for I have called upon the: let the ungodly
be put to confusion and be put to silence in ye grave.

Let the liyng lips be put to silence, which cruelly, disdaynefully, and
spitefully speak against the righteous.

O how ple^tiful is thy goodness, which thou have laid up, for the^ that fear
the? and that thou have prepared for them, that put their trust in the, even
before the sons of men?

Thou shall hyde the^ privily by thine own presence from the prouokyng of all
men, thou shall keep the^ secretly in thy tabernacle, from the strife of
tongues.

Thanks be to the Lord: for he has showed me merueilous great kyndnes in a
strong city.

And when I made have, I said: I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes.

Nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my prayer when I cried unto the.

O love the lord, all ye his saints, for the lord preserves them that are
faithful, and ple^teously rewards he the proud doer.

Be strong, and he shall stablishe your heart, all ye that put your trust in the
lord.

The fowerth. Beati quorum. psalm. xxxii.
BLessed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgeuen: and whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man, unto who^ the lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit
there is no guile.

For while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away through my daily
complainyng.

For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is like the drouth
in summer.

I will knowledge my sin unto the, and mine unrighteousness have I not hid.

I said: I will confess my sins unto ye lord, and so you forgauest the
wickedness of my si^ne. Sela.

For this shall every one that is godly, make his prayer. unto the in a time
when thou may be found, but in the great water fluddes they shall not come
nigh him.

Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance. Sela

I will enfourme the, and teach the in the way wherein thou shall goo: and I
will guide the with mine eye.

Be ye not like horse and Mule, which have no understanding, whose mouths
must be holden with bitte and bridle, lest they fall upon the.

Great plages remain for the ungodly, but whosoever puts his trust in the Lord,
mercy embraces him on every side.

Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the lord: and be joyful al ye that are
true of heart.

Let us pray.
O Merciful father, by whose power and strength we may over come our enemies
both bodily and ghostly: grant unto us O Lord that according to our promise
made in Baptism we may overcome the chief enemies of our soul, that is the
desires of the world, the pleasures of the flesh, and the suggestions of the
wicked spirit, and so after lead our lives in holiness and righteousness, that
we may serve the in spirit and in truth, and that by our savior and lord Jesus
Christ. Ame^.

The letany. etc. As on monday.

Let us pray.
O Almightye God and merciful lord which geuest. etc.

On the thursday.
The first. Benedicam dominum. Psalm. xxxiiii.
I Will always give thanks unto the lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

My soul shall make her bost in the lord, the humble shall hear thereof, and be
glad.

O praise the lord with me, and let us magnifye his name together.

I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of al my fear.

They had an eye unto him, and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed.

Lo, the poor cries, and the lord hears him, yea, and saves him out of al
his troubles.

The Angel of the lord tarieth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them.

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

O fear the lord, ye that be his saints, for they that fear him lack
nothing.

The lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall
want no manner of thing that is good.

Come ye children and harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the lord.

What man is he that lusts to live, and would feign see good days?

Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

Eschew evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it.

The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers.

The countenance of the lord is against the^ that do evil, to rote out the
remembrance of them from of the earth.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them: and delivers the^ out of al
their troubles.

The lord is nigh unto the^ that are of a contrite heart, and will save such
as be of an humble spirit.

Great are the troubles of the righteous, but ye lord delivers him out of al.

He keeps all his bones, so that not one of them is broken.

But misfortune shall slay the ungodly, and they that hate the righteous, shall be
desolate.

The lord delivers the souls of his servants: and all they that put their
trust in him shall not be destitute.

The second. Nolite emulare. psalm. xxxvii.
FRet not thy self because of the ungodly: neither be thou envious against the
evil doers.

For they shall sone be cut down like the grass, and be withered eue^ as the
grene herb.

Put thou thy trust in the lord, and do good: dwell in the land and verily thou
shall be fed.

Delight thou in the lord, and he shall give the thy hearts desire.

Commit thy way unto the lord, and put thy trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass.

He shall make thy righteousness as clear as the light, and thy just dealyng as
the noone day.

Hold the still in the Lord, and abide pacientely upon him: but grieve not thy
self at him whose way does prospere against the man that does after evil
cou^sailes.

Leave of from wrath, and let go displeasure: fret not thy self, else shall
thou be moved to do evil.

Wicked doers shall be roted out and they that patiently abide the lord, those
shall inherit the land.

Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shalt look after
his place, and he shall be away.

But ye meke spirit shall possess the earth, and shall be refreshed in the
multitude of peace.

The ungodly seeks counsel against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his
teethe.

The Lord shall laugh him to scorn, for he has seen, that his day is coming.

The ungodly have drawn out the swearde, and have bended their bow, to cast
down the pore and neady, and to slaye such as be of right conversation.

Their swearde shall go through their own heart, and their bow shall be broken.

A small thing that the righteous has, is better then great riches of the
ungodly.

For the arms of the ungodly shall be broken, and the Lord vpholdeth the
righteous.

The Lord knows the days of the godly, and their enheritance shall endure for
ever.

They shall not he confounded in the perilous time, and in the days of derth,
they shall have enough.

As for the ungodly, they shall perish: and the enemies of the Lord shall
consume as the fat of lambs, yea, even as the smoke shall they consume away.

The ungodly boroweth and pays not again, but the righteous is mercyful and
liberal.

Such as be blessed of God, shall possess the land, and they that be cursed of
him shall be roted out

The lord ordreth a good man's going, and makes his way acceptable to him self.

Though he fall, he shall not be cast a way, for the lord vpholdeth him with his
hand.

I have been young, and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his sede beggyng their bread.

The righteous is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is blessed.

Fle from evil, and do the thing that is good: and dwell for ever.

For the lord loves the thing that is right, he forsakes not his that be
godly, but they are preserved for evermore.

The unrighteous shall be punished: as for the seed of the ungodly, it shall be
roted out.

The righteous shall enherite the land, and dwell therein for ever.

The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue will be
talkyng of judgment.

The law of his God is in his heart, and his goynges shall not slide.

The ungodly sees the righteous, and seeks occasion to slaye him.

The lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

Hope thou in the lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote the that thou
shall possess the land: when the ungodly shall perish, thou shall se it.

I my self have seen the ungodly in great power, and florishyng like a grene
bay tree.

I went by, and lo, he was gone: I sought him, but (his place) could no where
be found.

Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall
bring a man peace at the last.

As for the transgressors they shall perish together, and the end of the
ungodly is, they shall be roted out at the last.

But the salvation of the righteous comes of the lord, which is also their
strength in the time of trouble.

And the Lord shall stand by the^ and save them: he shall deliver the^ from the
ungodly, and shall save the^, because they put their trust in him.

The third. Dixi custodiam vias. psalm. xxxix.
I Said: I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue.

I will keep my mouth (as it were with a bridle) while the ungodly is in my sight.

I held my tongue, and spoke nothing.

I kept silence: yea, even from good words, but it was pain and grefe to me.

My heart was hot within me and while I was thus musyng, the fire kyndled: and
(at the last) I spoke with my tongue.

Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be
certified how long I have to live.

Behold, thou have made my days as it were a spanne long, and mine age is
even as nothing in respect of the: and verily every man living is altogether
vanity. Sela.

For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth him self in vain, he
heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in the.

Deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me not a rebuke unto the folishe.

I became dumme, and opened not my mouth, for it was thy doing.

Take thy plage away fro me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy hand.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, like as it were a moth frettyng a garment.

Every man therefore is but vanity. Sela.

Hear my prayer, O lord, and with thine ears considre my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears.

For I am a stranger with the and a soiourner, as all my fathers were.

Oh spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be
no more seen.

The fourth. Beatus qui intelligit. Psalm. xli.
BLessed is he that considers the poor (and nedy) the Lord shall deliver him
in ye time of trouble.

The lord preserve him and keep him alive: that he may be blessed upon earth,
and deliver not thou him into the will of his enemies.

The lord comfort him, when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou al his bed
in his sickness.

I said, lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against
the.

Mine enemies speak evil of me: when shall he dye, and his name perish?

And if he come to se me, he speaks vanity, and his heart conceiueth falshod
within him self: and when he comes forth, he tells it.

All mine enemies whisper together against me: even against me do they ymagine
this evil.

Let the sentence of giltynes proceed against him, and now that he lies, let
him rise up no more.

Yea even mine own familiar friend who^ I trusted (which did also eat of my
bread) has laid great wait for me.

But be thou merciful unto me (O lord) raise thou me up again, and I shall
reward them.

By this I know thou fauourest me, that mine enemy does not triumph against
me.

And when I am in my health: thou vpholdest me, and shall set me before thy face
for ever.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, world without end. Amen and Amen.

Let us pray.
O Almighty and everlasting God, which not only geuest every good and perfect
gift, but also encreasest those gifts that thou haste given, we most humbly
beseech the merciful God, to increase in us the gift of faith, that we may
truly believe in the and in thy promises made unto us, and that neither by our
negligence nor infirmity of the flesh, nor by greuousnes of te^ptacion,
neither by the subtle crafts and assaults of the devil, we be driven from
faith in the blood of our savior and lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The lords prayer. etc. as before.

On the Fridaye.
The first. Miserere mei deus. psalm. li.
Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness: according unto the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me throwly fro my wiekednes, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against the only have I si^ned and done this evil in thy syghte: that thou
myghtest be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wyckydnes, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo thou requirest truth in ye inward parts, and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall pourge me with Isope, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whyter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken, may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart (O god) and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablyshe me with thy fre
sprete. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
converted unto the.

Deliver me from blood gyltynesse (O God) thou that art the God of my health,
and my tongue shall singe of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, (O Lord) and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desyrest no sacrifice, else would I give it the: but thou delytest
not in burnt offering.

The sacrifyce of god is a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart (O
God) shall thou not dispyse.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion, buyld thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness with burnt
offerynges and oblacions, then shall they offer young bullockes upon thine
aultare.

The second. Quid gloriaris. psalm. l.
WHy boasteste thou thy self, thou tirant, that thou can do mischif? Where
as the goodness of God endures yet daily.

Thy tongue ymagineth wickedness, and with lies thou curtest like a sharp rasour.

Thou have loved ungraciousness more then goodness: and to talk of lies more
then ryghteousnes. Sela.

Thou haste loved to speak all words yt may do hurt, O thou false tongue.

Therefore shall God destroy the for ever, he shall take the and pluck the out
of thy dwelling, and root the out of the land of the living. Sela.

The righteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to scorn.

Lo, this is that man that took not God for his strength, but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and strengthed him self in his wickedness.

As for me I am like a grene olyue tree in the house of God, my trust is in the
tender mercy of god for ever and ever.

I will always give thanks unto the: for that thou have done: and I will hope in
thy name, for thy saynctes like it well.

The third. Deus in nomine tuo. psalm. liiii.
Save me (O God) for thy names sake, and avenge me in thy strength.

Hear my prayer (O God) and harken unto the words of my mouth.

For strangers are rise^ up against me, and tirauntes (which have not God
before their eyes) seek after my soul. Sela.

Behold God is my helper, the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

He shall reward euel unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth.

An offrynge of a free heart will I give the, and praise thy name (O Lord)
because it is comfortable.

For he has delivered me out of all my trouble, and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

The fourth. Exaudi deus. Psalm. lv.
Hear my prayer (O God) and hyde not thy self fro my peticion.

Take heed unto me, and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed.

The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast: for they are minded
to do me some myschefe, so maliciously are they set against me.

My heart is disquieted within me, and the fear of death is fallen upon me.

Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

And I said: O yt I had wings like a dove, for then would I fly away, and be
at rest.

Lo, then would I get me away far of, and remain in the wyldrenes. Sela.

I would make haste to escape, because of the stormy wind and tempest.

Destroy their tongues o lord, and divide them: for I have spied unrighteousness
and strife in the city.

Day and night go they about within the walls thereof: mischief also, and sorrow
are in the midst of it.

Wickedness is therein, disceat, and gyle go not out of her streets.

For it is not an open enemy that has done me this dishonor: for then I
could have borne it: nether was it mine adversary, that did magnifye him self
against me: for the^ (peradventure) I would have hyd my self from him.

But it was even thou my companion, my gyde, and mine own familier friend.

We took sweet counsel together, and walked in the house of god, as friends.

Let death come hastily upon the^ and let them go down quick into hell, for
wickedness is in their dwell lynges, and among them.

As for me I will call unto god, and the lord shall save me.

In the evening and morning and at the none day will I pray, (and that
instantlye) and he shall hear my voice.

It is he that delivers my soul in peace, from the battayl that was against
me: for there were many with me.

Ye even god that endures for ever, shall hear me: and bring them down.
Sela.

For they will not turn nor fear god.

He laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him, and he brake his
couenaunte.

The words of his mouth were softer then butter, having war in his heart: his
words were smother then oil, and yet be they very sweardes.

O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall norysh the: and not suffer ye
righteous to fall for ever.

And as for them, thou (O god) shall bring them into the pyt of destruction.

The bludthurstie and dysceatfull men shall not live out half their days.

Nevertheless, my trust shall be in the (O Lord.)

Let us pray.
Grant unto us O merciful god we most heartily beseech, ye knowledge and true
understanding of thy word, that al ignorance expelled, we may know what thy
will and pleasure is in all things, and how to do our duties, and truly to
walk in our vocacion, and that also we may express in our living those
things that we do know: that we be not only knowers of thy word good lord,
but also be works of ye same: by our savior and Lord Jesus Christ. Ame^.

The Letany. etc. As before.

On satterday.
The first. Eripe me de inimicis. psalm. lix.
Deliver me from mine enemies (O God) defend me from them that rise up against
me.

O deliver me from the wicked doers, and save me from the blood thursty men.

For lo, they lie waytyng for my soul, the mighty men are gathered together
against me without any offense or fault of me (O Lord.)

They run and prepare them selves, without my fault.

Arise, thou therefore to help me, and behold.

Stand up (O Lord God of hoostes) thou God of Israel, to viset al Heathen:
and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness. Sela.

They go to and fro in the evening, they grenne like a dog, and run about
through the city.

Behold, they speak with their mouth, and sweardes are in their lyppes for who
does hear?

But thou (O Lord) shall have them in derysion, and thou shalt laugh all
Heathen to scorn.

My strength will I ascribe unto the, for you art ye god of my refuge.

God shows me his goodness plenteouslye, and god shall let me see my desire
upon mine enemies.

Slaye them not, lest my people forget it: but scatter them abroad among thy
people, and put them down (O Lord) our defense.

For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips they shall be
taken in their pride, and why? their preachinge is of cursynge and lies.

Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they may peryshe, and know that
it is God which rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world. Sela.

And in the euenyng they will return: grenne like a dog and will go about the
city.

They will run here and there for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.

As for me, I will singe of thy power: and will praise thy mercy be times in
the morning, for thou haste been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.

Unto the, O my strength, will I sing, for thou (O God) art my refuge and my
merciful god.

The second. Exau di deus depreca. Psalm. lxi.
Hear my crying (o god) give ear unto my prayer.

From the ends of the earth will I call unto the, when my heart is in heuines.

Oh set me up upon the rock that is higher then I.

For thou have been my hope, and a strong tower for me, against the enemy.

I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever, and my trust shall be under ye coueryng
of thy wings. Sela.

For thou O Lord, have heard my desires, and have given an heritage unto those
that fear thy name.

Thou shall grant ye king a long life, that his years may endure thoroweout
al generacions.

He shall dwell before God, for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and
faythfulnes, that they may preserve him:

So will I always sing praise to thy name, that I may daily perform my vows.

The third. Nonne deo subiecta: psalm. lxii.
MY soul truly wayteth still upon God, for of him comes my salvation.

He verily is my strength and my salvation: He is my defense so that I shall not
greatly fall.

How long will ye ymagin mischife against every man? ye shall be slain all the
sort of you: yea, as a totteryng wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge.

Their device is only how to put him out, whom God will exalte: their delyght
is in lies: they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their
heart. Sela.

Nevertheless, my soul wayt thou still upon god, for my hope is in him.

He truly is my strength, and my salvation: he is my defense so that I shall
not fall.

In god is my health and my glory, the rock of my might, and in God is my
trust.

O put your trust in him always (ye people) pour out your hertes before him,
for God is our hope. Sela.

As for the children of men, they are but vain, the children of men are
disceatful upon the wayghtes they are altogether lyghter the^ vanity it self.

O trust not in wrong and robberye, give not your selves unto vanity: if
riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

God spoke once and twyse: I-haue also heard the same: that power belongs
unto god.

And that thou Lord art merciful, for thou rewardeste every man according to
his work.

The fourth. Deus misereatur nostri. psalm. lxvii.
GOd, be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of of his
countenance: (and be merciful unto us). Sela.

That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise the O god: yea, let all the people praise the

O let the nacyons rejoice and be glad: For thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Sela.

Let the people praise the O god, let all thy people praise the.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God even our own God shall
give us his blessing.

God shall bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Let us pray.
O Almighty god, which have prepared everlasting life to all those that be
thy faithful servants, grant unto us Lord sure hope of ye life everlasting,
that we being in this miserable world may have some taste, and feling of it in
our hearts: and that not by our deserving, but by the merits and deserving of
our savior, and Lord, Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Letany. etc. As before.

On satterday at after noone.
The first Voce mea ad dominum. psalm. lxxvii.
I Will cry unto God with my voice, even unto God will I cry with my voice:
and he shall harken unto me.

In the time of my trouble, I I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not
in the night season: my soul refused comfort.

When I am in heuinesse, I will think upon God, when my heart is vexed, and will
complain. Sela.

Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so feeble, yt I cannot speak.

I have considered the days of old, and the years that are past.

I call to remembrance my song: and in the night I commune with mine own
heart, and search out my spirits

Will the lord absent him self for ever? And will he be no more entreated.

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? And will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure? Sela.

And I said: it is mine own infyrmitie: But I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most highest.

I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind thy wonders of old
time.

I will think also of all thy works, and my talking shall be of thy doings.

Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God as (our) God? Thou art the
god that does wondres, and have declared thy power among people.

Thou have mightily delivered thy people, eue^ the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
Sela.

The waters saw the, O god, the waters saw the and were afraid: ye depthes
also were troubled.

The clouds powered out water, the air thundered: and thine arowes went abroad.

The voice of thy thundre was herd round about, ye lighteninges shone upon the
ground, the earth was moved and shoke withal.

Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters: and thy
footesteppes are not known.

Thou lededst thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

The second. Deus venerunt gentes psalm. lxxix.
O God, the Heathen are come into thy enheritaunce, thy holy temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an hepe of stones.

The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls
of the air, and the flesh of thy saynctes unto the beasts of the land.

Their blood have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was
no man to bury them.

We are become an open shame unto our enemies, a very scorn and derision unto
them that are round about us.

Lord, how long will thou be angrye? shall thy gelousye burn like fire for
ever?

Pour out thine indignacion upon the Heathen that have not known the, and
upon thy kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for we are come to great myserie.

Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name.

O deliver us, and be mercyful unto our sins, for thy names sake.

Wherefore do the Heathen say: where is now their God?

O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed, be openly showed
upon the Heathen, in our sight.

O let the sorrowful syghynge of the prisonners come before the: according unto
the greatness of thy power: preserve thou those ye are appointed to dye.

And as for ye blasphemy (wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed the) reward
thou them O Lord, seven fold into their bosom.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give the thanks for
ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise, from generation to generation.

The third. Qui regis Israel. Psalm. lxxx.
Hear O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep show
thy self also thou that sit upon the Cherubins.

Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses: styre up thy strength, and come help
us.

Turn us again O god, show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

O Lord God of hoostes, how long will thou be angry with thy people that
prays?

Thou fedest them with the bread of tears, and give them plenteousnesse of
tears to drink.

Thou have made us a very strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh us
to scorn.

Turn us again, thou God of hoostes, show ye light of thy countenance: and
we shall be whole.

Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the Heathen, and
planted it.

Thou made rowme for it, and when it had taken rote, it filled the land.

The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were
like ye goodly Cedre trees.

She stretched out her branches unto the sea, and her boughs unto the river.

Why have thou then broken down her hedge, that all they which go by, pluck
of her grapes?

The wild bore out of the wood does rote it up, and the wild beasts of the
filde deuoureth it.

Turn ye again, thou God of hoostes, look down from heaven: behold, and
visit this vine.

And the place of the vyneiarde that thy right hand has planted: and the
branch that thou made so strong for thy self.

It is brent with fire, and cut down, and they shall peryshe at the rebuke of
thy countenance.

Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand and upon the son of man
whom thou made so strong for thine own self.

And so will not we go back from the: Oh, let us live, and we shall call upon
thy name.

Turn us again, O lord god of hoostes, show the light of thy countenance,
and we shall be whole.

The forth. Inclina domine aurem. psalm. lxxxvi.
Bow down thine ear, o lord, and hear me, for I am poor and in misery.

Preserve thou my soul, for I am holy: my God save thy servant, yt puts
his trust in the.

Be merciful unto me (o Lord) for I will call daily upon the,

Coumfort the soul of thy servant, for unto the (o lord) do I lift up my
soul.

For thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that
call upon the.

Give ear Lord unto my prayer, and ponder the voices of my humble desires.

In the time of my trouble I will call upon the, for thou hear me.

Among the gods there is none like unto the, (O Lord) there is not one that
can do as thou do.

All nations whom thou haste made, shall come and worship the (O Lord) and
shall gloryfie thy name.

For thou art great and doeste wondrous things, thou art god alone.

Teach me thy way (O Lord) and I will walk in thy truth.

O knyt my heart unto the, that it may fear thy name.

I will thank the, O Lord my God with all my heart, and will praise thy name
for ever.

For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou haste delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell.

O god, the proud are risen against me, and the congregacions of naughty men
have sought after my soul, and have not set the before their eyes.

But thou (O Lord god) art full of compassion, and mercy, long sufferyng,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

O turn the then unto me and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thine handemayde.

Show some token upon me for good, that they which hate me, may se it: and be
ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me and comforted me.

Let us pray.
O Merciful God, our only aid, soccour, and strength at all times, grant
unto us, O-lord, that in the time of prosperity, we be not proud, and so
forget the, but that with our whole power and strength, we may cleave unto the:
and in the time of adversity that we fall not to infidelity, and desperacio^,
but that always with a constante faith we may call for help unto the: Grant
this O Lord for our advocates sake, and savior Jesus Christ. Ame^.

The Lords prayer. etc. As before.

On the Sunday.
The first. Domine refugium. psalm. xc.
LOrd, thou have ben our refuge from one generation unto another.

Before ye mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world
were made, thou art God from everlasting and world without end.

Thou turnest man to destruccio^ again thou say: come again children of
men.

For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterdaye, seeing that is paste
as a watch in the night.

As soon as thou scaterest them, they are even as a sleep, and fade away
suddenly like the grass.

In the morning it is grene and grows up, but in the eueninge it is cut
down (dried up) and withered.

For we consume away in thy dyspleasure, and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignacion.

Thou have set our misdedes before the, and our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told.

The days of our age are three score years and ten: and though men be so
strong that they come to four scour years, yet is their strength, then but
labor and sorrow: so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

But who regards the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man fares,
so is thy dyspleasure.

O teach us to noumbre our days, that we may apply our hertes unto wisdom.

Turn the again, (O Lord) at the last, and be gracious unto thy servants.

O satisfy us with thy mercy and that soon, so shall we rejoice and be glad
all the days of our life.

Comfort us again, now after the time that thou have plaged us, and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

Show thy servants thy work, and their children thy glory.

And the glorious majesty of the lord our god be upon us: prosper thou the
work of our hands upon us, o prosper thou our handy work.

The second. Venite exultemus. psalm. xcv.
O Come, let us sing unto the Lord, let us hertely rejoice in ye strength of
our salvation: let us come before his presence with thanks giving, and show
our self glad in him with psalms.

For the Lord is a great king above all gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth, and the strength of the hills
is his also.

The sea is his, and he made it, and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship and fall down before the Lord, our maker.

For he is (the Lord) our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
prouocacion, and as in the day of tentacion in the wilderness: when your
fathers tempted me, proved me: and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with the generation, and said: it is a
people that do err in their hertes: for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

The third. Iubilate deo. psalm. C.
O Be joyful in the Lord (all ye lands) serve the Lord with gladness: and
come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: It is he that has made us, and not we
our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thankesgeuing, and into his courts with
praise, be thankeful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting, and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

The fowerth. Benedic anima mea. psalm. ciii.
Praise the lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefytes.

Which forgeueth al thy sin, and heals all thine infyrmyties.

Which saves thy life from destruccio^, and crowns the with mercy and
loving kyndnesse.

Which satisfyeth thy mouth with good things, making the young and lustye as
an Aegle.

The lord executes righteousness and judgment, for all them that are
oppressed with wrong.

He showed his ways unto Moses, his works unto the children of Israel.

The lord is full of compassion and mercy: long suffering, and of great goodness.

He will not always be chiding, neither keeps he his anger for ever.

He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
wickednesses.

For look how hye the heaven is in comparison of the earth, so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him.

Look how wide also the East is from the west, so far has he set our
sins from us.

Yea like as a father pytieth his own children, even so is the lord merciful
unto the^ that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust.

The days of man are but as grass, for he florisheth as a flower of the
field.

For as soon as the wind goth over it, it is gone: and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

But the merciful goodness of the lord endures for ever and ever, upon them
that fear him, and his ryghteousnes upon childres children.

Even upon such as keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments to
do them.

The lord has prepared his seat in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all.

O praise the lord ye Angels of his, ye that excel in strength: ye that
fulfill his commandment, and harken unto the voice of his words.

O praise the Lord al ye his hosts, ye servants of his, that do his pleasure.

O speak good of the lord all ye works of his, in all places of his
dominyon: praise thou the lord, O my soul.

Let us pray.
O Almyghtie and merciful lord which geuest unto thy elect people the holy
gooste, as a sure pledge of thy heavenly kingdom: Grant unto us o lord, this
holy spirit, that he may bear witness with our spirit that we be thy
children, and heirs of thy kingdom, and that by the operacion of this spirit
we may kyl all carnal lusts, unlawful pleasures, concupiscence evil
affeccions contrary unto thy will: by our savior and lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Letany.
O God the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.


O God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.


O God the son, redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.


O God the son redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.


O God the holy ghost, procedyng from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.


O God the holy ghost, procedyng from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.


O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.


O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.


Holy virgin Mary, mother of God, our savior Jesus Christ:


Pray for us.


All holy Angels and Archangelles, and all holy orders of blessed spirits.


Pray for us.


All holy Patriarchs, and Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, Confessors and
Virgins, and all the blessed company of heaven:


Pray for us.


Remember not Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins, spare us good Lord, spare thy
people, whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not
angrye with us for ever:


Spare us good lord.


From all euel and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assautes of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnacion:


Good lord deliver us.


From blindness of heart, from pride, vayneglory, and hipocrisy, from envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.


Good lord deliver us.


From fornicacion, and all deadly sin, and from all the deceiptes of the
world, the flesh, and the devil:


Good lord deliver us.


From lightening and tempest, from plage, pestilence, and famine: from battle
and murder, and from sodeyne death.


Good lord deliver us.


From all sedicion, and pryuye conspiracy, from the tyranny of the bishop of
Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and heresy:
from al hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.


Good lord deliver us.


By the mystery of thy holy incarnacion, by thy holy Nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting and temptacion:


Good lord deliver us


By thine agony and bluddy sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and buryall, by thy glorious resurrection and ascencion, by the cummyng
of the holy ghost:


Good lord deliver us.


In all time of our tribulacion, to all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, in the day of judgment.


Good lord deliver us.


We sinners do beseech the to hear us, O lord God, and that it may please
the to rule and govern thy holy church universal in the right way:


We beseech the to hear us good lord:


That it may please the to keep Edward the sixth, thy servant, and our king and
governor.


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, that
he may ever have affiaunce in the, and ever seek thy honor and glory.


We beseech the to hear us good lord:


That it may please the to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to keep the noble Queen Katherine dowagier in thy fear
and love, giving her increace of all godliness, honor, and children.


We beseech the to hear us Good lord.


That it may please the to preserve the lady Mary's grace, the lady Elizabethes
grace, and the Lord Protectors grace.


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to illuminate all byshopes, pastors, and mynisters of
the Church, with true knowledge, and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and living, they may set it furthe, and show it accordyngly:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to endue the lords of the counsayl, and al ye
nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding:


We beseech the to hear us Good lord.


That it may please the to bless and keep the magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to bless and keep all thy people:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to give to all nations, unity, peace and concord:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to give us an heart to love and dread the, and
diligently to live after thy commandment:


We beseech the to hear us good lord:


That it may please the to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
mekely thy word, and receive it with pure affeccion, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and are deceived:


We beseech the to hear us good lord:


That it may please the to strengthen such as do stand, and comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet:


We beseech the to hear us good lord


That it may please the to succor, help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and trybulacion.


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to preserve all that travail by land or by water, all
women labourynge of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to defend and provide for the fatherles children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to have mercy upon all men:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to forgive our enemies, persecutours, and sclaunderous,
and to turn their hearts:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to give to our use the kindly fruits of the earth,
so as in due time we may enjoy them, and to preserve them:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


That it may please the to give to us true repentance, to forgive us al our
sins, negligences and ignoraunces, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word:


We beseech the to hear us good lord.


Son of God, we beseech the to hear us.


Son of god, we beseech the to hear us.


O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:


Grant us thy peace.


O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:


Have mercy upon us.


O Christ hear us.


O Christ hear us.


Lord have mercy upon us.


Lord have mercy upon us:


Christ have mercy upon us.


Christ have mercy upon us.


Lord have mercy upon us.


Lord have mercy upon us.


Our father which art in heaven.


With the residue of the pater noster.


And suffer us not to be led in to temptacion.


But deliver us from evil. Amen.


The versicle.
O lord, deal not with us after our sins.

The answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God, merciful father, ye dispysest not the sighing of a co^trite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before yt in all our troubles and adversities, when soever they oppress
us.

And graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subteltie of
the Devil or manne works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being
hurt by no persecucions, may evermore give thanks unto the, in thy holy
Church, thorough Jesus Christ our lord.


O lord arise, help us and deliver us for thy names sake.


O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us
the noble works that thou dyddest in their days, and in the old time before
them.


O lord arise, help us, and deliver us, for thy honor.


Glory to the father, the son, and to the holy ghost: as it has been from the
beginning, is, and shall be ever world without end. Amen.


From our enemies defend us O Christ:


Graciously look upon our affliccions.


Pitifully behold the dolor of our heart:


Mercyfully forgive the sins of thy people.


Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.


O son of David, have mercy upon us.


Both now and ever vouchesaufe to hear us Christ:


Graciously hear us, O Christ:


Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.


The versicle.
O lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The answer.
As we do put our trust in the.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech the, O father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those euylles, that we most
ryghteously have deserved. Grant this, O lord God, for our mediator and
advocate Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive,
receive our humble peticion, and though we be tied and bound with the chain
of our sins, yet let the pityfulnes of thy great mercy leuse us, for the
honor of Jesus Christ's sake, our mediator and advocate. Amen.

Almighty and euerliuyng God, which only workest great meruayles, send
down upon our bishops and curates, and all congregacions committed to their
charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please the:
pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this (o lord) for
the honor of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.

WE beseech the (O Lord) to show upon us thine exceeding great mercy, which
no tongue can worthily express, and that it may please the to deliver us from
all our sins, and also from the pains that we have for them deserved.
Grant this (O lord) through our mediator and advocate Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grant, we beseech the, O almighty God, that we in our trouble, put our whole
confidence upon thy mercy, that we against all adversity be defended under thy
protection. Grant this, O lord God, for our mediator and advocate Jesus
Christ's sake.

Amen.

ALmighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our commune supplicacions unto the, and do promise, that when two or.iii. be
gathered in thy name, thou will grant their requests, fulfill now O lord, the
desires and peticions of thy servants, as may be best expedient for them,
grauntyng us in this world, knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come
life everlasting. Amen.

The prayer of our Lord.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And let
us not be led into temptacion. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Creed, or.xii. articles of the Christen faith.
I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived of the holy ghost, borne
of the virgin Mry. Suffered under Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead, buried,
and descended, in to hell. And the third day, he rose again from death. He
ascended into heaven, and sytteth on the right hand of god the father
almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I Believe in the holy ghost. The holy Catholycke church. The Communion of
saynctes: the forgeuenes of sins. The resurreccion of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.

The.x. commandments. of almighty God.
THou shalt have none other gods in my syghte: Thou shall make the no graven
image, neither any similitude that is in Heaven above, either in the earth
beneth, or in the waters under the earth. Thou shalt not worship them,
neither serve them: for I the Lord thy god, am a gelouse God: and vysitte the
sin of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate me: and show mercy unto thousands in them that love me and
keep my commandments. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy god in
vain. Remember the Sabbath day, that thou sanctify it. Honor thy father and
thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy god
gives the. Thou shalt not kill. Thou shall not break wedlock. Thou shalt
not steal. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbors house: neither shall thou covet thy neighbors
wife, or his manne servant, or his maid, or his Ox, or his ass, or what
soever thy neighbor has.


The places of baptysme.
Go ye therefore, Math. xxviii.
and teach all nations, baptisynge them in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy gooste: Teaching them to observe al things, whatsoever
I have commanded you.

Go ye in to all the world and preach the gospel to all creatures, Mark. xv
he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. But he that believes not, shall
be dampened.

Know ye not that al we which are baptized into Jesus Christ, Roma. vi
are baptized to dye with him?

For ye are al children of god, because ye believe in Christ Jesus. Gal. iii.


For all ye that are baptized, have put on Christ.

For the supper of the lord.

Math. xxvi.
When they were eating Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to the dysciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body.
And he took the cup, and thanked, and gave it them, saying: Drink ye all of
this, for this is my blood (which is of the new testamente) that is shed for
many, for the remission of sins.

Mark. xiiii.
And as they did eat, Jesus took bread: and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave to them and said: Take, eat, this is my body: And he took
the cup, and when he had given thanks, he took it to them, and they all drank
of it, and he said unto them: This is my blood of ye new testament, which is
shed for many.

And he took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave unto
them saying. Luke. xxii.
This is my body, which is given for you. This do in the remembrance of me.
Likewise also when he had supped, he took the cup saying: This cup is the
new testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

That which I delivered unto you, I received of the lord. i. Cor. xi.
For the Lord Jesus the same night, in which he was betrayed, took bread: and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said: Take ye, and eat: this is
my body; which is broken for you.

This do ye in the remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the
cup; when supper was done, saying: this cup is the new Testament in my blood.
This do as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye
shall eat this bread: and drink of this cup, ye shall show the Lords death
till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat of this bread, or drink of the
cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be gyltie of the body and blood of the Lord.

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of
the cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own da^nacion, because he makes no difference of the Lords body. For this
cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep. For if we had
judged ourselves* we should not have been judged.

Finis.
Imprinted at London, in Fleet street, at the sign of the Sun, over against
the Conduyte, by Edward Whit-churche, the.v. day of November, in the year of
our Lord. 1547.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


