A Svvoord against Swearyng, containing these principal points.

1 That there is a lawful use of an oath, contrary to the assertion of the
Manichees and Anabaptists.

2 How great a sin it is to swear falsely, vaynely, rashly, or customably.

3 That common or usual swearing leads unto perjury.

4 Examples of Gods just and visible punishment upon blasphemers, periurers,
and such as have procured Gods wrath by cursing and bannyng, which we call
execration.

At London, Printed by Richard Watkins, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard.

1579.

GOD the Father.

Exodus. 20Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. The Lord
will not hold him giltlesse, that takes his name in vain. Le. 19. You shall
not forswear in my name, you shall not defile the name of your God. I am the
Lord. GOD the Son.

Math. 6.Thus you shall specially pray. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed
be thy name. GOD the holy Ghost.

Iacobi. 5. Above all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, nor by any other kind of oath. The Prophet David.

Psalm. 68. GOD shall wound the head of his enemies, and the heary scalpe of
every one that goes on still in his wickedness. To the right worshypfull, M.
Alexander Nowel. M. John Mullens. M. John Walker, diligent and faithful
distributers of Gods heavenly Mysteries.
MAN in the dignity of his creation (right woorshypfull, and my very good
Patrons) has this excellent denomination, he is termed (...), a little world
within it self, as carryin within the little compass of his small brain, the
whole order, and disposition of a common wealth. But if by inuersion it may be
allowed, to return unto smaller things, the greatest, we may then right well
resemble the world unto mankind, saying, The world is like unto a man, and of
good right and reason, the greatest time and age of the world being now
consumed, and gone. This face of the world, as it were lying sick of age
(which age it self in deed is a malady varecouerable) this same last age of
the world, may best be likened then unto an old man: But an old man is twyse a
child, children be foolish, and froward, and besides the infirmity of
sickness, they be nastie and noisome, full of uncleanness, in whose froward
folly, this above al things must be remembered, that old men, how just soever
the cause be, can abide no reprehension, nor cannot endure the hearing of their
faults: And so for all the world, though never any age were so wicked, so
foul, so filthy, so nasty, and so loathsome, as this our age is: yet we say,
we be clean and wholesome, we say we be sweet and sauery, we say they be not
wise that reprehende in age any thing. Age in deed is honorable, howbeit not
that age which Seneca ad Lucilium calls Elementaria senectus, but that age
whereof Tullie remembers de senectute: Remember always, says he, that I
speak of that age whereof youth has laid an honest foundation. It is not
years, or gray hears, nor wrinkles in the browe, nor furrows in the face,
that brings reverence unto age, but an honest life past before, which
continues with reverence unto the end. An old Ruffian, or an ancient
Callet, is not for their continuance in wickedness worthy any reverence. A
sleepie age given to idleness, that rests not without fear, and is void of
hope of goodness, seeking security for the time, pretending that we were best
be at quiet for the time of our life, we are not able to endure the troubles
that may compass us: this age is not honorable. And such is our age, and like
altogether unto testy old froward age, that how just soever the cause be, can
abide no reprehension. What, we live in the old age of the world, and have
the examples of all the ages of the world before us, and our end is to be
looked for, no man wotteth how soon: Shall not our punishment be the greater,
our condemnation the more just, how much the more warninges and examples have
been given unto us since the beginning of the world, if we take no heed
thereby? And how much I pray you have we profited? Amongst Gods special
commandments, is God honored? Is Gods name reverenced? Was ever any age so
outrageous in Oaths? So blasphemous in railing? So rooted in perjury? When God
turned his gracious countenance to wards us again, and renewed the glory of
his Gospel, did we suspect that wickedness should have been vnweeded, that
blasphemy should have spread such blossoms, that common swearing should have been thus suffered as it is? Thought we that Papists should have had any place
of authority? Thought we that contention should have been so common, or that
consience should have been ruled by riches. Nay verily, we hoped for better, and
I wot not when any age was worse. It is true that affliction and trouble
tries: God is never letter served, then in adversity. Wealth makes us
Wantons, peace bredeth pride, we have quite forgotten Mariana tempora. This
complaint as it may truly be made in diverse respects, so specially in this,
that Gods most glorious name is not hallowed nor honored, but vainly used,
terribly abused, and blasphemed most outragiously. Some faults against the
second table, because they concern the common wealth, are somewhat duly
executed, nay I dare boldly say that laws for hawks eggs, for couies of
Partriges, and eyes of Phesantes, are with much diligence observed and looked
unto: (and good cause that so they should) But this that concerns Gods
honor, and the glory of his majesty, this whereof God has given a special
charge, whereunto God has annexed his terrible threatenings, this commandment
of the first Table, concerning the reverence of Gods own name, is (fie for
shame) to much neglected. If Princes would forget it, if Counselors consult
for common wealth only, yet may not Divines speak? What though we be like unto
women, for that when we have said, we have done, our authority stretches no
farther: yet in a reasonable cause a woman may speak with honesty, and speak
again and again to, until she be heard. Unto you therefore this I remember,
not in suspision of your diligence, that be far from me, for I profess gladly,
and I give God thanks, I know that both in doctrine and life, none labor
more fervently: but as little sand to continue a long lasting edge, unto a
strong gentle Scithe: So I humbly beseech you still to continue your earnest
Zeal, to the promoting of Gods glory, Namely, and most specially when
opportunity of time and place shall serve, that some strength of law earnestly
be by your wysedomes required, again and again, to be established for
punishment of vain swearing, and for the utter cuttyng of, of forswearing or
perjury. The discommodities of the outrageous excess in apparret breeds
much more woe then many deemes for: drunkenness, is a deathful disease, and it
dismaketh a man, so that be ceasseth to be that he was: But this vice
concerns not man so much as God: No tongue can utter, no pen can express, no
mortality can conceive the sinful wickedness, the dishonor unto God, the
mischief and misery unto mankind, that grows thereby: Of this it pleased God
to styr me up to write somewhat, whereof I yield most humble thanks unto his
majesty, that it pleased him I should bring somewhat, whether it be hear or
wool, or sand, or Oyster shelles, to the building of his Temple. The matter is
worthy for all men to regard, though it be a common thing (every body can say it
is so) our age is dainty, and lusts after novelties: the profession of our
faith in religion, is like unto our foolish fancy in building. We delight in
shows, in tricks and toys, in cornered Windows, in tops of Chimneies,
though the bottomes be not. So we dispute curious unprofitable preternecessarie
questions, not regarding the ground and substance, which is most necessary, as
without the which we are not. That your godly wisdom right well considered,
when in your ancient reverend age, you wrote yet instructions for the tender
youth, a Work which to your presence for to commend, is not so seemly: it
was in deed a hammer, a Hatchet, a swoorde, an axe, to beat, to cut, to
wound, to destroy Antechrist and all Heritiques. Old men are unclean and
nastie, the hope is in the youth, whom well to enstructe in faithful
literature, and studiously to train up to his glory, is the only hope that
remains to our age: the strength of which hope, is the stablishment of good
laws in time, for the reverend use and honor of Gods name. Which neglected
or intermitted, the evil of example that amongst us remains, is like to
poison more pottes, then all the Vinegar in Europe is able hereafter to make
sweet or seasonable. God grant that his honor may most specially be tendered,
and that thereunto all other Potentates, Princes, and Dominions whatsoever, may
with condign reverence bend and obey. Amen.

Unto your good woorshyppes, bounden by duty, most humble in the Lord.
Edmond Bicknoll.

Unto the Godly Reader, through the grace of Gods spirit, feruentnesse of
Zeal, and diligence (according to ability) to kill and destroy the abominable
sin of Swearing and perjury.
THe notable sayings of Gods chosen servants, in whom the holy Ghost it self
speaks, are worthy perpetual remembrance. Which if they be not regarded, the
godly are taken away to their rest and joy, and then follows (in plague to the
people) the miseries and calamities that before were threatened by the mouths
of those his messengers. So after the death of S. Ambrose, followed the horrible
vastation of Italy, after the death of Augustine the Vandales entered Affricke,
and then sprang the Arryan Heresy, after the death of Johannes Hus the fierce
battayles of Bohemia, after the death of Martin Luther, what terrible troubles,
and cruel calamities happened? Who in his life time amongst al other, left in
memorial this notable prophecy: That these three things would be the
destruction of Christian religion. The first, is forgetfulness of the
benefits that we receive at Gods hands by the Gospel, and unthankfulness
for the same. The second, is carelessness: the word is brought unto us, and
we care not for it, we make a profession of a faith for a show, but we reckon
not what we do, nor how we live. The third, is that we love and like better of
worldly wisdom, then of godly wisdom: within the compass of our foolyshe
brains, we will comprehend the reason, rule, order, and end of every thing:
ungodly counsel is a prop and stay unto our determinations, we depend not upon
the Lords providence, we ask not counsel at the mouth of the Lord: if the
Lord guide not the world after our own will, we like no longer to be governed
by him: We forsake the Lord, we fly straight unto flesh and blood. The
prosperity of the world is our delyght, and therefore we say iumply as it was
said unto Jeremy, We remember what we have Ieremi. 4^
done, and lived meerily after it: when we sacrificed unto the Queen of
heaven, the world went merrily with us, we saw none evil: but since we left
sacrificing unto the Queen of heaven, we have lived in lack, and felt much woe:
Even so say we, if we should live according to the Gospel, we should leave of
crafty cunnyng in getting, and perchance become beggars, we should leave our
faise swearing, and not sell our wares, we should leave our excess in vanity,
which is our chief delyght, we should labor earnestly, and leave out
slothful rest, we should give to them that want, and have no certenty our
selves, but still wait until the Lord would give us more. Flesh and blood is
our delight, the glory of the world is our joy: and, this is contrary
thereunto. Thus we forsake the Lord, and cast of the yoke of Christian
profession, nay, of Christian religion I would say, for we profess somewhat,
but we live nothing. These things, said that excellent vessel of the. L.
Doctor Martin Luther, would destroy christian religion: So as Moses law shall be
continued, and the Turk very far shall spread the praise of his Mahumet, but
christian religion amongst us shall war full cold. It is God him self that
speakenh by the mouth of his ministers, and therefore it would be specially
regarded, what the holy ghost moved them to tell, before it pleased God to take
away our good Josias, our ^xample in ^emorie.
sweet king Edward, this voice was heard out of every Preachers mouth, The
Gospel shall be taken from yon, the Gospel shall be taken away from you. I am
horribly afraid because of the ungodly, so often as I hear my dear brethren
and fellow laborers in the Lord: Who, I am sure with earnest groninges, pray
unto the Lord, that his spirit may teach them what to speak: So often as I
see that the spirit woorketh in them to threaten, above al other this woe, to
have the kingdom of heaven taken away from us, to have the glorious Gospel of
GOD, the immortal seed, the spiritual food of our souls, taken quite away
from us: So often, me thinks, I fear and tremble to think how soon that
terrible hunger shall come, that we shall go, and run, and seek earnestly, and
yet not find the food of our souls wherewith to be comforted. If we wilfully
forget Gods glory, will he care for us? wherefore? There was never a goodlyer
thing upon the earth, then was Jerusalem: and yet when they refused to be
obedient unto the Lord, and began to wax forgetful of his great benefits,
when they left of to ask counsel of the Lord, and trusted to man's foolyshe
wisdom and policy, to man's vain strength, even then they were destroyed by
vnciuyll discention, poisoned with the plague of pestilence, murdered by cruel
famine, devoured of the enemies sword, many thousands of their Nobles forced
to do the days labor of slaves, no more account of them, but that. 30. of
them were sold for one poor penie: the rest were forced to live against their
wylles in lack and woe, pinched with penury, oppressed with labor in most
cruel bondage and perpetual slavery. To come nearer and next in deed to our
selves: How gallant and glorious a City was Antwerp? How floorished some
part of Germany and Flaunders, but when the voice of the Gospel is not
obeyed, when Gods kingdom is not sought first and before all other things,
when Gods mercy is despised, and his Gospel no more embraced, when the spirit
of God is resisted and refused? then in deed we must needs look for that
which Martin Luther, that chosen instrument of the Lord, foretold us, that
the Gospel shall be translated from us, to some other people, or rather returned
back again from us Gentiles unto the Jews, from the new chosen refusers, to
the old refused professors: It has an hyd dark mystery, that many false
professed Christians deny the reverend Sacrament of Baptism, and some
natural Israelites, carnal Jews, have earnestly desired the benefit of the
same. Doubtless it is true that Christ said, You shall not finyshe all the
Cities of Judah until the coming again of the son of man, somewhat shall be
to do amongst them: GOD has a work amongst them that he will do, he has
a remnant that he will call home, whereof Paul speaks, saying, Blindness is
partly happened unto Israel, until the fulness Romans. ^^
of the Gentiles be accomplished, and so Israel shall be saved. Hertof says
Hilarious, Al is not yet doonem Israel: after the fullness of the Gentiles is
come in, there is a remnant yet Hillarie.
left in Israel that shall be gathered unto the Lord. Our looseness of life is
unto any Christian conscience a terrible fear, or rather a despair of any
long continuance of Gods Gospel among us. The Fox of whom Methodius speaks
in his Vaticinis whom diverse learked interpret to be Mahomet or his faction,
Methodi^^
was never so like to bring red and blooddy Turks and Jews out of Cancasus
cloisters, as now, neither was our battle ever so great in deed with them
our froward neighbors that ware black Boots, as it shall be with those
strangers that wear red Buskins, whereof a just provocation is in good sadness
that which Bessarion lays to our charge, that we are so diverse of hew, so
variable in color, that it is hard to find a number Bessarion.
of Christians of one color, of one consent, of one like disposition, some are
white, some are black, some are dun, some are blew, some are falowe, some are
red, some are full of speckles, some are unspotted: on the other side, one Wolf
is like an other, all wicked ons, as birds of one feather, as beasts of one
kind, they are all alyke, of one mind, of one consent. The Devil, the Pope,
the Turk, the Jew, they have one and the self same intent, they shoot all
at one mark: seek to destroy Christ's kingdom, and have with you, for our
pick of Malt set the whole Kylne on fire: deface Gods glory, blot out his
name, and set up whom you will: Let God and Moses be forgotten, in the Mount al
Israel will pluck of their special Jewels and Ornaments to make a molten
Image. Let the people proclayme a sacrifice unto the Queen of heaven, you
shall have company that will spare for no cost, young men will cut wood, children
will gather ^eremi. 44
chyps, women will fetch water, old men will afoorde wheat, one will fetch fire,
an other will heat the Oven, make cakes to sacrifice to the Queen of heaven,
spare for no cost, you shall lack for no company. Gedeon did but once ask it,
and he had it redily given him to Judges. 8.
make an Ephod to set up in Ephra 1700. sicles of ready gold, besides Jewels
and precious apparel. Above al things, we should be most thankful for that
inestimable treasure of Gods most sacred word, we should seek most
specially his honor, in respect whereof, al pompous glory should be as dunghyl
fylthinesse. Philip. 3.
In this case lament al you that love God: Help al you that be good
Christians, with one consent, let us be fellow laborers in the Lord: For Gods
glory, for the reverent use of his name, spare no labor, speak, sue,
entreat, encourage, help, succor, make good choice (if I speak not to late)
of your Knights of the Shyre, of the Burgesses of the Parliament, of the
Clerks of the Conuetation, she we your zeal, do what you may to move, to
procure some godly law, whereby the customable evil use, the vain abuse of
our sacred God, his most mighty name may be reformed. The force of Papistrie
GOD be thanked is beaten down, they write not, nor have not what to write. Our
lack of good life is the greatest loss, the strongest stop, the unhappiest
hinderance that now remains against the fullness and plentifulnesse of Gods
kingdom: Whose kingdom, if we build not unto the end, whose spirit if we
resist, and refuse, as heretofore (a fruit of infidelity) we were given over
to believe Hobgoblin, Robin goodfelow, Fayries, and such other fancies, so
hereafter we may be sure, haueuyng cast of the spirit of grace, the Devil
shall every where in the terror of our conscience, appear and show him self
unto us: So as hereafter it shall be (I fear) as great a wonder to see many
houses free from some one or more visibly possessed of the Devil, as heretofore
it has been strange to see one in a parish. Strange sightes, earthquakes,
unnatural mutthers, Monsters by Sea and by land, as tokens of Gods wrath, we
have seen abundantly: Nay we may write again to the beginning of the world,
such things as they never heard of. These things should frame or rather
force us to a newness of life, to a ready waiting for the Lord Christ his
last coming. Amongst al other, this great and horrible vice of vain swearing,
to the destruction whereof, I beseech GOD grant some strength and force of
law, it is so great a sin, so unprofitable a mischief, so common an evil,
as there is nothing more to be woondred at in my judgment, then that after
twenty whole years preaching of the Gospel under so gracious and godly a
Queen, and mother unto his Church, there should any man, no^^ ^r simple, be
so ungodly, so unthankful, so (...) once to dishonor God by dishalow^^^ of his
name, (...) him self by evil outrageous oaths forgetful o^ (...) benefit of
the Gospel, or through disobedience and lack of good life, to hinder the
commyn home of ^ther unto the society of Gods holy congregation. And in this
so good and necessary a motion, I am and sorry that some man of good learning
and great (...) had not taken this enterprise in hand: Howbeit (...) matter it
self is worthy every where to fynd^ (...) Patron* And as helpers and ayders,
I do earnestly desire in this behalf all good Christians to succor and
further this motion: But most specially as Patrones by name, I have chosen
thres such (as, though comparisons be odious) (And blessed be GOD therefore,
our Church of England abounds with good men, so as I dare say, no one
function in subjects state is more faithfully and diligently discharged then
the ministry) yet hereof I dare clappe my hands unto my self, that all
other either learned, or godly, will easily give them the title (besides their
excellent universal gifts of literature) of diligent and faythful^
distributers of Gods heavenly mysteries, whereunto if their life be not
correspondent, let him that can, step forth and rebuke, so that he do it per
(...) just coarguere. Of the which three, as the one has the first place
before our most gracious Queen, and her most honorable Counselors, in the
which place, a^^ A shwensday
his wisdom of godly zeal has moved diverse things heretofore to be
reformed: So at this time I trus^ in God his spirit will work a mighty
effect in him, And the other wayne I am sure in their condition and place, will
move and further this Christiam request to Gods own glory: Hereof also. I
hope largely that whatsoever so godly learned, and faithful stewardes of the
Lord shall ^^^ue, al other that be either godly, learned or zealous, will
assent, prosecute, and further the same, to the uttermost of their strength and
ability: Which God grant for his son Christ Jesus his sake, to his only
honor, and reverence of his most glorious name, as also to the great
commendation of the government of his church in England, that other
congregations of Christ else where, may confess England to be no whyt inferiouy
unto any in the world, but rather a light and lantherne unto the rest.

Amen. Amen.
ASword against swearing god send us, god send us.
Lord, thy Sword brandysheth, wrath against it.
EXcept our England, leave her oaths outrageous.
XEgypt plagues were not so sharp a scourge.
AS God will send, when he his floor shall purge.
NO thing does more, diminish Gods glory.
Does not God threaten, swearers his vengaunce?
EXcept you repent, and be heartily sorry.
REmember hell fire, shall be your pyttaunces.
NOVVVVEL, God speed thy tongue,
And guide thee with his grace:
That when to preach, thy course shall come,
This vice, thou may deface.
And as. S. Ridley did,
procure the poor some joy,
When good King Edward did from him
perceive their hard distress:
So God give thee to move, that sharp
Laws may destroy
This filthy sin, and thine attemptes,
God bless with good success.
A Sword against Swearyng.
Christ our most blessed Savior, in that his most perfect form of prayer,
wherein al necessary goodness for soul or body is desired for us, and al
euylles due unto us, are required to be turned from us, has, as the most
special, set down this in the first place before al other, a petition of al
Christians, most necessary to be required at Gods hands: That the name of our
heavenly father be sanctified, that is, always esteemed holy and reverend. And
in deed, for good and loving children, how is any thing more requisite, or
what more perfect note of true and sonlike love is there, then this, That the
son above al other things, do seek especially the honor and reverend
estimation of his father. So also God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with the son, and the holy Ghost, one only God, of al might and power, when
he had chosen one peculier people, to show his might by them over all the
world, he gave unto them, and consequently to us al, Laws, or
Commandments, ten in number: but he gave them by thunder and lyghtning, by
myste and darkness, by smoke and fire. Mount Sinai was al on smoke, and the
smoke went up to the midst of heaven: teaching us by dreadeful signs, that
his law is to be had in reverence, and his Majesty to be feared. Amongst
which commandments, as in the former twain, he teaches, that he is GOD
alone, and therefore only to be honored: so the next is, that his name be no
more lightly or vaynely used. Used yet, but not in vain: whereunto (if God be
to be feared, that not without these great and dreadeful signs gave us these
his commandments) he adds the penalty of his wrath, The Lord will not hold
him giltlesse, that takes his name in vain. And if the Lord, the law geuer,
that knows best the intent and purpose of the law, the Judge also against the
transgressors of the same, shall pronounce us gyltie, what remains to the
person condemned, but bitter execution? How is it then, that GOD by terror
commaundyng us, Christ by duty of love exhortyng us, above al things, to
seek the honor and reverend estimation of God his name? his most glorious
name notwithstanding is most vaynely used, most shamefully abused, and
blasphemed most outragiously. How faere this accusation would stretche, how
generally this fault is spread, that concerns the dishonoring of Gods name,
it is not mine intent here to discover it. As the name of God in it self is
most glorious, and can not be dishonored, yet all the ways and means
practiced by mankind, against the glory of Gods name, to set them all down,
were a work infinite. This small Treatise, which I pray God it may be to the
honor only of his name, shall concern the lawfulness of swearyng, the abuse
of vain swearyng, the punishment of pertury or forswearyng. As two false
Knaves need no Broker, for they can easily enough agree in wickedness sine
mediante, without any to break the matter between them: so amongst true and
faithful men, there need no oaths. Where Virtue fails not, truth of it
self carries credit sufficient. But God only knows who are his, and the
simple cloak of Hypocrisy covers many a subtyl soul. Double dealyng of the
most, makes many men doubtful where they may trust. Christ is so conveyed
by subtlety, and falsehood is so disguysed with fair colors, that in a deep
deceyptfulnesse, a man would almost dread no danger: and he that stands in
no fear or doubt of subtlety, is soonest endomaged, wherout for our safety
the Lawyer teaches us this lesson, to trust few or none upon their words,
words are but wind, bind every man's bargayne sure by writing.

Because that faith and troth
with no degree will stand.
Therefore the Lawyer says,
take writing of his hand.
If no man would deceive his neighbor, if every man would speak the truth
from his heart, we then should need no written bonds, oaths should have no
use amongst us. A remedy therefore it is against our corruption, that in
doubtful matters (confessyng God almyghtie his wisdom, that he knows all
and every singular work and word, deed and thought of man) we take his
name, we use the name of God, that is, not in vain, but lawfully: we confess
his almighty power, that he knows al things: (A matter that much concerns
his Majesty) for who can do so (but God alone?) we call him as witness of our
truth, that we may prosper therein: we desire him also to be a revenger and
punisher of our sins, if we do not speak the truth. And therefore the
Hebrews begin their oath with this conjunction of condition, If: and use the
figure (...) suppressyng the rest, and yet in deed intendyng this much: If I
deceive you, or if I break this oath, the Lord that is of al power revenge it
upon me. An oath therefore parteyneth to that part of Gods service, which we
call invocation: Call upon me, says the Lord, make unto thy self none other
Godds, I am the Lord thy god, use my name. So yt when we hear the Lord say,
Take not my name in vain: let us remember yet that the Lord said before, I am
the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other gods but me. Preach my name. Call
upon my name. Confess my name. Use my name: take it not vaynely, nor in
trifling matters abuse it not: I am the Lord, therefore to be reverenced. But
in matters of doubt, when man's wisdom can go no further, Confess mine
omnipotent power, call upon me, I am God alone, and know al. Make unto your
selves no other gods, by attributyng unto them that which is proper only unto
me, but call me for a witness, call me for a revenger. The Lord said not at
any time. Take not my name in use: but he said, Take not my name in vain, use
it not but with great reverence, in consideration of my Majesty: yet use my
name, Invoke my name, or call upon my name only, for I only am the Lord,
Thou shall have none other Gods but me. If invocation parteyneth not unto me
alone, I am not God alone. Anabaptista, and Manachei, and other sectaries, are
thus easily confuted: when they deny the lawful use of the name of God, they
deny Gods reverence, they deny Gods power, they deny God to be God. But if they
will not understand that Invocation confesses and attributes omnipotency
unto the person that they do invoke or call upon, and where there is no
invocation, there is no godhead or power divine acknowledged, let them yet
consider this substance followyng.

1 Gods commandment unto his people, to swear by his name.

2 That God forbyddeth his people to swear by the name of strange gods,
least by invocation, they should attribute that omnipotency unto Idolles and
Deuylles, that is proper to him alone.

3 The example of God, swearyng for our capacity.

4 Examples of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Christ him self, which in
no case can be contrary unto GOD his father.

WHen the Lord had chosen Israel from al other nations, and had procured, by
Exodus. 19.
terror of his power, the reverence of his majesty, the force whereof was so
great, that the people fled for fear of his might, and stood a far of from
the mountain, and said unto Moses, Talk thou with us, we will hear Exodus. 20
thee: but let not god talk with us, least we die. Even the Lord him self by
Moses unto Israel from his own matestie, amongst many other, gave this law:
If a man deliver his neighbor money or stuff to keep, if Exodus 22.
it be stolen out of the house, if the thief be found, he shall pay the double:
But if the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought
unto the judges. 7. 8
To swear whether he has put any hand unto his neighbors goods, or no. Here
the Lord him self appointed an oath, as an ordinary mean to decide a
controversy, and a sufficient testimony of truth in a doubtful matter.
Again in ye. 10. and. 11. verses of the said chapter, If a man deliver unto
his neighbor 10 11
an Ass, or an Ox, or any other beast to keep, if it die, or be hurt, or be
taken away of enemies, and no man see it. An oath of the Lord shall be between
themtwaine, that he has not put his hand unto his neighbors goods. Here is
the apoyntment of an oath by the Lord him self. It is called an oath of the
Lord, because they should swear by the name of ye Lord only. Also. 6. Deuteronomy.
Moses heedefully and carefully remembering again unto Israel the Lord his
commandment, when he commanded them to lay up in their hearts, to teach them
to their children, when he gives them this most earnest Caveat, Beware lest
thou forget God, he adds specially, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and
serve him, and shall swear by his name. Which commandment he also rehearses
in the. 10. of Deuteronomy. 25 and in the. 4. of Ieremi. 4.
Jeremy. 25. showing how great a part of religion consists in inuocating or
calling upon the name of the Lord only. The Lord by his Prophet mouyng them
earnestly to return, not haltyngly, nor halfly, nor holowly, but holyly, and
wholly unto the Lord, he especially teaches them to swear by his name, Thou
shall swear, The Lord lives: Tyeing an oath, or every oath, to these lymits,
Vaynely thou shall not swear: but in truth, in judgment, in righteousness,
and then thou shall take none other to witness but the Lord him self,
whereunto he adds the majesty of the Lord, and the benefit of the people,
That the nations may be blessed in the Lord, that the people may glory in the
Lord. Against the glory of whose majesty full highly it is, if any other be
taken in his place, if any other be sworn by, if any other be called upon,
either for grace, to give blessyng unto truth, or for might of power, to
revenge falsehood. For what is that, but clean to forsake the lord, and to
attribute omnipotency or al power and strength to some other. Wherefore the
Lord in his zealous wrath against Judah, amongst al other sins, for which in
his justice he powers vengeance against them, even to Iere. 5. 7.
the utter destruction thereof by the hands of the Chaldeans, he reckons
this as a capital crime, How should I spare thee for this, thy children have
forsaken me: The Lord himself shows him the manner how, They have sworn by
them that are not Gods, they have forsaken me. This fault the Lord reckoned so
injurious to his glory, that with a myghtie vehemency of speech he says, How
can I spare thee for this? in effect thus, Surely I will not spare thee, the
Chaldees shall destroy thee.

Hereof the Lord gave a special commandment in the. 23. of Exodus. Take
Exodus. 23.
heed to al things that I have said unto you, and ye shall make no mention of
the name of other Gods, neither shall it be heard out of your mouth. And in
the. 23. of Joshua, Make Iosue, 23.
no mention of their gods, nor give or take any cause to swear by them. He
said not, Take not their names in vain: but, take them not at all, let them
not be heard out of your mouths. So the. 19. of Esaias, where the Esaias. 19.
Lord gives a special form how the Lord is served and honored according to
his own good will and pleasure, the Prophet expresses it thus, At that day,
five Cities of the Lord shall speak the language of Canaan, and shall swear by
the Lord of Hosts. And thus the Lord him self also did most zelously, as to
show his only omnipotency, and how it stretches universally. In Esaias. 45. I
have Esaias. 45.
^worne by my self says the Lord, the word (...) gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and ^hal not return. Every knee shall bow unto me, and every
tongue shall swear by me: according whereunto, not vainly, but reverently, in
matters of great weight, to end contentions. To make assurance of promises to
be kept in testimony of truth, we read how the fathers, both Patriarchs and
Prophets, have sworn.

So Abraham swore unto Abimelec in Genesis 21.
covenant of his safety.

Isaac likewise in the like case, swore unto Gene. 26.
Abimelec, Ahuzzah, and Phicol.

Jacob swore unto Laban, concerning Gene. 31.
the bounds of their ground.

Moses agreed by covenant of oath to ^w^ with Iethro. Exodus 2.


Jonathan swear to David. Ibidem.


David swear to Jonathan.

Jonathan and David swear both. Ibidem.


Likewise Saul required an oath of assurance, for his seed after him: and Dau^^
swear unto Saul.

Also David in the presence of Natha^ 1. Reg. 1
the prophet, swear unto Bethsheba that Solomon should reign after him.

Helias the Prophet swear unto Ach^^ the king. 1. Reg. 17.


Elizeus swear unto He lias that he would go with him. 2. Reg. 2.


The Angel swear by him that lives world without end. Apoc. 10,


So also the Lord yeeldyng unto our weakness, confirmed al his promises by
an oath, having no greater to swear by, according to the fashion of men, he
swear by him self, concerning his covenant with Abraham.

By my self have I sworn, I will surely Gene. 22.
blesle thee and thy seed: which oath he confirmed unto Isaac.

I will surely perform the oath which I Genesis 26.
swear unto Abraham.

Also Esaias. I have sworn by my self. Esaias. 45.
says the Lord, The word is gone out of my mouth, and shall not return.

So David remembers the Lord his covenant confirmed unto him by the Lords
Psalm. 89.
oath, I have sworn unto David my servant. and again, I have sworn once by my
bo^inesse, I will not fail David.

Likewise the Prophet remembryng the Psalm. 96.
disobedience of the Israelites, remembers also how the Lord swear that they
should not enter into the land promised unto them. The Lord swear concerning
the everlasting Priesthood of Christ. And again unto David, Psalm. 110.
The Lord swear in truth, and will not shrink from it. Psalm. 132.


Paul also remembers at large, how the Lord swear unto Abraham, and as it
were ratifiyng ye use of an oath: An oath, says he, for Hebrews. 6
confirmation, is an end amongst men of al strife. Which thing also for
testimony and confirmation in his earnest zeal, Paul also did, as first to
the Romans, God is my witness: And to the Corinthians, I call God to record
unto my soul: And to the Galathians, 2, Corinth. 1
Behold I witness before God, or I call God to witness that I lie not: And to
the Galathi. 1.
Ephesians, God is my record: and so likewise Ephe. 1.
to the Thessalonians. And yet no Christian ever doubted but yt Paul was led by
the spirit of God when he wrote those Epistles: In somuche that Augustine
says, It were an heinous Agust. contra mend.
wickedness to say that Paul, especially in his written Epistles, has
violated or broken that Gods commandment, Thoushalt not swear. Therefore,
says he, you must understand that which is set down (non omnino not at al.)
That is, as much as in you lies, have none affection at all to swear, think
an oath to be no grace nor no garnyshyng unto your speech: Otherwise how
should (...) excuse Christ him self? Or shall we with Porphirius or Iulianus
condemn Christ, that his words and commandments are one thing, his life
and conversation are another? for so these vile Heretics carpe a^ Christ,
and upon the lefe same saying, (...) they harp with the Manichees and
Anabaptists, urging vehemently the words without sense, Swear not at al,
not at all, let your communication be yea, yea, no, no, that which is more then
thi^, is sin. Which commandment if it were not to be enterpreted, Christ in
deed had done violence, for he has used often, as a testimony of truth, and
as a confirmation of his speech, Amen. Amen. Which is somewhat more then a
plain yea, for it sounds as much as, Certainly, Truly, Verily, or, of a
certain truth. And in this sense Paul says, All the 2. Corin. (...).
promises of God in Christ are yea, and are in him Amen, that is, truly,
perfectly, fully, assured, performed, complete and ended. And let us mark
now what a great oath this is, Amen, Verily, and Truly, or, Of a truth:
whereby I appose their conscience to reclayme them thereby, that think it is
no oath to say, Truly, or, Verily: insomuche that in our customable speech, if
a man say, Truly: it is replied, Yea, but you dare not swear: when he already
has sworn full deeply. S. Paul says, God swear. Mark now the form of
the oath set down by Paul, Truly: Heb. 6.
or, Surely I will bless thee. So also the Prophet David remembers that the
Lord swear unto the Israelites, that they should not enter into the land of
promise. Turn ^salm. 95.
unto the. 14. of Numbers, where the History of their murmuring is expressed,
and the Number. 14.
form of that oath is thus set down, Surely, or, Certainly, they shall not
see that good land. So often as we say, Certainly, assuredly, truly, or
verily, so often in deed we do swear: for though GOD be not expressly Truly.
Verily.
named, yet in namyng truth, God is named, for God and truth are one, and the
self same: And the strength of an oath consists more in honoring God by
truth, then in the outward namyng of God. Let all men then either learn or
remember, whereas customably they use vaynely, Truly, when many times there is
neither truth nor verity in their saying, how that they most grievously
offend God, who is in deed all truth, and the only truth. So then neither
may the Anabaptists restrain this unto the time only of the old Testament,
neither may they so urge the words by the letter, that they thereby take away
the just interpretation and sense thereof: For so should Paul and Christ him
self be condemned, so should God his mercy, declared heretofore by his
Prophets unto the Gentiles in Christ, and after Christ his coming, be
frustrated and made void, which were blasphemy against the spirit: and an
infinite heap of other mischiefs would ensue, if like places of Scripture
were violently forced according to the letter. We must therefore unfold them
according to their meaning, and take them up as they lie. The sense does offer
it self as plain as can be, if we mark upon what occasion, and to what
purpose Christ gave this commandment. The Jews had gotten this evil
custom of swearing by creatures, as, by the Temple, by the Altar, by Heaven,
by Jerusalem, by the Earth. etc. And though they swore falsely, and intended
to deceive their neighbor, yet if they named not God expressly, they thought it
was no sin. Much like unto the foolyshe people of our age, that entendyng to
deceive others, by subtlety of sound, or by eclipsing the pronunciation,
reckon yet their crafty intent to be no deceit: such I mean as swear thus.
GOD pronounce me at the last day. By God, I never defended him in all my life.
When they think and hope that other men will judge that they mean, GOD
reuounce me, I never offended him. Thus did the Jews, though ^ugustine (...).
ser. dom.
they carried in their minds a full and perfect intent of deceit, though
their communication was myngled ^^th common and customable oaths, yea though
they did foresweare them selves falsely, except there were some express namyng
of GOD, they reckoned it none offense at all. And to this Dyuelyshe purpose
they abused this text, Thou shall not forswear in my name, least thou defile
the name of the Leui. 19.
Lord thy GOD. Otherwise (so that they used not invocation of GOD expressly by
name) although they swear and forsware, although they used execration, which
conceyneth cursyng and bannyng, and desiring of vengeance (As in example, The
earth open and swalowe me. The stones of the Temple fall upon me: or such
like) they made none account of any such oath or execration. And this Christ
correctyng in the 23. of Matthewe, he calls them blind Math.
guydes, and blind Bussardes, showing them that there is no place nor plot in
the world, wherein God has not set some cognisaunce of his glory: Heaven is
his seat, the earth is his footestoole. He that swears by the Temple,
swears by it, and by him that dwells in the Temple. He that swears by
Heaven, swears by the throne of GOD, and by him that sytteth therein. This
spoke Christ, to confute their damnable custom of swearyng commonly, and
their doltyshe interpretation of swearyng or forswearyng by the name of GOD,
and teaches them withal an orderly form of behavior in their common
speech, Let every man speak the truth to his neighbor from his heart, and
say, Yea, it is so: Let him renounce falsehood, and say, Nay, it is not so. Let
this be Math. 5.
an order established for your daily communication. And now let us harp upon
communication, communication: as they chaunte out, Not at all, not at all: and
then the true sense is, In your daily communication, use none oaths at all, or
use not at all any oaths in your daily communication: But speak truly, and
say, yea, or nay. So that Christ is not contrary to GOD his father, he
repealeth not the decree of GOD, established for the vsyng of his name in
judgment, in justice, in doubtful causes concerning equity and right: but he
rebukes that which God forbade, Vain and rash swearyng, and foolyshe
conceived opinions, of this or that oath. Thus vsyng Gods name lawfully, we
must never abuse the same. GOD that said, Take not my name in vain, has
therefore appointed the right use of his name, because he has forbidden the
abuse thereof. Of strange Gods he has said, Exo. 23.
By the name of strange Gods thou shall not swear at all: the name of any of
them shall not be heard out of your mouths. He said not In vain: but, Not at
all, of any other besides him self. Of his own name only, there is a lawful
use allowed and commanded unto the Godly: as to spread his glory.

1 By preaching his name. Go and preach the Gospel M. 11.
unto all creatures. Preach the word, be earnest in season, and out of season.
2. Ti. 4.


2 By giving thanks and honor unto his name. I will always give thanks Psalm
33.
unto ye Lord, his praise shall evermore be in my mouth. I will deliver there,
and thou Psalm. 49.
shall honor me.

3 By professing and confessyng Gods name and power. He that confesses me
before M. 10.
men, I will confess and acknowledge him before my father. To confess Gods
name, Romans 10.
proceeds from the mouth. Confess the Lord, and call Psalm. 14.
upon his name.

4 To invoke or call for help at the name of the Lord. Call upon me in the
time Psalm. 49.
of trouble.

Unto the which part, most specially the right use of an oath apparteyneth: As,
when by calling GOD to witness, we confess his omnipotent power, and desire A
memo^^ndum for swearers.
him to maynteyne and prosper us in truth, and punysh us, or to be avenged
upon us, if we speak, or do, or entende any falsehood or deceypt: which both
we are sure he will do, because he is God. But what is it to take Gods name in
vain? It is,

1 To call God a witness in unjust or in trifelyng matters.

2 To swear rashly, unadvisedly, or without urgent necessity, time, place,
and authority not considered.

3 Or once to name God, without the reverence due unto the Majesty of his
name, of whom nothing may occupy so much as our thought, without due
remembrance of his honor.

Think not of the Lord, but in goodness, says Solomon, and the Lord him
self, Sap. 1.
Ye shall not swear by my name in vain, neither shall thou defile the name of
thy Leui. 19.
God. I am the Lord.

Unto all the Curses and Plagues that Moses from the mouth of the Lord
remembers: Deuteronomy. 28.
As the curse at home, the curse abroad, the curse of hunger, the curse of
thyrst, the curse of ill success, the curse of sickness, of madness, of
penury, of oppression, of captivity, unto them all, he adds this as a
chief addition, These and many more plagues shall the Lord heap upon thee,
unless thou fear the glorious, mighty, and terrible name of the Lord. Thy
name is wonderful, O Psalm. 8.
Lord, and only to be had in reverence. The Lord will not hold him
gyltlesle, Exodus. 20
that takes his name in vain. It is remembered by Aben Ezra, that the
Egyptians had a custom to swear by the head of their king: which oath, who so
ever performed not, no ransom would redeem him from death, because he
despised the king: How much more, not without due reverence and fear, ought
we to name or think once upon the name of our God, who only is God, and
without or besides whom there is no God. Thou only art great, O Lord, and
great is Iere. 10.
thy name in strength and power, who fears not thee thou King of Kings?
thine is the glory above al. How much the hyghlyer we esteem of Gods glory,
with so much the more reverence ought we to think and to speak of his name:
but as he that speasteth much, speaks sometimes unadvisedly for haste, as
Solomon remembers, Unto many words, folly is never absent or wanting. Prou.
10.
In much speech, there is either flat falsehood, or vanity, or superfluity
at the least, or peradventure all at once. So of the often naming of God, much
more of often swearing by his name, there aryseth a vain abuse, an
dishonorable derogation, a path way to the Palace of perjury, an open access,
or rather a compultion to the pyt of perdition. The Adulterer, the Thief, the
Murderer, can not always do that wickedness that they would: But he that
accustometh him self to vain swearing, though of purpose he would sometimes
Evil of custom.
frame and fashion him self to abstain from swearing, yet can he not for his
life so do: Custom succeeds, or rather grows in natures rome. So that at
al times he swears, and by swearing dishaloweth, as much as in him lies,
the most holy and reverent name of God: In so much, that a common swearer, if
he be in the fear of God reprehended for his vain swearyng: he answeareth
with an other oath, that he swear not before. I have heard ere now, a vain
fellow to gently reprehended for the damnable custom of swearyng, and his
answer has been with an execrable oath, that such reprehension needed not,
for he never swear lightly: whose words truly understood, he spoke more
truly then he was aware, not lightly, but heavily. Could any Christian bear
it, to hear the most honorable name of our glorious GOD so terribly abused?
Hereof says Chrysostom, Like as a continual babbler pratleth intemporally
some unseasonable Chrisost. super. Ma.
speech: so no man swears often, but he also too many times for swears him
self. Therefore says Augustine, because he is farther of from perjury that
uses not at all to swear, then he that swears redily in matters of truth,
the commandment of our Savior is, that by abstayning from swearing, we might
be sure not to forswear, rather then by swearing in matters which we suppose
to be true, to draw or drive our selves into the acquaintance or
familiarity, nay rather into the danger, damage, and destruction of perfurie.
To swear that which a man deemeth to be true, is not expedient, nay it is
intolerable, and may not be admitted, and thereof Michael de Hungaria, setting
down particular kinds of swearing, by the first and last letters of this
word Fato, and by Idonea, forbyddeth first to swear falsely, and then also
to swear that which we deem to be true. For though a man see his freende on
Horseback at Byshoppesgate in London, entendyng to ride to Cambridge the next
day, he may not therefore swear that he is at Cambridge, though he think
verily that he is there: for though he judge so, yet it may be otherwise. And,
but in truth a man may not swear. Swear not then says he per primas (...)
fato, per idonea notificato.

Swear not
Falsely: for God is truth. As you think: for you may be deceived, be sure
first that it be undoubtedly true, before ye swear. I Irreuerently: for it is
against Gods honor. D Deceitfully: for your faith is given as it is received,
and as he unto whom you made or gave your faith understand it, so it is to be
interpreted and performed. O Ociously or idelly. Swear never, but to good
purpose, and then not but in truth, in equity, and judgment. N Negligently:
not regarding what you swear, for God is the revenger. E Erroniously: for it
diminishes the reverence due unto Gods name. A Accustomably: for who so does,
the plague of God shall not depart from his house.

AS our proverb is of swearing, Set your mind on it, and it will come alone:
So in deed, use breeds facility, facility engenders familiarity,
familiarity makes readiness, readiness frames perfectness, perfectness
breeds custom, custom forces continuance, continuance conueyeth us to
senselessness, senselessness lulleth us a sleep in the cradle of Security, so
that we fear not, nor feel not our desperate fall into the payneful pyt of
Perjury, the unhappy reward where of, is perpetual infelicitie. Let us take
heed then of swearing, or of the rash or hasty naming of GOD, without the
reverence due unto his most glorious name. For, as with much water passes
either Gravel or Mudde, and, as the servant that is often times beaten, is
seldom without some blewe spotte: so, he that often times names God, names
him vaynely, and irreverently, and he that swears often, dishonoreth his
majesty, and oftentimes falls into perjury. What mockery and derision is
this against Christ, in the Church, when the name of Christ Jesus is
sounded, to bend or bow in token of reverence, and all the week after to
swear by him, as though he were worthy none honor at all: The Jews, as we
understand by the gesture of the high Priests, used to tear their garments
when they supposed Mar. 14.
that they heard any blasphemy. The Turks reckon and esteem so reverently of
their Mahomet, that they never lightly or vaynely swear by his name, neither
do they Tripolitanus.
admit unto any office of government any swearer, what birth soever he be of,
or though he be for any other quality never so notable. Amongst the Heathen
people, it is wonderful, a terrible shame to Christians, that Regulus, a
worthy Roman, being taken prisoner August, de ciuitate dei. 1. Li. 15. c.
of the Carthaginians, when they of Carthage desired rather to have had their
own prisoners from the Romans, they sent this Regulus to Rome, without any
gage or pledge, save his faith only. When he was at home at Rome, he persuaded
his countrymen, that his message was not profitable for his Country: and for
his oaths sake yet, not otherwise compelled, but only to keep his oath, he
returned as a prisoner to Carthage: where, after the most cruellest manner that
the mischief of their most blooddie minds could invent, after such a sort as
I never read the like, they put him to death most terribly. This was their
guyse. They compassed him close round about with plankes, the plankes were
driven thycke with Iron pricks, the points whereof were made exceeding sharp,
so that he could not bend him self to lean any way, without grievous
wounds, whereof his flesh rancklyng, the longer he lived, the more grecuous
would be his pain, wakyng or sleepyng his feet must bear the burden of his
whole body: he might truly say, Viuus, vidensque perio, I live, and see full
well I dye. So the Saguntinians, rather then they would break their faith made
unto the Romans, they endured willingly all the punishments that hunger,
sword, or fire could do unto them. Liuius remembers two Roman Li. 3. cap. 20
Soldiers taken prisoners, dismissed by Hanibal upon their oaths, to return
again to his Camp. The first, subtly left his sword behind him, and when
he was gone a good way of from the Camp, he returned again to fetch his
swoorde: meaning by his subtyl recurnyng, to save his oath, and never more to
return. But when this case came to be disputed at Rome, the Heathen Romans
sent him back again as a perjured person, affirming that an oath ought so to
be performed, as he unto whom the oath was made did understand the promise.
What shame is this to Christians, that the Heathen people which know not GOD,
would not swear rashly, but reverently? and duly did keep their faith
promised. And we, that profess Christ, swear rashly, and irreverently: and,
so we be trusted when we swear, we care not afterward for keepyng our faith.
Believe not a common or customable swearer: how Counsel.
can he keep any faith or credit in him, that powers it out continually? He
that swears always by his faith, swears all away. So a swearer may be
believed, his care is never after to perform his faith. If a common swearer
did believe in God, if he did hope to he comforted by him, if he did think
that God would punish his perturie, surely he would not, without reverence
and fear, he would not without urgent cause in cases required, take once the
most blessed name of Gods majesty in his mouth. Now when he believes not him
self that which he affirms unto another, who shall believe him? Why do we
not say unto common swearers, why do you lie? Or if you speak truth, why do
you swear? If you do believe in God, why do you so dishonor the glory of his
name? If you do not believe in God, why would you have me to believe you, when
you swear by that God, in whom you your self do not believe? Solomon in the
case of two women contendyng for one child, to cry where true natural love
rested, made a countenance as though he would have cut the child in pieces. The
wicked blood thirsty woman, of whom the child had no nature or substance, cried
with aloude voice, divide it, divide it. The true mother, in whom nature
rested, made her humble request: Not so my Lord, let the child live and
prosper, let no violence be done unto it. In the ancient records of the
Romans it is remembered, of an adultres having three sons, that upon her
death bed she told her husband, that of three boys, one only was his. This
father, when he should dye, entreated earnestly his executours that they would
do their diligence, by all wisdom, to try which of the three was his
natural son, and unto him by Will he bequeathed his whole land. The faithful
and trusty Executours thus made experience where nature rested: They took the
dead corpse of the father, and set it against a tree: unto every of the three
children they delivered a bow and an arrow, they told them that their fathers
will was doubtful, and the division of the land was hard: the best way was to
try by happy hazard, he that could shoot nearest the fathers heart, should
have al. The two bastardes, in whom rested no spark of natural love. shot with
good will: the third with reverence refused so fylthy a fact: Whereby, if he
were perceived to be the truesonne. What bastardes shall we know them to be that
shoot at every part of Christ's most blessed person? Common swearers truly
bear no natural love to GOD, but tear him in pieces, shoot at his heart like
bastardes, and cry with that Strumpet, Divide him, divide him, cut him in
pieces. Whereof says Agustine, They Augustine in Mat.
sin no less that blaspheme Christ now raygnyng in heaven, then they which
crucified him here upon the earth. Thine enemies O Lord, take thy name in
vain. Remember this Psalm. 135
O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked: Psalm. 74
And how the foolish people has blasphemed thy name. God shall wound the
Psalm. 6^
head of his enemies, and the heary scalpe of such a one as goes on still in
his wickedness. Power out thine indignation, O lord, upon the Heathen that have
not known Psalm. 75
thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. As for the
blasphemy wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed thee, reward thou them, O
Lord, seven fold into their boosomes. Make their faces ashamed, O Lord, that
they may seek thy name. Let al good Christians say with heart and voice, in
word and life, Blessed be the Lord our GOD, even the Psalm. 75
Lord GOD of Israel, yea blessed be the name of his Majesty for evermore.
They that in profession sometimes grant this reverence and honor unto the
Majesty of Gods name, and yet, by the vnreuerent abuse of his name, practyse
the contrary, are very welresembled unto those Jews, that put upon Christ a
purple Robe, and platted a crown of thorns upon his head, and put a Reed in
his hand like a Septer, mocking him in deed after the most despytefull manner
that they could deuyse, but yet in words they saluted him courteously, and
said, Hayle king of the Jews. They are a like unto those people, whom the
Lord by his prophet Ieremi reprehended, They say the Lord lives, this is
Ieremi. 5.
their spech, in words they say so, but examine their religion in deed, they
swear falsely. Gods name is not honored, but dishalowed as much as in them
lies. They take the Lords name in testimony that it is full true, when yet
notwithstanding it is full false: what greater dishonor can they do unto the
Lord? Do they believe that God knows it not? which were against his
omnipotency: or do they think that God will leave so great a sin unpunished?
which were against his promise. The greatness of this sin, the Prophet thus
describes, They have made their faces harder then a stone. Right terrible is
that which GOD threatens by Zachary, Behold a flying Zacha. 5.
book of xx. cubits long. and.x. cubits broad, containing a curse of GOD
against thieves and swearers, I will bring this curse forth says the Lord of
Hosts: it shall come forth upon the house of the thief, and upon the house
of the swearer, that swears falsely by my name. This curse shall remain in the
midst of their howses, and shall consume them, timber, stones, and al. And
this good counsel from the Lord, we have by the wise King Solomon, Eccle. 23.
Let not thy mouth be accustomed with swearing, for in it there are many
falls. Let not the namyng of GOD be continually in thy mouth. For like as a
servant that is much beaten cannot be without some spots: So he that swears,
and has the name of GOD continually in his mouth, cannot be free from sin. A
man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall
never go from his house. He that swears in vain, shall not be found
righteous. Much swearing brings such horror, that it makes a man's hear to
stand vpryght, and the irreuerence thereof, would make a man stop his ears.
Though the proud blaspheme and are scorneful, yet vengance lurketh for them as
a Lion. The words of the swearer bring death, God grant it be not found in
the house of Israel.

If there were in all the world no more faults but this alone, it were enough
to provoke more vengeance then the whole mass of mankind were able to bear.
God grant that England may once thoroughly be purged from this execrable crime.
The Lord has promised that he shall be pronounced gyltie that takes his name
in vain. A greater threatnyng is not added unto any of the commandments
among them al: but vaynely, in vain for every vain trifling matter, as though
GOD were of no power to revenge, as though he were worthy of no woorshyp. Fie,
fie, it is to fylthy, to to abominable. Would to GOD al kings, Queens, and
Princes, would with more earnestness tender chiefly Gods honor, and deeply
consider that they live and enjoy their states and kingdoms by Gods merciful
ordinance and sufferaunce: to this end, that above all things they should
promote the glory of his name. How are they lulled a sleep in the cradle of
security, in the drowstnesse of their own transitory glory, if they forget
that which most specially concerns Gods glory? Me thinks al Princes should
reckon all them that irreverently use Gods name, never like to afforde their
persons any reverence or true obedience. They that fear not God, will they care
for man? No truly, who so keeps of God neither fear nor love, will easily
break his faith to any Prince. A worthy obseruaunce it is, that good Kings
here in England, have made right good and wholesome laws to Gods glory against
common swearing. We have good cause to hope, that as GOD has given us a most
gracious Queen, aunsweryng in any good Title to any other king that has been
in this Realm: So in this case also, it will please him to work by her
Grace, and her Graces most honorable Counsel, that they shall most specially
excel, exceed, and go beyond al others, in studious care and provision for
the reverence and honor due unto Gods most glorious name. In this number of
good kings, in this respect, are to be remembered.

1 King Iue. De quibus consule. Job. Fox.


2 King Alfride.

3 King Edward.

4 King Edmonde, whose law was, that whosoever was once proved perjured,
should for ever be separated from Gods congregation. And of ^awes made in his
time for this, and other matters, look the collections of M. William Lambert,
which were imprinted by John Day. Anno. 1568. Lambert.


5 King Henry the first, for example to the whole Realm, beginning at his own
house, first ordained that within his own Palace, if any did swear, he
should forfayte to the ^aldenus.
use of the poor for every oath.

If he were A Duke, xl. s. A Lord. xx s. A Knight, Squire, or Gentleman.x. s.
A Yoman.iii. s.iiii. d. A Page o Lackie, to be scourged.

There be laws for meaner matters more duly observed. GOD grant that his
honor may be most specially regarded. Amen.

In France. Kings that hold their Crown in Homage to the kings of England,
have made these laws, to this purpose: First Ludouic King of France ordained,
that al periurers and common swearers, should have their lyppes seared with an
hot burning iron: and this punishment he caused to be put in execution, openly
at Paris, upon a Citizen there.

Philip, an other of the kings of France, Vincenti^ in speculo.
constituted this general law: that who so ever, were he Gentle or simple, yea
though he were for birth right noble, in what place so ever it were, though it
were in a common Tavern (where many wise men forget themselves) if he
blasphemed Gods name, he should straight way be drowned.

Maximilian, the Emperor, made this Law, that whosoever was justly reprehended
as a vain swearer, should leese and pay xiii. s. iiii. d. but if after his
reprehension, he would not both be sorrowful for his sin, and willingly pay
the said money, he should lose his head.

Philip, an Earl of Flaunders, for the precinct of his dominion decreed, that
who so ever forsware him self, should loose both his goods and his life.

Josephus counsayleth, that the blasphemer Libr 4. Antiq. C. 6.
should be stoned, and then hanged up one whole day: afterward, being taken
down, that he should be thrown into a holl or pyt, without any solemnity of
buryal.

Justinian, the good Emperor, unto his Citizens of Constantinople, counsayleth
and commands thus. Whereas many in words and oaths execrably abuse the
most reverend name of God, whereby Gods heavy wrath is procured: we exhort
you, that you abstain from cursing and bannyng, and Iusti. 77. Nouel con.
from swearyng, either by your head, or by your hear, or by any other oaths.
For if injuries done unto man, be not unrevenged, much more, he that
dishalloweth Gods name, is worthy of great punishment, for such faults truly
both hunger and earthquakes, and the plague of Pestilence, falls upon us. We
therefore gently exhort you, that you abstain from such grievous crimes. If
any will not be warned by this our Counsel, first as he shall procure Gods
displeasure, so shall he be sure not to escape unpunished: for we have given
unto our most worthy governor of this our royal City, this earnest
commandment, that he shall apprehend the offenders herein, and cause them to
die the death, least God him self should punish both this City and the whole
Realm, for leauyng so great faults unpunished.

The law of the Egiptians was, that no Egypt.
swearyng should be used, but in lawful causes. If any were proved perjured,
he lost his head.

The Sithians had a Law likewise, that Sithia.
whosoever was proved perjured, should lose his head: and he that made proof
thereof, should have his goods.

The Romans had a Law, that who so Romane^
ever was proved perjured, he should be thrown down from the high Rock
Tarpeius: and therefore when they did swear, they held a Stone in their hand,
and protested: If I lie, or swear ought but truth, cast me down the Hill
violently, as I flyng this stone from me.

But to go beyond men. The Lord himself has made a Law: He that
blasphemeth Le. 24.
the name of the Lord, shall dye for it, all the multitude shall stone him to
death: whether he be Citizen or Stranger, if he blaspheme the name of the Lord,
let him dye the death. And this law God commanded to be put in execution upon
ye son A remembrance for Fathers and Mothers.
of Salomith, which was the daughter of Dibri, where no doubt the Mothers name
is remembered and the Grandmothers, for their offense of ill education.

Likewise Iosue, and the Israelites, made a Iosuah. 9.
faithful oath with the Gibeonites. In ye days of Saul that oath was broken:
which breach of faith, the Lord punished with three years continual famine:
which famine was not taken away, until seven of the sons, or next 2. Reg.
21. c
of the kindred of Saul, were hanged up unto the Lord. Likewise Mathathias,
whom the king of Babylon named Sedechias, he contrary to his oath rebelled
against the king of Babylon: which perjury, the Lord thus punished,
Nabuchodonosor took Sedechias prisoner, first he flue his son in his own 4.
Reg. 24. 25.
sight, after that, he plucked out both his eyes, he bound him with Chains of
Iron, and carried him prisoner to Babylon, where he kept him in perpetual
misery. What need I remember that Troy, and diverse other Cities, were
destroyed for perjury. Eusebius tells of three wicked disposed persons, that
of mischief pretended against Narcissus, the good Bishop of Jerusalem, laid
unto his charge an heavy and heinous crime, and to make their false accusation
the more probable, they swear grievously, and desired GOD to show vengaunce
upon them, on this wise: The first wyshed, to be destroyed with fire, if it
were not true: The second wyshed, to be consumed with a most grievous
sickness: The third, to loose both his eyes. Narcissus perceiving their
desperate intence unto mischief, and his weakness not able to resist three
such adversaries, removed him self unto the solitary Wilderness, there to
lead a private solitary life: In the mean time, unto them which so
willingly, and wyckedly forsware them selves, this happened. The first, as he
wyshed, by casualtie of fire, was burnt to death, and al his family: which
fire rose but of one little spark. The second was taken with a grievous
strange sickness, from top to toe, and devoured of the same. The third,
hearing and seeing Gods just judgment to fall upon the other twain, confessed
the fault, and through great repentance, powered out such abundaunce of tears,
that he lost both his eyes. Thus was their false perturie punished by God, and
the good Bishop received home again with joy.

Saint Gregory tells us a wonderful story of a young Child, under the age
of seven S. Gregory.
years (at which age we say children have no discretion) yet for swearyng,
and blasphemyng the name of the Lord, his Father holdyng him in his arms, the
Dyuel entered possession of the said Child, as it visibly appeared.

But to come to mere Englysh Stories.

Though not first in order, yet for dignity, I will place King Stephan, and
that company, King Stephan.
which contrary to their oath made in the days of King Henry the first, unto
Mahld or Mold, yet they crowned Stephan Earl of Bolloigne King of England: in
which number, were William, Archbishop of Caunterburie, Roger, Bishop of
Salisbury, Hugh Bigot, Steward sometimes to king Henry the first, and diverse
Lords more. The Archbishop, God punished shortly after with death: the Bishop
of Salisbury, the king vanished him the land: Hugh Bigot died miserably:
Diverse other Lords, were diuersely punished. Eustace, the kings son, taking
up his horse before his father, had a fall, and brake his leg. The king, in
remembrance of his perjury, with sorrow ended his miserable life, even when
he had now made a composition to live in peace, and to hold his Crown quietly
during his life time, proclayming Henry Duke of Normandy heir apparaunt to
the Crown, even then, when he most desired to live, most likely to live in
most quietness, with sorrow he paid the price of his perjury with the loss
of his life.

Edward the fourth, at York took a solemn oath, to hold him contented with
his Edward. 4.
own Dukedom, and to yield due obedience unto King Henry: but his oath rashly
taken, was as soon broken, and his perjury God punished in his posterity:
none of his children came to the possession of the Crown.

Elfred, because he was a Duke, shall have the next place: This Elfred conspired
against Elfred.
King Adelstane at Winchester. (...) put out his eyes: his conspiracy
suspected and detected, the king secretly fled. The wicked Duke was driven to
purge him self by his oath, of the suspicion. In the Church dedicated to. S.
Peter at Rome, periuriously he forsware him self: but even so soon as he had
forsworn him self, he fell down dead in the Church, and so was taken up, and
carried to the English house at Rome, and from thence, after three days, to
his Grave.

Earl Godwin, traitorously slew Alphred, brother to King Edward the third:
afterward, Godwin.
as Godwin sat at the Table with the king at Windsor, it happened that one of
the cup bearers (one of this Earl Godwins own sons) brynging a Cup of
Wine toward the king, tripped on the one foot, and yet recovered by the stay
of the other foot, so that he shed none of the Wine; whereat the Earl Godwin
laughed, saying, How the one brother gently had helped the other: Right so,
said the King, should my brother Alphred have helped me, had not the Earl
Godwin been: At which words Godwin, to excuse him self, falsely forsware
the fact, and taking a morsel of bread in his hand, wyshed that that piece of
bread might choke him, if he were gyltie of that deed: but so soon as he had
received the bread, forthwith he was choked, and fell down dead: whereat,
quoth the king, have away this perjured Traitor, and by Harold his son, he
was conveyed to Winchester to be buried: Upon whose Land also, GOD sent such a
Plague, that until this day, all England hears of the unfortunate place,
called Godwins Sands.

Sir Roger Mortimer brake his solemn Sir Roger Mortimer
faith and allegiaunce unto his sovereign Lord, King Edward the second, and
for the same his perjury, is thus punished: In the days of Edward the
third, he was first set openly upon a Ladder, his privy members cut from him,
and cast into the fire before his face, his heart plucked out of his belley, his
body divided into four quarters, and sent to the four principal Cities of
the Realm.

How many corrected in Gods merciful judgment for our example have we
known, some punished by loss of their goods, some by fire, some by strange
sicknesses, some with tongues so black as a coal, some with such Diverse
punishments
hot tongues, that they could not in any case cloase their mouths again,
which before they had opened to the dishalowyng of Gods most blessed name: as
notable of late days above the rest let us remember Richard Richard Long.
Fox Mar. ^^97.
Long in Caleis, that wyllyngly to trouble Smyth and Brook, took his oath upon
a Book, that they twain ate flesh together in Lent, in the said Brooks
house, yet in truth, the said Smyth came not into Brooks house all that Lent:
he long after this perjury committed, drowned him self at the iuttie end of
the haven in Caleis.

Grimwood of Hitcham in the County of Grimwood. ^bidem.
Suffolk, against John Cooper of Watsam, in the said County, at an assise
holden at Berry, wylfully forsware him self: at Harvest after, feelyng no
pain, complaynyng of no disease, iudgyng him self strong and able to labor,
as he was stacking up a Goffe of Corn, suddenly his bowels fell out of his
body, and immediately he dyed most miserably. That worthy instrument in Gods
Church, Master John Fox, from whom I collected these two last stories, gives
a gentle and fatherlyke warnyng to all young Gentlemen, to leave their
outrageous swearyng, by the fearful example of this Gentleman followyng.

In the time and reign of King Edward the syxt, there was in Cornwall, a
lusty young Gentleman, who did ride together with other more Gentlemen and
their servants, in number about twenty Horsemen, amongst whom this lusty
yonker entryng into talk, began to swear most horribly: unto whom one of the
company, not able to abide such blasphemous abomination, in gentle words
said to him, that he should give account for every idle word. The Gentleman
taking snuff thereat, Why, quoth he, take thou thought for me? Take thought
for thy wyndyng sheet. Well quoth the other, amend, for death gives no
warnyng, as soon comes a Lambs skin to the market, as an old Sheep:
(Gods wounds) said he, Care not thou for me: ragyng still after his swearing
manner worse and worse in words, till at length, passing on their journey,
they came rydyng over a great Bridge, which stands over a piece of an arm of
the Sea, upon which Bridge, this gentleman swearer spurced his Horse, in such
sort, as he sprang clean over the Bridge with the man on his back? Who, as he
was going, cried aloude, Horse and man, and all to the Devil.

WYddowe Barnes being rebuked for ^iddowe (...). Corne^^^^ in Lon^^^ 74.
swearing, to the intent she might defeat an Orphant of her right, not
regardyng good admonishmentes, within four days after cast her self out at a
window in Cornehil, and brake her neck.

Arthure Myller, a fylthy talker of rybaldrie, Arthure Miller, at Hackney. 1573.
a common swearer and blasphemer of Gods name, in his sickness the year of
our Lord. 1573. refused all comfortable doctrine of faith in Christ, and
cried out, The Devil, the Devil: Confessing in deed gods omnipotent power, for
he said, he felt it, but he could not pray for grace, the cause he him self
knew, but he would not utter it. So that kyssyng his hand often, in which he
said he held the Devil, crying for help only upon the Devil, he most
miserably ended his most wretched life.

An Aueris. 1575. II. February.
AN Aueris wyddowe, which at that time dwelt in Ducke Lane, without Aldersgate
in London, in the Parish of S. Bartholome we the little, by Smythfielde (judged
to be.lxx. years of age, or thereabout) came the day and year above dated, to
the house or shop of Richard Wylliamson in Woodstreete (whose wife exercises
the sorting and dressing of Flax and Towe) to buy there (as heretofore she
had been accustomed) some course Towe: and having cheapened and agreed for vi.
pound of course Towe (a very small value) but mark whyther customable use
does bring one, She perceiving the servants in the shop busy about other
Customers, secretly slypt away, imagining by lykelyhood, that because of their
great business they nothing regarded her: Howbeit (as GOD would) the Maiden
that in her Mistres absence used to deliver Ware, and receive money, remembryng
redyly that no money was received for the said. vt. pound of Towe, sent one of
them that best might be spared from the shop, home to the house of this An
Aueris in Ducke Lane, to require either the Towe again or else money for it.
This ungodly woman (in whose mouth a wicked oath was the rediest thing) Swear by
and by, that she paid the money while she was yet in the shop: But being
earnestly desired that she would again return to the said shop, there to
affirm the same: As one that would put on a countenance of honesty, she
refused not so to do, lashyng out by the way bitter curses and terrible oaths,
that she had already paid the money, neither ceased she when she came back
again to the shop: But being gently reprehended for her ungentle and ungodly
deed, with terrible oaths, periuriously she forsware the fact (Vidz. that she
departed without payment) And, if she paid not the money before her departure
out of the shop, she desired vengeance at the Lords hands, and that he would
openly show upon her in his just judgment (that if she departed out of the
shop without payment of the money for the said.vi. pound of Towe) that she
might presently sincke or fall suddenly down, and never have power after to
stir or go out of that place: thynkyng perchance, as Atheistes do, that
there is no GOD, or else that GOD hears not the prayers of the people, either
to reward the godly, or to punyshe the wicked. Howbeit as GOD is a swyft GOD
to revenge when his mercy is refused: so in the deapth of his judgment, he
heard her prayer, and stroke her so immediately unto the ground, that
staggeryng to and fro, the strength of her legs faylyng her, and ceassing to
do their duty in vpholdyng the body, down she fell in the shop, and became
speachlesse, never able to rise without help, never able to utter any more
blasphemous oaths against the Lord: Only, a wonderful thing to tell, as if
GOD would playuely show the cause of his procured wrath, she held out in her
left hand.xiii. d. with which she should have paid for the Towe, and that said
money she tossed and tumbled up and down upon her Apron, so as all the standers
by might behold the same. As she fell down in the deuylles name, so to stand
up again no help could support her that she might be able again to go: Her
mouth also was put to a most vile office, as if GOD would show that in his
justice he would punish the place from whence, and the instrument wherewith,
his most holy name was so irreverently blasphemed: So as that which nature
would have cast downewarde at the bostome of the belly in some secret place,
when she had withdrawn her self from all company, that self same
fylthynesse she was forced to void at her mouth in the open street in open
day iyght, as many men, women, and children, as came by gazyng, woonderyng
thereat: from thence being carried home, her dwelling house denied to receive
so vile a person, so as of force she was feign to be lodged in a stinkyng
Stable (a Parlour sweet yenough for so unsavory a wretch) from whence she was
afterward carried to her lodging, and from thence a few days after to her
grave. The examination of this fact was taken before Sir Lyonel Ducket, Knight,
Alderman, and Justice of Peace within the City of London: and as witnesses are
set down.

M. Doctor Fulke. M. Newstubbes. M. Crake. M. Edmundes. M. Robert Pistor. M.
Robert Ask.
Who so lists, may see this story at large, imprinted by John Alde. 1576.

Of whose printyng, you may also see another strange story of Father Lea. dated
the. 28 of January. 1577.

Father Lea, a man almost of.lxxx. years, Father Le^ 1577.
whose white hoary hears wan credit to his tale, was hired for a small sum
of money to forswear himself: God in his mercy deferryng his judgment, full
two years and more, he bare about him the heavy burden of a wounded
conscience, a privy pain, yet in deed a more irksome grief, then it would
have been to have endured public punishment for the same. He needed none
other, either Iayler, or Hangman to torment him, that fyndeth that inward woo.
But even like as an Arrow set in a Bow ready to be shot, does fray a man more
then an Arrow that already has hit his leg or his arm: Or like as the fear of
death, or punishment, where grace has been wanting, has made many to murder
them selves wilfully: Even so, the inward festeryng wound of a gylty
conscience, void of hope, full of despair, is more grievous and more
intolierable, then any outward correction. Two long fasting years, Father Lea
hearing this importable burden, at the last the force of the fire brake through
the ashes that so long had covered it. In foster lane in London, this Lea met
that party, against whom, or to whose hynderaunce he had forsworn him self,
and holdyng up his hands (after the manner of our askyng of forgiveness) he
desired him to forgive him his former offense against him committed, confessyng
that against him he had falsely forsworn himself. The party offended,
charitably answered, that the offense against him might easily be forgeuen,
but the offense against God, in abusing his most holy name, was most heinous
and wicked: But more, to witness his repentance, he desired him to come home
to his house, and so Lea did, and there confessed his fault to him, and diverse
other credible persons. And on Monday the xxviii. of January (ten weeks after
this confession) being alone in his house, (as the devil is cunnyng in
choosyng his time) he then assaulted him, when he had no help or comfort, by
the presence of his wife, or any other, and so mightyly overcame him, that as
it seemed, the said Lea intended to have murdered himself, with an old rustie
knyfe he ripped his own belly, and so hard was his heart, (his mind being
vanquished with the horrible remembrance of his detestable perjury) that he
gryped his own guts with his own hands, and so let them fall from him into
an earthen vessel. But as Gods mercy is unspeakable, so (blessed be God
therefore) the devil having showed his tyranny, his wife came suddenly, and
at this strange sight scrikyng very loud, some of the neighbors came runnyng
in, and sent for a Surgeon, who presently stytched up his wounds, and dressed
him so cunnyngly as he could. After him came also a spiritual Surgeon, the
pastor of that Parry she where he dwelt, named M. Simpson (Father Lea dwelled
in Sone Alley in Norton folly, in the parrysh of S. Botulphes without
Byshopsgate of London) and he with the Spiritual comfort of Gods sweet
promises of remission of sins to all penitent sinners, that in Christ's name
ask and entreat for forgiveness, so salued his afflicted conscience, that
this distressed creature was recomforted therewith, and earnestly called upon
God for mercy and forgeuenes, professyng that he steadfastly hoped to be saved
by the blood of Jesus Christ, who of his rich mercy had given him a time of
repentance after his desperate fact: And so ended his life, the.xxix. of
January.

These examples being mere English, let us borowe some out of the Germane
Histories, the profitablest members for us to take example by, for that they
had the Gospel before us, and for their unthankfulness, and looseness of
life, these ensamples ensuyng were showed upon them. Let us be warned by their
woo, least after warnyng refused, by counsel and example, we feel also with
them the punishment of war.

Melancthon remembers, of two wanton young men, making but a jest of Gods most
glorious name, stryued whether of them could swear most terriblest, or curse
most horriblest: but their iestyng was so odious in Gods sight, that the one of
them was presently stryken with madness.

In the City Eslingen, where upon Saint Katherins day there is a great Fair
kept, Eslingen.
a Gentleman of a noble house by birth, fell amongst other ill company to Dyce,
and lost a great deal of money, whereat being moved earnestly, the Gentleman
swearyng and cursyng outragiously, in a furious heat called to one of his men
for his Horse, even when it was now in the edge of the euenyng: his man
dissuaded him from riding, alleging that the ways were foul, and hard to
find, dangerous through many waters, and it now began to be dark already,
earnestly entreated he his Master, to tarry until the next morning: But as
he must needs go, whom the Devil dryueth: so, full of rage and fury forth
they went, in number but three, the Gentleman, and two men: They had not rydden
far, but they met with more company, as ill or worse then them selves, Deuyls
no doubt, who bent their force directly against this swearyng Gentleman: these
feendes pluck him of from his Horse, and would no doubt have carried him away
body and soul, if they had could: his men (through Gods mercy) especially the
one of them, having a good measure of faith, and a good conscience, were unto
their Master good Angels at that time, defendyng him from the force of the
enemy: Howbeit, all the night long they wandered out of the way, those evil
spirits still troubling them, seeking the destruction of the swearyng
Gentleman, until the day was light: then when they saw the coast of the
Country, and knew where about they were, they brought their blaspheming
Master unto Bethen Hawsen, where, after he had lain three days sick, he
departed this life.

At Tubinga, a desperate Boy devised new oaths, such as were not in common use:
but the Tubinga.
Lord sent a canker, or some worse disease, that ate out his tongue, even the
very instrument where with he blasphemed God.

At Ciguea in Schueberg, for greediness of the gaynes of certain Moynes, a
wretched Ciguea in Schueberg.
creature forsware him self: but God removed his blessing from the place, a
Snayle, as an instrument of Gods wrath (for the Lord can work by any weak
creature, through his own power and might) a Snayle made little holes, which at
this day remain to be seen, and so devoured the metal in the Moynes, that
from thencefoorth no metal remained in the Moynes to be found, as before
they were, though with much wastful cost and expenses, they have been sought
for, since that committed perjury. In Thuringia the Devil, as he thought his
commission would have served him, seized upon a young man, for dishalowyng the
name of God, whom yet in mercy upon repentance GOD delivered from his tyranny:
So as the young man remained an open and visible witness, both of the Deuyls
unmerciful tyranny, and of Gods unspeakable mercy.

Rodolphus, Duke of Sweathen, had Duke of Swethen,
made a faithful oath unto the Emperor Henry the fourth: but Gregoric the
seventh Pope of Rome, absolved him from that oath, as well as he could. It came
to pass, that this Duke now, being (contrary to his oath) on the contrary part
against his liege Lord the Emperor, in a battle fought hard by Merspurge,
he lost both the feelde, and his The Pope could not set on his hand again.
ryghthand, and fled into the City for refuge, where lying sick, his right
hand being brought unto him, diverse of the Popes Ciergie standing about him,
with deep sighs and grouynges, he said unto them, Lo, this is that same hand
with the which I gave my faith unto my Lord the Emperor: You gave me counsel
to rebel against him, you procured mine absolution from the Pope, you see Gods
judgment upon me: consider now in your consciences, whether you have well
done or no: And shortly after, he yielded up the ghost. Manlius remembers one
of Swether, a man of noble birth, whom the Palatine took prisoner: but of
mercy the Palatine gave him license to depart into his own Country, upon his
promise made by an oath, that he should by a time limited return as a prisoner
priuileged, by promise of his faith, unto Heydelbergum: but the prisoner
esteemyng more of his liberty, then of his faith, played the Truant, and
returned not: afterward hoasting with a Jew, having now broken his Christian
faith, not far from the valley of Ioachim, his life that he loved beyond
honest measure, was dispatched by a Gunne.

Ladislaus king of Polonia, though it Ladislaus king of Polonia.
were unto a Turk, namely unto Amurathes, yet he swear by GOD to keep his
faith, which oath when he had broke, by the Soldiers of the Turk he was
shortly after slain.

A most notable example done in Marchia. 1528, by Johannes Manlius remembered
also.
A Common Soldier, having gotten in some skirmish, or other ways, as a
^o^ty, a good, or rather a great bag of money, suddenly he was visited with
sickness, so as of necessity he betook him self to rest in an Inn, until
by ordinary means he might recover his strength. Upon the first condition, or
entrance of his soiournyng there, supposing no body lykelyer to be of good and
sufficient credit then his Hosts, he delivered unto her custody his whole
bag of money: Afterward recoueryng, as God would, his health, he required
to receive his bag again. It grieved his dishonest Hosts to depart from so
great a pray, therefore she enters an earnest consultation with her husband,
what shyft they might find to deteyne the said spoil. Her unhappy husband,
being beyond al conscience of that judgment (that too too many men be of now
a days) that what so ever by open proof of law, can not be won from them
perforce, is therefore their own gotten good, he gives his wife counsel to
deny the receipt of the said bag, or money: his Hoastes denied it. How
could the Souldour Old wiced woman.
prove it? Mark the boldness of a wicked woman, she seems to wonder at
the Soldier, that he would be so impudent, as to ask at her hands, that
which she auowched she never received: in this case she rayleth at him, and
reuileth him, so far as the uttermost of her vain Rethorique would stretch.
The Soldier (as they are commonly allowed to be somewhat more bold then
other men) obiecteth against her, her open falsehood, for that contrary to her
faith, she forsweareth the truth against her conscience. Her husband, a
principal party in this perjury, as if it were to defend his wives honesty,
with violence thrusts the Soldier out at his doors. The Soldier bold in
war, abroad, at home, thought, that in a good quarrel he might well be more
bold, and having almost in choice as liefe to leese his life, as his money
(the whole recompense of his lives adventure) sloutly he draws his swoorde,
professyng, that either he will leese his life, or save his money, and breaks
with too much haste his Hoastes house to reenter, alleagyng, that where his
goods are, there he may safely be. The host pleads an action of burglarie,
and makes open cry for help unto his neighbors. And as in braulles and
broils to many fees belong to Sergiauntes, with violent force a number of
officers carry him, as an open malefactor, unto the Gayle. The common
Counsel, according to the intimation of the fact, are agreed deliberatly what
judgment to give, when public judgment shall be craved: agreed it was, the
Soldier by most voices should have been condemned. The Dyuell, who knows
some things by permission, in some form and fashion comes unto the
prisoner, and to win the more credit, he tells him what judgment the
Senators would pronounce, unless he took good heed, and dealt wisely. The
(...) intent
And as he would feign have some testimony against man, wherein he falls
from God, and cousenteth unto him: so he persuades the Soldier a free
delyueraunce from his whole trouble, if he would give him his soul to hyre.
Nay quoth the Soldier, I had rather yet leese my life, then my soul. Well
quoth the Devil, though I get nothing of thee, as a reward, yet will I deliver
thee, so that thou be ruled by me. Follow therefore (quoth he) these
instructions: when thou shall be brought before the Judges, plead for thy
self ignorance, desire to have an Attorney. Chose me, quoth the Dyuell, to
debate thy cause: by these notes thou shall know me, by a blewe Cappe and a
Feather. The Soldier easily granted to use his counsel. The (...) Dyuell
(...) her.
Session is holden, the Soldier is brought forth as a malefactor, his Host
pleads the death of the Soldier, the Soldier uses the counsel of his
unhappy advocate: License he craves, that the Gentleman with the blewe Cappe
and the Feather might plead for him: Leave is granted, forth comes the
Proctor, and like a skylfull Lawyer, he makes this Caution: The party not
gyltie, is not to be condemned, for from the Soldier grue no cause of strife:
the Inholder by violence, thrust the Soldier out at the doors, an open and a
manifest crime. Search the cause, quoth the Dyuell, and (as one of the private
Counsayll with all unhappiness) give me leave and authority, says he, to
search the house, I dare undertake to find the bag and the money, so shall
the Inholder be gyltie, and the Soldier clear. The Typler standing now upon
his credit, Not (...) thy the ^ame (...)*
or discredit for ever, added, as the Dyuell would have him, many blasphemous
oaths, that he by no means knew of any such money, and for confirmation of
his faith made by oath, he requires, as the custom of swearers is, vengeance
at Gods hands, if he swear falsely: I would (quoth he) the Dyuel might fetch
me away presently body and soul before you al, if I swear unjustly. Which
terrible words, when the Typler had earnestly repeated once or twyce, this
Dyuelyshe Lawyer, or this lawing Dyuell, leaft the cause, and snatched the
Corpse (according to the vengeance desired at Gods hand) of this typlyng
Host, and carried him throw by the wyndowe, and then ^^sibly over the market
place of the Town, so as his body was never seen any more, nothing being left
behind him, but an horrible stincke, as a witness what an unclean spirit
had carried away such an unclean person. Of this notable remembrance, the
time is set down, and the place, and the authors name, that nothing might
want to the certainty of the truth.

I will add hereunto the destruction of that detestable vice, of bannyng and
cursyng, which is the next brother unto this sin of pertury (whether is
worse, God knows) both tend to the dishonoring of Gods name, an example or
two, in hatred of the same.

Not far from Eslengen (whereof before it was remembered) says Melancthon,
^elanc^^^^ (...) with (...)
certain wanton youths, players by lykelyhood of description in Enterludes,
after a solemn Pageant set out to the people, sported them selves with cursyng
and bannyng (thynkyng to make but a Maygame of the Lords reverence) but amiddes
their cursings, God sent his punyshmentes: One of them was stricken stark
dumb, the other fell stark mad.

At the feast of Whitsontyde, a wretched In (...).
woman, by cursyng and bannyng, forsakyng the help of GOD, and procuryng the
vengeance due unto her by the Dyuell, was by the Dyuell sodaynely snatche up
into the air, many people beholding the same: and as he took her up in the
Denylles name, so he flang her down with a very vengeance, a number of people
beholding how she was snatched up, and how she was hurled down, but runnyng
to the place where she fell, they found her stark dead, and her face turned
quite behind her.

Johannes Manlius, a man of great credit, Manlius A remembrance fo mothers.
one of the first visitors of the Church of Germany, records, that the
excellent man of GOD, Doctor Martin Luther, and he at Basile saw a woman
guivyng her daughter up and down the country, the daughter being possessed of
a wicked spirit, which invasion of the spirit, grew by the mothers dyuelysh
curse. The mother confessed (that her daughter disobeyng her commandment) she
cursed her said daughter, with these words, The Dyuel take thee: or, the
Dyuel fly upon thee. And the self same hour her daughter fell mad, and was
possessed of a Dyuel. Doctor Luther seeing the woman, communed with them, and
against ye Devil he used that place of James: GOD rebuke thee thou foul
spirit, unto which words the Devil answered again: so as it was well
manifest what spirit possessed her.

In the Town of Freburg in Misnia, an hasty froward father, ill accustomed
with continual In exam^le for fa^^ers. ^anlius ^^llection. (...) To. et
^^elueche^s. To. 1. ^edagogie. (...).
swearyng, cursyng, and bannyng, commanded his son to do a certain
business with all speed possible. The son not yeeldyng honor enough unto
his father, neglected disobediently his fathers commandment: (a great fault
in deed, and worthy to have been well punished:) but unorderly and wickedly,
the froward ungodly father, when he heard his son yet at home, whom he
thought before that time to have been gone about his business, in the Devils
name falls to cursing his son, and these or such like words he used: Did
I bid thee go in have: and stand thou still there: Now still moughtest thou
stand, I pray GOD, and never may thou stir alive out of that same place.
(Oh dire imprecation) Gods merciful grace absented, and his judgment earnestly
provoked, still stood his son. What gained the ungodly father: unless he
would pluck the son in pieces, the father now could not, would he never so
feign, either by his own strength, or by any others help, way, or means, once
move or stir his distressed child. The child wanted his ease, but the
father bid the woo: stir could not the son, help must the father: and
since that according to the fathers curse the son could not be removed, the
wylful father, according to Gods commandment, must needs of duty succor
his woeful son. Glad and feign was the father to underprop his son with a
Chair and a Cushion, and so to keep him in that place by the space of three
whole years. Many a godly man came to see this sorrowful sight, many a good
prayer, both private and public, was powered out unto the Lord for him, many
a public exhortation was made unto the people to avoid such offenses, and to
pray for grace for him: long it was or ever the Lord would be entreated. But
The fort of contin prayer.
as Gods mercy is above al his works: so the Lord after three years space
was entreated for some mercy, his feet were loosed, whose footesteppes or
print of his feet (a woonderful thing to tell) remain to be seen at this day
in the pauement where he stood. So sat he then yet in misery four more long
years, with a long lean countenance, eating little or nothing, speaking but
now and

3 It obscureth Gods glory, which above al things we must promote.

4 It breaks faith and credit amongst Christians, which we must maintain.

5 It increases infidelity, which we must abhor.

6 It is the work of the Dyuell, and Christ came to destroy it.

7 It never did good unto any, and we must do good unto all. Use breeds
custom, custom breadeth continuance, familiar easy continuance leads us
readyly and perfectly unto the most damnable sin of perjury* Stop therefore
the beginning. Strike not, and you shall not kyl. Swear not, and you shall not
be forsworn. Above al things my brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, for
it is Gods seat, nor by the Earth, nor by any other thing. It was said before
Christ's coming, Thou shall not forswear thy self: But Christ said, Swear
not at all Let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay: yea in word, yea
in deed: dishallowe not Gods most glorious name. As you profess a faith in
Christ, so express the same continually: Let Christ be seen in your life,
as he is heard of in your language: let his holy name never be taken in vain,
but study and endeavor with your whole power and strength, that Gods name may
be sanctified, that is, always esteemed holy and reverent, always honored
and glorified, in you, and by you: Unto whom only, of only right alone, be al
honor, praise, and glory, woorshyp, renown, and dominion, for all, and above
al, world without end. Amen. Amen.

Amen. The Lord reigns. The Lord only is truth, and shall have the victory
and only glory.

Amen.
FINIS.
Reasons that vain swearyng sauoreth of infidelity, and of several oaths
perswadyng the same.
How can we call upon God for help in our adversity, whose honor we so
lightly regard in prosperity? Psalm. 49. Call upon me in ye time of thy
trouble, and I will deliver thee. Our health is only of the Lord. Acts. 4. The
son of God came to this end, to destroy the works of the devil. John. What
hope then have they in ye son of God, yt fulfill desperately this work of ye
devil, in dishonoring Gods name? Peter. Christ has given him self for us an
offering, and a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor, unto God. Ephe. 3. Who
believes this, and will vaynely swear by Christ, or by the blessed body of
Christ? By his own blood, entered he once into the holy place, and obtained
eternal remission for us. Hebrews. 9 Who believes this, and yet will idelly or
vaynely swear by the precious blood of Christ? 1. John. 1. Peter. 1. What
hope have we of that comfortable beholding christ at the last day, face to
face? (...) Whose honor, and reverence we diminish daily, and darken, as much
as in us lies, the glory of his name, by little esteemyng or vaynely v^^ng it
for every trifle. By his wounds we are healed, and by his stripes we are made
whole. Esa. 9. who believes this, and will yet swear by ye precious wounds of
Christ? One of the soldiers pearsed his side with a spear, and forthwith ran
out water and blood. John. 19. who beeleueth this, and will yet swear by Gods
sides? God shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Acts. 7. who believes
this, and will swear, as God shall judge me? Unto the cursed, God shall say, go
you cursed of my father, into everlasting fire. Matthew who believes this, and
will swear, God renounce me?

Of Cursing.
The vengaunce of God shall eat up your gold and your silver. (...) The devil
a penny, that is, the devil have the penny. Vengance lurketh for them, as a
Lion. Solomon. The foul evil have thee, or take thee: how many see we every
year come from the north plagued with this disease, in which country this
curse is most ryfest?

THE END.

