Baculum Familliare, Catholicon sieve Generale.

A BOOK OF THE making and use of a Staff, newly invented by the Author,
called the Familiar Staff.

As well for that it may be made usually and familiarlie to walk with, as for
that it performs the Geometrical mensurations of all Altitudes, Longitudes,
Latitudes, Distances and Profundities: as many miles of, as the eye may well
see and discern: most speedily, exactly and familiarly without any manner of
Arithmeticall calculation, easily to be learned and practiced, even by the
unlettered.

Newly compiled, and at this time published for the special help of shooting
in great Ordinance, and other millitarie services, and may as well be employed
by the ingenious, for measuring of land, and to a number of other good
purposes, both Geometrical and Astronomicall: By JOHN BLAGRAVE of Reading
Gentleman, the same wellwiller to the Mathematickes.

The use of which Familiar staff is also so general that it readily
performs all the several uses of the Cross staff, the Quadrate, the
Circle, the Quadrante, the Gunners Quadrante, the Trigon, every one in his own
kind, and with no less method and facillitie, both for Sea and Land.

depiction of cannons with 'familiar staves'

LONDON Printed by Hugh Iackson dwelling in Fleetestreete a little beneath the
Conduit, at the sign of S. John the Evangelist.

1590.

To the Right Honorable Sir Fraunces Knolles Knight, Treasurer of her
Majesty's Household, and of her Highness most Honorable privy Counsel.
WHen that I had (right Honorable) with an earnest intent to proceed very
far in the Mathematikes published my late book of the Mathematical Jewel,
dedicated even of mere duty, unto the right Honorable Lord Burleigh, Lord
high treasurer of England, whom from the abundance of my heart I can not but
with your Honors good favor, as a Myrror of Justice and piety, a Pattern of
true Honor and Nobility, not only at this time again, but during life, in
all my good actions to remember. Yet not long after espying my years to run
on, the world to slip away by me, whiles I was occupied in these studies that
brought nothing but delight: and withal remembering the example of the silly
Grasshopper, and the saying non semper erit estas. I began in manner to droupe
and languish, as one out of hope, and even upon point either to give them over,
or to attend them at more leisure, which of all things those studies may not
like because they rather more earnestly require a man's whole endeavor, Sticking
fast in this mammering of despair, your Honor beyond all exspectation or
cogitation of mine, draws me forth of the poor country Cabin where obscurely
I lurked, into your more open presence, and there so adorned and beautified me
with your Honorable courtesies and favor, so renoumed my name at the Court
amongst persons of high regard, and (not content therewith) without any least
desert of mine, of purpose, as I take it, to encourage me to proceed: thereby
not a little bewraying your Honors hidden skill and secret good will to the
Mathematicke sciences, most liberally bestowed on me a yearly pension or
stipend: that verifying the old Adage: Honos alit arts, I was enforced again
to my former Byas, and so much the more strongly, to the end that your Honor
conceived opinion of me, and favorable auouchments in my behalf, should not
be utterly made void, earnestly bending upon those points which may most help
or forward Nauigators for their long voyages and new discoueries being now
almost prepared and in point, to furnish them with such familiar instruments
and precepts, carrying no less facility then this treatise does, that them
selves shall be able to strengthen their own nauigations, in whatsoever art
may assist them: But lest in the mean time whiles I am thus busied; even to
the uttermost of that leisure which this diverse world allows me, I should be
thought to sleep of your Honor, of whom I have been so many ways favorably
incyted, I could not but exact so much intermission from those weighty
actions, as to seek about in my Mathematicke storehouse, for some ready
present wherewith I might the whiles show my self broad waking unto your H.
And all sodeinly as I was tossing and seeking, me thought I hard the fresh
sound in mine ears of the piece of Ordinance I saw your H. shoot off at
Greyes this last summer. Thereupon I sought no further, but seeing your H. both
by your honorable office and course of years to carry a staff, with that
conceit bent my head wholly to metamorphose that instrument which by chance I
then showed unto your H. and others there: unto a Mathematical staff, fit for
so noble a mind as your H. has, even from your first knighthood, won in the
field, hitherto carried, and daily expresses, by diverse such noble and
martial exercises. And the same staff clean void of all lofty florishes,
singular easy to be conceived, even for the unlettered, to learn and work
by, without any manner of arithmeticall calculation, although I know your H.
most abundantly far to exceed any ordinary Arithmetician, and not deuoid of
some parts Geometrical. Which staff, as effectually framed as my self and
my man (whom purposly to forward these actions, I have ever since your Honors
said liberality bestowed, retained) cold without any first pattern contriue:
I most humbly present to your H. together with this treatise of the use
thereof, beseeching God to prosper your H. in all your, honorable actions.

Your Honors most humble at command, John Blagraue.

A Table of the Chapters and Contents of this present book following.
Chap. 1. WHat moved the Author at this time to publish so much of this
instrument, and his use as he now sets forth. Chap. 2. Of the imperfections
of the cross staff, called by Gemma Frisius Baculus Geometricus and by how
much this Familliar Staff exceeds it and all other instruments hitherto
devised, to like purposes both for sufficiency and facillity. Chap. 3. Of the
framing and fashioning of this notable instrument called the Familiar Staff.
Chap. 4. How you shall in a singular sort set degrees on the leuel of the
running staff, and also on his Graduator, together with the points of the
Gunners quadrant. Chap. 5. How by this Familiar Staff to level or try,
whether a piece of ground be level whereon to plant your piece of ordinance.
Chap. 6. How by this Familliar Staff to mount a piece of ordinance by points
of the Gunners quadrant. Chap. 7. By what means a certain Table is to be
made, thereby to know how far any piece will shoot at random, being mounted to
any point of the gunners quadrant. Chap. 8. Having made a Table of Randomes to
some one piece according to the precept in the last chapter. How by this
Familiar Staff, to make the same table serve for any other piece, without any
Arythmeticall calculation Angular easy. Chap. 9. If a Wall or Tower were to be
scaled, and that you may come unto the base of it without danger, How by this
Familiar staff speedely to get the height thereof, thereby to make your
scaling ladders according. Chap. 10. To perform the last chap. Where you dare
not come near the base of the Tower for danger of shot, or let by reason of
some deep mote or ditch. Chap. 11. How by this Familiar staff to perform the
last chap. another way more exact for long distances, the more safely to keep
you out of danger of shot of the Fort, whiles you are in action. Chap. 12. How
you shall know by this Familiar staff, the depth under the just level of
your eye, of the base of any Tower vnapprochable, when the same base is to be
seen. Chap. 13. To know the length of the scaling ladder to reach over the
ditch to the top of the wall or tower. Chap. 14. How at any station, either
by the standerd or running staff, the angle of station or position between
any two marks or places, is to be taken two several ways. Chap. 15. How (in
manner of the first and playnest means mentioned in the last chapter, to take
the angle of position) to get the most exact distance of a castle or fort from
you, though the same fort be two or three miles off or more, whereby you may
know how to place your main battle, as near as may be, yet without danger of
shot from the Fort, and also in what space you may march to the same, when you
will. Chap. 16. Of the Geometrical ground and familiar proof thereof, whereon
the whole working by this familiar Staff depends. Chap. 17. How to perform
the fifteenth chapter with more facility by means of the second manner of
taking the angle of position mentioned in the 14. chap. Chap. 18. In case that
a Castle or Fort were dug out of some rock or situate in some valley
between two hills, admitting but some narrow coming unto it, and therefore
enforcing your stations to be one directly behind another, How yet by this
Familiar Staff you shall attain the distance of the same from you. Chap. 19.
How you shall perform the 15. chap. Where the distance of the fort or castle
is very far off, and the ground being uneven with hills, dales, and rocks,
has no one level plain sufficient to make two stations for so great a
distance. Chap. 20. If in a night you, have secretly gotten with your army
near any Fort, and that you would with more speed then in the 15. or 17.
chap. is showed, know the distance whether you are near enough to plant your
ordinance for battery. Chap. 21. If you shall see two Fortes of the Enemies
within view, and would know how far they are in sunder, and whether there
may be passage for an Army between them without danger of shot from those
Fortes, or to get the length and breadth of any Fort a far off, thereby to
gather, of what receite the same Fort is, or to get the width of a River
fronting any Fort, keeping your self a far off without danger of shot.
Chap. 22. If in a Fort or Haven on the sea coast, or abroad on the playnes on
the sea banks, you shall see any ships a far off, sailing toward you, or
any Army approaching by land: how you shall always be provided in such
special places, that in a moment almost, and with small help you shall know
how far they are from you, and by that means speedily find when they shall
be commen within the random or point blancke of the shot. Chap. 23. If an Army
on the land, or an Navy on the sea shall be as far off as you may ken, making
toward your Fort. To know by help of this Familiar Staff, how fast their
gate is, and in what time they shall (according to that gate) come within reach
of your shot. Chap. 24. If standing on the sea banks, you see your ship of
war at the sea pursuing another ship of the enemy, to know (by help of
this Familiar Staff) how far, and how much the one gets of the other in
sailing, whether he be likely to over take the enemy, and in what time. Chap.
25. Your self planted on the top of an high rock, clyft, or Tower by the
sea side, To know by this Familiar Staff, how deep the level of the water
is under you. Chap. 26. If a Gunner keep a Blockehouse, or have a piece or two
of ordinance, planted on the top of some very high clift by the sea side, how
by this Familiar Staff, he himself without any help at all, shall most easily
and speedely in a moment, get the distance of any ship at the sea, making
toward him, or passing a long and that most exact, for so far as the
random of any great piece will extend. Chap. 27. If a man were prisoner with
the enemy, How being in the top of a Tower on the leads, or out of his
prison window he might by this Familiar Staff know the deepth to the
ground, to see if he were able with any devise to let himself down without
danger. Chap. 28. If a Fort or Tower stand upon an high hill, How by this
Familiar staff to know the ioinct and several heightes both of the hill and
tower. Chap. 29. If being at the sea you would cast ancor as near some Fort or
Harborrowe as you might be free from reach of their shot, How by this Familiar
Staff you shall exactly get the distance thereof, or the distance of any other
ship from your ship being both fleeting at once on the wild sea. Chap.
30. How by this Familiar Staff to carry the level of one place to any other,
necessary for such as shall undermine a Fort, to know always how deep they
are. Or for such as would try whether waters may be brought from one place to
fortify another. Chap. 31. How by help of this Familiar Staff, you shall
carry a mine under the ground, and set barrelles of gunpouder directly under any
Tower or chief place of any Castle or Fort. Chap. 32. How a Captain may by
this Familiar Staff, set in Plat or Map any Province of the enemies
Country.
Here begins the Book of the ready, eadie, and pleasant use of this new
Instrument, called the FAMILIAR STAFF.
CHAPTER. I.
What moved the Author at this time to publish so much of this Instrument and
his use, as he now sets forth.

IT was my good hap to be at the mansion place of my most honorable fauorer the
right Ho. Sir Frances Knolles knight, called Greyes Court in the County of
Oxenford in Summer last, where the right excellent and most noble Lord, Robert
Deuorax Earl of Essex, his grandson being expected that day, it pleased his
Honor to pass the time, or rather as it might be judged, to stir up by his
example the courageous minded knights and Gentlemen his sons, naturally apt
enough of themselves to patrizate, imitate, or rather to exceed in all such
magnanimous exercises, there to contend with the right worshipful and valorous
Gentleman, Sir William Knolles knight, his son and heir, in shooting with a
small piece of ordinance at a mark, which piece was there ready on her
carriage, appointed at that time together with another great piece, not long
before the Spanish kings, called a Saker, which the said sir William to his
high deserved commendations, then lately had brought home from the winning of
ye Groyne in Spain, and many other small shot there also set ready on the
leads of the house, with trains of gun powder to be shot off, to welcome the
said noble Earl: sending forth amidde the regions of the air the exceeding
joy that was there taken of the safe and happy arrival of his nobleness,
from the then late desperate voyage performed into Portingale.

At this time after his H. and his said son and heir had each of them shot,
I being at hand, was demanded a question or two of getting the distance of the
mark whereto they shot. And the said Sir William Knolles was also very
desirous and inquisitiue of me, in what time himself might learn skill
sufficient for that purpose. Of which so just and wished occasion I was right
glad, and the rather when I considered with my self, how these dangerous times
threaten to set our great ordinance mightily on work, and how needful and
appertinent it is to the shooting in them certainly and speedily, to get the
distance of the mark they shoot at, as well for annoying of the enemy, as
sparing of shootes spent in wast. So that I was in manner assured, that no
Treatise was like to be more acceptable unto his H. (next unto books of
sincere religion) then such as should tend toward the defense and safe keeping
of this his native Country. Wherein it is well known, even to any that least
know him, how forward his H. has alwais bin and continues every way
whatsoever. That old age and graie hayres cannot yet daunt or hold him back
from the face of that enemy that should invade the same, or offer violence or
hurt to the person of our most gracious soueraign Lady and Queen Elizabeth,
whom God grant long to reign over us to his glory. Considering also what no
small want of some one perfect mean, General for all these actions yet
remained after so great a number of both Latin and English authors, writing of
so sundry ways to attain Altitudes, Longitudes, Latitudes, Distances and
Profundities, some by the Quadrate, some by the Trigo^, some by the Cross
Staff, some by the Cyrste, some by the Quadrante, some by the bare bare rule
or Squyre, some by plain sticks and stations, some one way some another. And
amongst them all, no one instrument sufficiently apt for all purposes, neither
yet to do any of these feats in all points, or almost in any point of
himself, without the continual and ready use of the five parts of
Arithmetike. Which in the unlearned Gunner is not always to be had: nor having
it, easy for him to perform, especially in such busy times, when the
buzzing of dangerous business amongst the multitude, shall bring the best
learned and skillful man out of his numbers: besides the number of precepts so
toil some, the manifold absurdities admitted, so loathsome. Upon al these
just occasions I was in manner forcibly drawn at this time to bend the
fabrication and use of this so noble instrument wholly upon these causes, which
I had for three or four years before determined to have published in a more
ample sort, almost as general for a number of matters of Geometry, as my
Jewel is for matters of Attronomie, Cosmographie and Navigations, which I yet
mean to do, but that I dare make no more promises in print, until I have
finished the second part of my Jewel, so often since required at at my hand,
being five years past: which yet this busy world suffers me not to bring
forth, although I contend to loose no manner of time.

Chap 2.
Of the imperfectio^s of the Cross staff called by Gemma Frisius, Baculus
Geometricus, and how much this Familiar staff exceeds it and all other
Instruments hitherto devised to like purposes, both for sufficiency and
facillity.

FOr that I have been acquainted with diverse willing wits desirous of
knowledge, wanting the rudiments of Geometry, whereby they might be enabled to
make choice of such instruments as might be subject to fewest errors and
absurdities, to have been marueilously in love with the cross staff and that
altogether, because it yeldeth his use with that facillity, though but in
matters at hand. For which cause, I thought good even of zeal and good will to
all such willinge young practisers, to waste this Cap. for their good, to
assure them how weak and to small purpose the cross staff is, in respect to
be employed in any weighty service, scarce doing any thing well, and that not
much above a bow shute of, whereas this my familliar staff shall perform
them no less exact at a mile, 2. or 3. distante, if the mark be such that
the eye may carry it strongly.

There have been from time to time besides the cross staff diverse other
instruments, devised for these kinds of seruisable mesurations, as in the Cap.
before I mentioned: of which the Geometrical quadrate was thought to be the
best, as it seems to me by G. Frisius, who often vpbraydeth the same quadrate
with his staff, when he had in as much as might be done, reduced the cross
staff to all yerfection, letting it then to lack no commendations, saying
even at the first entrance to the use of it, lib. de radio astro. and Geomet.
cap. 5. Dimensionibus longitudinum altit. latit. and distantiarum antecellit
radius reliqua instrumenta ad similem vsum excogitata facillitatem habens long
maiorem and copiam. But by G. Frisius good savor, I see no causa why it should
carry any of those commendations, more then for the facillity in use, and for
this, will ask no better judge then him self. For in taking of an altitude,
which is simply the best thing it can do, if the staff be not directed level
with the horrizon, then cannot the cross be parallel to the upright, and
therefore breeds error as him self confesses in the same 5. Cap. saying:
Vnum a paucis notatum intollerabiles inducit errores. Si quidem Radius in
dimensionibus per directam lineam, and quasi ad normam tendere debet versus
lineam quam metiri statuimus, sieve ea sit longitudinis five latitudinis, what
can a man ask more then direct consession, yet after he says again by way
of auoidance in the same Cap. Neque vereri de bes paruum a norma deflexum qui
nullum inducere potest errorem sensu perceptibilem. But by his favor again
though a little holding from the level, can breed no great error in the
altitude or latitude. Yet that very small error, there committed: shall grow to
somewhat in the longitude or distaunce: being he teaches no other way in
manner, to get a distance but by the altit. or latit. of some thing at
thextreame of the distance first obtained, multiplied into the length. Which in
a long distance will multiply that insensible error to become intolerable as
he terms it. But what should we talk of long distances, when as he makes a
prouiso, we shall deal with none by these words in his 5. Cap. or the like in
effect. Nihili esse quantum distes a re mensuranda, verum opus est distantia
non admodum longa. And then were we as good to be without his staff in my
opinion, as to entertain him on such straight conditions. But now to remedy
those errors in altitudes, he says in one place you may set the staff
level by a thredd and plummet aplied to the cross. In erectis quidem appenso
perpendiculo* Yet in another place he thinks that, too combersome, saying
thus. Qua in re, sufficit rudius oculi indicium ac examen. As for latitudes
transuerse: remedy he could find none, saying: In transuersis vero, visui
credere oportet. Yet for all these things he could not hold but conclude
toward the end of his first practices. Cap. 2. Itaque nulla in part
superatur ascala Geomet. verum multis modis superat, quin ipse radius, scala
quo que quaedam est geometrica, tanto praestantior quanto maiorem prebet vsum,
he should have said facil orem vsum and then he had said somewhat, for taking
away his facillity, you take away his chief goodness. The quadrate, the plain
stationes which sticks, the bare rule or squire, being well handled, will do
much more, as well in great as small distances, only they want the like
facillitie in use. Yea and G. Frisus him self for all his great bostes before
let fall was driven ere he ended his book to seek another way for his
matters in manner quadrate wise, by hanging his cross Staff, as it were by the
hair of the head, with his arms abroad, and then is his so well boasted
facillitye quite gone: Besides that, the longest part of your goodly
instrumente is brought then to half the length of the cross, and a small
length of the staff, which in a staff of 5. foot length will be but 15.
inches, and in a staff of 9. or 10. foot, which no man's height can possibly
reach to use in that manner without a ladder, the longest part will be little
above 2. foot, and of that length though the facillity remained, a man might
as easelye wild a quadrate. And now considering that half the cross and 3.
quarters of the staffes length, is by this means abject and to no use, who
would carry all that wood about with him, except the weather were cold.
Therefore to conclude, let no man be led away with the facillity of the Cross
staff, or of any instrument, rather let him think no pains too great that
produces an exact truth. And where as G. Frisius says, that his staff is
quaeda^ scala geometrica, I say that my Staff is not quaedam, but summa scala
geometrica, that be is nobilissimu^ trigonu^ geometricu^. For what may be done
by Triangles in Geometry, whole volumes do testify, and my self in another
treatise of this staff at some other time will partly manifest. And I say
that he shall be quoddam quadratum Geometricum and quidam radius Geometricus, and
perform the use of his Radius more effectually then it performs the
quadrates use. What should I say, it is Baculum Catholicon sieve generalissimum,
and shall recompense the tractable facillity of the cross staff, with his
familiar palpaple use, as well in his performance of these mensurations, as his
daily usage for an ordinary and familiar walking staff. For which cause I have
named him Baculum Familliare, the Familliar staff.

Chap 3.
Of the framing and fashioning of this noble instrument, called the Familiar
staff.

THis staff consists of two several parts, or rather two several staves,
the one I call the standerd staff, the other the running staff. Both in
manner like, very plain to conceive: being each but as it were, two straight
rulers iointed together, to open and shut even like an ordinary pair of
compasses.

The standerd staff is here represented by this figure A B C, having his two
legs or limbs A B and A C, ioyncted at A, each leg consisting of 3. rules,
or narrow boordes 5. foot in length, of breadth and thicknes convenient to
carry it self straight, of some such wood as will best keep from warping,
glewed and wrought together, so that both legs A B and A C being shut close:
there may be within it a concanity of one ynch and an half square quite through
to contain the running staff for easy carriage. After this: for easier
handling in use, let this standerd staff be brought into an 8. square. And
either let the round or pomell of the ioincte A be of 4. inches diametre at
the least, having a screwed pin of iron through the center with a screwed
box on the under side to fasten or lock fast the staff being open at any
angle or width: or else let there be a third rule or graduator, like unto that of
the running staff, which is far more sure if you may convey him into the
room, and so may the ioynte A. be as slender as you will. Within the
hollownesse of this leg are two channelles made in the upper and lower sides
parrallell, to their fiduciall or center lines: by or in which, two boltes or
pieces of wood, vz. M. and N, do slip to and fro carrying either two sight
pinnes half round, their plain sides running close to the staff, even with
the fiduciall or center lines, having each a pretty button or pearl on the
top, thereby to direct the eye to any mark: or else two half round deep
holes or sockets, into which two like sight pins or any other kind of sightes
may be put at any time when you shall use them: other two like sight pinnes,
you must have fixed near unto the center, their flat half round sides even
also with the fiducial lines, on each leg one. Those two bolts or pieces
carrying the two running sight pins must have each of them a spring of metal,
to cause them run the more pleasant, and also a screwpin at all times to
fasten them at any part of the standardeslegge. So much for the standard
staff.

The running staff represented in this figure by E. D. F. is ye very like to
the standard, being also but the like two legs or limbs D. E. and D. F.
ioynted at D. each made of three rules or narrow boordes of four foot length
and better, and of breadth and thickness, convenient to fill the hollownes of
the standard staff, hollow as the former, not eight square, but four square.
Herein it differs, that at the point G. of the side D. E. twenty inches from
D. the part G. F. shall be to take off and on with help of a square socket
or some screwe, made in the end G. of the part T. G. to be taken off, when it
is to be used as ye Gu^ners quadrant, or to be set on at E. to enlarge the side
D. E. as occasion shall serve. Also at the point G. there must be ioynted
another light four square hollow ruler, viz. G. H. equal in length to G. F.
which (the instrument shut together) must fall into the channels of G. F. and
E. I. This square ruler G. H. I call the Graduator, because he yields
degrees. The center of this graduators joint G. shall be even with the midst
of the breadth, and his length shall be such, that taking D. I. in the side D.
E. just equal to D. G. and the running Staff opened exactly to a square
angle, as here you see, that the extreme of the graduator, viz. H. which I
will hence forth call his Apex, may but justly touch the point I. making there a
right angled Aequicrurall triangle. And let the graduator have at his Apex H.
some devise with a socket or pair of cheeks, or else annexed to some such
running bolt, as before in the standard carries the sightes, and a screw pin
to fasten him in any part of the side.

There must be in thecentre D. a pin turning round, having either an half
round hole, quite thorough, to fit upon the sight pins which the running bolts
of the standard do carry, or else an half round pin standing out to fit into
the half round holes or sockets of those boltes. You must have also for each
side of this running Staff, one running sight or wing (as they call it) like
unto those of the Cross Staff, as in this figure you may see, and also two
fixed sight pins for each end of A Supporter.
each side one parallel to the fiducial lines, which for distinction sake, I
will call sight pegs: and must be so planted, that they may rise and fall into
the sides, suffering the wings to slip over them when occasion serves. And if
the standard it self had on each leg the like pair of sight pegs, it were
not amiss.

Your instrument thus prepared neatly in all points, as a workman can better
of himself tell how, then if I should write much more. You shall divide each
leg of either of these staves into as many inches as they will contain,
beginning from the centres A. and D. and every inch, into eight parts, which
parts shall signify feet, paces, perches, pike lengths, or any other kind
of measure that you shall use: so shall the five soote length of the legs A. B.
and B. C. of the standarde, contain each 480. equal parts, and the sides D.
E. and D. F. of the running Staff as many like parts as it may contain, all
which to be subdivided again, each into four equal parts, and set numbers
unto them, increasing by tens, each sort of division drawn to his several
space limbe-like, as usually workmen can do full well. Thus is your
instrument fully finished, saving for his degrees, which in the next Chapter I
will show.

Other necessaries there are appertinent, as a thread and plommet for the
running Staff, or else in stead thereof (which is much better both for use and
carriage) some pretty rule of metal, equal in length to D. G. heavy toward
the lower end, moving pliant, sometimes on the center D, and sometimes on a
pin set on the hanging side of the staff, thereby at any time to set him
perpendicular to the Horizon. A copartner at all times to help, for that the
instrument is great, a couple of supporters, if you will, which need not be
curious, they may be made of two stiff sticks three or four foot long,
nailed together about three or four inches from the upper end, so that they
may open and shut upon the nail, making a forke above to rest the staff in,
as in this figure you see, or any other devise you like better. But if any man
desire to have this Familiar Staff made in a less or more slender proportion
then this before described, thereby to be more neat and fit for a daily
walking staff. Then let him have no running staff at all, but set the
graduator in the standard it self, and have a small third four square ruler,
with a center hole, in all respects like the one side of the running Staff,
loose, to use at pleasure. For so shall it be sufficient enough for any
purpose, only the running Staff helps to do all things with more speed
and facility, which two standards also made in this sort may as well
perform. For the one may serve in stead of the standard, the other as the
running Staff.

Cap. 4.
How you shall in a singular sort set degrees, on the level side of the
running staff, and also on his Graduator, together with the points of the
gunners quadrant.

Having had the invention and use of a geometrical instrument not much unlike
this my Familiar staff, nere these 7. years, but of much smaller size then my
good will desired, because I could never conclude with my self, how to compass
conveniently without comber, the degrees of the circle thereon: neither yet
what foot or rest to carry him on, in using him, until now this suddeine
occasion ministered by my honorable friends in the 1. Chap. mentioned, did new
set a sharp edge on my dull wits: yea although I conferred sundry times with
diverse mathematically given about the same. As for the foot or rest which I
could never devise but very great and more combersome then the staff it
self, requiring a spare body to carry it: Now I mean that spare body shall
supplye the use or stead thereof: as heareafter shall appear, but for the
graduacion you shall thus after a singular sort supply.

The running Staff framed, as in the last Chap. I will call the side D E
(whereon the graduators apex must run to and fro) the leuel side, because in all
questions for the most part it must be carried level with the horrizon. The
side D F I will call the hanging side, because in every level the plum line
must hang directty by it: the piece G F being taken from the side D F I will
call the iointe piece, this known: you shall on some plain boorde of two foete
breadth draw a ground line, vz. M F then on some point thereof, vz. D erecte the
perpend: D K of 2. foot length at the least: Wherein you shall set the
point I. xx. inches just from D, and likewise G as much from D, in the
groundline D F, then on D with the quantity D K, describe the semy circle M K L
and on G with the quantity O I, describe the semy circle N I F. This done
divide the semy circle M K L into 180. degrees, and every degree into six
parts at the least, with blind notes: you shall also on the center D with the
quantity D I describe the quadrante I G, which you shall divide into 12. equal
parts, which are called the 12. points of the gunners quadrante, and every of
those 12. parts, again you shall subdiuide into other 12. parts, which are
called the minutes of a gunners quadrante, so have you 144. parts.

Thus is your ground plot laid, whereby to set on all your graduations.
Wherefore you shall now bring your runninge Staff prepared as in the last
Chap. and opening it to a square angle, (which is done when the apex of the
graduator is fixed to the point I of the level side) place him now on this
figure his center D, on the point D of this figure, and so consequently I upon
I, G upon G, F upon F etc.

The tipe of graduating this instrument, commended by the Author, to the
ingenious matthematicall minded gentleman, Master Auditor Hill.


The uppermost side of the graduator you shall divide into 90 degreees, by a
rule laid from D on every division of the quadrante K L, and the vndermoste
side into the 144 parts of the gunners quadrante, by the quadrante I G in like
manner: So is your graduator furnished with his parts, if you draw certain
parallel lines, limb like as the manner is, and add but numbers to each of
them: but now to set graduation in the level side D E you shall keep the
hanging side D F, sure fixed on the groundlyne M F keeping his former place,
and bring the level side even with it, shutting in the graduator close out of
sight: then shall you open him again till his fiduciall line do cut one
degree above L of the semicircle M K L, and there lift up the graduator til
his apex do touch the leuel side. Mark that touch point, for one degree: then
open the level side unto 2. degrees above L, and there bring the graduators
apex again to touch, mark that touch point in the leuel side, for 2.
degrees, and so do from degree to degree of the whole semicircle M K L,
marking still the touch points in the level side, and you shall find that the
apex will touch that level side ever in the semicircle N I F but when you are
once paste 10. or 15. degrees, you shall make notes in like manner for every
subdiuision of each degree, and let these degrees be placed either in the
upper or lower flat of the level side, it is no great matter which, and
numbered from E ending at D with 180. degres, for note, that the even parts
mentioned in the last Chap. must be set on the inner or shutting flats of both
sides of this running Staff.

Chap 5.
How by this Familiar Staff to try whether a piece of ground be level,
whereon to plant your piece of ordinance.

I Perceived by that small practice I saw in shooting, mentioned Of leuelling.
in the first Chapter, that it is needful to place a piece of Ordinance to be
shot, on a level plot of ground, yt one wheel of their carriage go not
higher then another, least in her recoile it make her shoot awrie: first
stick some wooden pin in the ground, and resting the center of your running
staff, (set at the square angle) thereon: lifting up the hanging side, by help
of a thread and plommet or plum rule, until the level side be exactly placed
level with the Horizon: then shall you from that wooden pin extend a thread
or line, even by that level side of the Staff so placed, and with another
pin also thrust into the ground, there fasten it, then keeping still the
center of your staff on his first pin, turn about the leuel side somewhat
wide from the line you have strained between the two pins, and there in the
very like manner place another thread or line extended from the said first pin
by the level side of the Staff, and let the same be holden stiff out with a
third pin: now laying your eye nere the ground, by these two lines or threeds
so extended, you shall see whether any part thereof be higher then the level,
to be pared away, or lower, to be filled up E. A. N. is the running Staff
A. the first pin K. the second, I. the third A. K. and A. I. the two threads or
lines extended level with the Horizon P. the cie leuelling by the threeds, O.
an hillocke to be pared away.

Chap. 6.
How by this Familliar Staff to mount a piece of ordinance by points of the
Gunners quadrate.

Having by the last chap. leuelled the ground, whereon your Of mount(...)
ordinance is to be planted, next follows to know how to mount your piece
unto any point desired, which is most easy: For your running Staff set at
this squere, pulling away the joint piece of the hanging side, so is that side
the shorter by more then half. Then putting his level side into the piece up
to the very apex of the graduator, there let it be holden even and level,
with the bottom or lowest side of the concauitie A piece leuelled at point
blanke.
of the piece, then lifting up or weighing down the piece till the thread and
plummet, or plumme rule, hanged out of the center do rest even with the
fiduciall line of the hanging side, there is your piece situated leuel with the
Horizon neither mounted nor embased any point or minute, but even at point
blanke, as they call it. After this, if the piece be elevated never so little
above that level, then does your thread and plummet or plum rule, show on your
gunners scale (appointed in the fourth Chapter, on the inner side of the
graduator) to what point or minute the piece is elevated for to shoot at
randon, as they call it, yea, and if need be, it shows you on the upper scale
of the graduator, the same randon A piece mounted to shoot at randon.
by degrees of the circle, which for any thing I can see, might be applied to
this purpose as well as the gunners points.

Chap 7.
By what means a certain table is to be made, thereby to know how far
any piece will shoot at randon, being mounted to any poinct of the gunners
quadrante.

LEt no man think that I pretend to show the art of shooting in great
ordinance, being in deed a matter that I never took occasion so much as to
think of, before this time, but for that matter, do advise every man to repair
unto Tartaglia, which is lately englished by M. Cyprian Lucar, and published.
Who has set down diverse singular conceits and obseruances about the same,
only to the end to sharpen your taste for the fruit of this my work following.
I thought good to present you with this instance out of Tartaglia, which in the
next Chapter I mean also to apply to my Staff. He gives but a glance in his
first book, 1. Colloquie, that any one piece being mounted from point to
point, and minute to minute of the gunners quadrate, and the randomes or
distances in paces of that piece taken at every several mounting, and noted
in a table (being carefully dealt in) would serve to know the randoms of any
other piece likewise elevated from point to point: if you do but know any one
shoot at any one point elevated of that other piece. For look what proportion
the shoot of any point of the first, bears unto any other point of the same
piece. The like shall the randomes of any two like points of the second bear
one to another.

As for example: If the first piece shoot forty paces at the first point,
fifty at the second, sixty at the third, etc. Then if you shoot one shoot
in another piece, which at the first point happily shoots but thirty five
paces, and that by this one shoot known of this second piece, you would
before hand know how far he should shoot being elevated to the third point.
In this case you must by the rule of three (says Tartaglia) seek out a number
in that proportion to thirty five, as sixty is to forty, which you shall
find 52.. paces: and so much shall this second piece shoot, elevated to the
third point, if that Instaunce of Tartagliaes be true in it self. Although
many secret accidents besides may much alter it, as that the powder at each
shoot be like good and like much, the pellet of like weight, the piece of one
temper, and such like. For Tartaglia writes amongst many other experiments
singular well by him discussed, which I am not any way to meddle with, that a
piece being cold, shoots not so far at the first shoot, as with like
charge he does at the second or third being then temperatly hot: And after
when she is over hot with shooting, she begins to shoot shorter again:
and shows the reasons thereof.

Chap. 8.
Having made a table of randoms to some one piece according to the precepts in
the last Chapter. How by this familiar staff, to make the same table serve for
any other piece without any arithmetycall calculation.

Truly this invention is very new: for it came into my Of prop(...)tion.
head but even as I was writing the last chapter, where you are taught
Arithmetically to perform the same. But my familiar staff will not have you
troubled with numbers in such dangerous times. Wherefore having your table
made by some one piece exquisitly shot in, and one shoot given of some other
piece at some one certain point or minute perfectly made. So have you always,
as in the last Chapter is showed three numbers given: two out of your table:
and the third is the shoot of the piece in action. You shall seek the one of
your two table numbers (it is no matter which) in the right leg of the
standerd staff, and thereto by help of the moving sight pin, place the center
of the running staff, set at his square angle, or any other less angle it is
not material what: and direct the level side unto the center of the standerd:
There hold him till ye have pulled too or thrust out the left leg of the
standerd, so that it cut in the hanging side of the running staff your other
table number. There wrest the standerd fast at that angle by his center skrew.
Lastly, seek in the said right leg of the standerd the number of paces of
the shoot given, and thither by help of the said sight pin, remove the center
of your running staff, keeping his former angle, and his said level side,
directly still with the center of the standerd, and questionless the left
leg of the standerd shall there cut off in the hanging side of the running
staff, the just number of paces desired.

For example, it is admitted in the last Chapter, that the shoot of a piece
elevated unto the first point was thirty five paces, by which I would know how
far that piece would shoot, being mounted at the third point: I seek in the
Table there mentioned for ye same first point, there according to ye last
chapter I find fortye paces, and also for the third point I find sixty
paces, which had, I seek the biggest of those table numbers, viz. 60. on the
right leg of the standerd: it ends at B there I place the center of the
running staff, being set at a venture at the angle C B A and apply his level
side B A even with the center A of the standerd, and there on his hanging side
B C I seek the other table number, that is forty, at C. thither I bring the
left leg of the standerd to cut, and there lock him fast to keep the angle
C A B. That done I seek the number of paces of the shoot given, that is to
say thirty five, on the said right leg of the standerd, that is to say at E
and thither I remove the center of the running staff his level side, keeping
still the center A and in both the staves their angles before set C A B and A B
C unstirred, and there do I see the left leg of the standerd to cut off in
the running staff at D fifty two paces, the Random of this second piece at
the third point desired: in all respects the same which in the last Chapter
you found by Arithmetike. So that upon the matter you have now learned the rule
of three by Geometry, and is demonstrated in Eucl. lib. 6. Propo. 10.

Chap. 9.
If a Wall or Tower were to be scaled, and that you may come unto the hase of
it without danger, How by this familiar staff spedily to get the height
thereof, thereby to make your scaling ladders according.

IT happens often that it is thought more convenient to win Of altit
a town or fort by scaling with ladders and such like, then to batter it with
ordinance. In such a case where the walls may be come to, without danger, it
is so easy and common to get the height by any instrument, that I could scarce
spare it a room, but that it may serve as a ground, or first introduction to
the rest. This my familliar staff as in the 2. chap. I said, may be used in
most cases, either as himself, or as the quadrante or circle, or as the
quadrate, or as the cross staff, or as the gunners quadrant: and in this case
indifferent to them all. For if you take your running staff set at his square
angle, and apply the level side to your eye, lifting up the center till the
line and plummet out of the center do hang justly on the 45. degrees. or 6.
gunners poinct of the graduator, which are both in one straight line, what
upright soever you see, then even with the level side the height thereof is
equal to the distannce from you. In so much that when at any time you shall by
this instrument or any other find the altitude of the sun 45. degrees. if then
you run and measure the shadow of that tower or wall, the same shall be
equal to the height thereof, as most aucthors affirm, but in very deed it
shall be less then the height by so much as one quarter of a degree comes
to, as in the treatise of my new Astronomicall staff not yet extant shall
appear: in the mean time take the shadow at 44 degrees high, and the same
shall be your desire.

But now, if you will do it crossestaffe wise, then set the extreme of the
level side of the running staff to your eye carrying it square to the
upright, as near as you can, the hanging side upwards and parallel to the
wall, and go in or out so, till you may see the top of the upright, even with
the top of the hanging side, and there shall you find the distaunce to the
wall equal to the height thereof, as before. And if you place the wing in the
midst of the hanging side, and by that see the top from the extreme of the
leuel side, then is the distance to the upright double to the height, if at a
fourth part from the center, then is the distance 4. times the height, etc. For
example in this figure the running staff set at his square angle, and carried
square to the wall as you see: if you go in or out till you might see the top
P of the tower R P even by the extremes E and F there shall the distance from
your standing to the tower be equal to P S, then adding thereto your height
viz. R S, you have the height desired. And if you choose your station so that
you see P by the extreme E of the leuel side and the wing H: and that H be one
4 part of D F from D, then is E S four times the height P S, because D H is
four times in D E: in like manner H being set at half or a third part, etc.

Chap. 10.
To perform the last cap. Where you dare not come near the base of the tower
for danger of shot or let by reason of some deep mote or ditch.

I Will first in this Chap. show (...) by this familiar Of altitu
staff to do this feate after (...) mer almost of the Crosse-staffe, which
many (...) ell, and in the next chap. after his own fashion, a (...) may as
well be applied to a wall or upright approchable.

Take your running staff set at his square angle: and place the wing of his
hanging side near about the midst thereof, or as occasion shall serve:
fixed: then applying your eye to the extreme of the level side, directed
right against the wall or tower in manner of thel last chap. choosing you a
station somewhat far from the wall, where from thextreame of the level side
you may see the top of the wall, by the said wing before fixed: which done,
then shall you place the running sight of the level side from his extreme
toward the Center, half or a quarter, or just so much as the said wing
before fixed in the hanging side is placed from the Center of the staff, and
there let this wing also be fixed. Then choose you a second station (going in
toward the wall) carrying the instrument plum as before, till you may again
see the top thereof by both these fixed wings. Lastly, measure the distance
between both your stations for the same shall be either the whole, the half,
or quarter of the height of the wall you seek, according as you did set the
last wing from thextreame of the level side, either the whole, the half, or
quarter the length of the first wing from the Center, adding thereto when you
have done the height of your eye above the base of the upright.

For example, Admit you placed the wing of the hanging side 120. even parts
from the center of the staff, viz. at H by which at the first station viz M
and thextreame of the level side of your staff, viz. E you see the top of
the wall of the tower, viz. P by the visiall line E P. That done, then place
the wing of the level side E D one half of D H (being 120. parts as is said)
viz. 60. even parts from E at I, and seek you a standing nearer to the tower
P R, where you may even by the wings H and I see P the top thereof again
viz. at N, then measuring the distance between your stations M and N which
admit to be 20. foot. I conclude because D H 120. parts is twice so much as E
I 60. parts that the height of the tower from the top unto the height or
level of mine eye, viz. P S is twice 20. foot, viz. forty foot: and if
need be you may use the help of the 5. or 6. note of the 15. chap. following.

But here I can no longer delay, but warn you of two things in this working,
both which, G. Frisius half wineketh at in the use of his Cross Staff,
because he would have it commended forsooth for facillity. But I have ever
detested that facillity that should produce any absurdity. The one is, that the
hanging side of our instrument be parallel to the wall, the other, that your eye
in both stations be set in one level, that is to say, no higher above the
base in the one station, then in the other, both which are foul faults to be
admitted, if the upright should be far of: yet are easily salued with a little
pains. And I earnestly exhort every practiser in these actions, to defy that
ease, that should shame him self and bring his art in question: a notable
fault amongst most of our land measurers in these days, I mean those that
measure by platt, who partly by want of skill in Geometry, partly by want of
perseverance and knowledge in other sciences and faculties, wherewith a perfect
surueior ought to be adorned and furnished: and chiefly by want of industry,
pains and diligence, do bring them selves and a most excellent Science into
disdain and obloquy, when as seldom two of them can produce one measure or
like plat of one self ground, and that which more is, scarce one of them shall
agree with him self. I mean produce at his second measurement either the same
platt or the same measure which he did at the first. But God willing when so
ever I shall go in hand to write again of this instrument, I shall set down
most certain salues for every sore in those cases. In the mean time, to
return unto the two errors, that might accreaue to this matter we have in
hand: they are easily salued with no pains at all in respect: because the
greatness of the Staff requires an assistaunte or partner at the further end:
who shall discharge you thereof. The first is easy remedied by a plum line, or
rather a plum rule mentioned in the third Chapter, applied to the hanging side,
as in the second Chapter was said, which your partner may easily guide whiles
he stays theend for you, especially having an halberd pitched in the ground
to help him rest his hand steady. The second as easy salued by a spare halberd,
or a staff pitched somewhat farther in toward your upright then your second
station shall be: which halberd shall have a bright mark viz. Q placed on it,
even with your eye at the first station, by which mark Q you and your partner
may easily direct the leuel side of your instrument at both stations of one
height. Note that whatsoever is before written of altitudes, the same does G.
Frisius, Chapter seventh de Rad. Geo. convert to the latitudes or distaunces
between two marks, towers or trees, willing you to bear the cross aside, and
not upright, and to take care that you stand square to the latitude as near as
you can, saying, a little awry will do but a little harm. You may not doubt do
it as well by this Familiar Staff, as by the Cross Staff: but I will not bid
you to do so much as a little harm, lest you do a little more, and then all
stark naught. I mean to teach you a better way in my 21. Chapter.

Chap. 11.
How by this Familiar Staff to perform the last Chapter another way, more
exact for long distaunces, the more safelye to keep you out of danger of the
shot of the forte, vvhiles you are in action.

HItherto we have but as it were borrowed the precepts of the Cross Staff to
fit the fancy of some, who I hope will not deny but that this my Familliar
Staff performs Of altitude.
them with no less facillity, and no great alteration: yet as in the last
Chapter I said, my earnest care of exact trothes will not suffer me to advise
you to rely upon them, for any altitude above a bow shoot of, as in the
second Chapter I touched, for many causes too long here to recite. But in case
the upright be far from you, whose height you seek, then shall the proper and
natural working of this my Familliar Staff serve your turn much better in
this manner. You shall first by help of two stationes as in the fifteenth,
seventeenth or twenty Chapter following is taught, get the distaunce from you
to the base of the wall or tower, viz. how many feet, yards, paces, or other
measure, it is from your first station: those reckon on the level side of your
runninge Staff from the center, and thereto place the wing fixed: that one,
set that wing to your eye (placed just over your station) directing the center
of your Staff to the wall, and let your partener keep the hanging side plumne
by the plum rule, and with all, be reddy with his hand to move the wing of the
hanging side, by direction of your eye, so much above the center till your
self may from the said winge at your eye, by this second wing see the top of
the wall or tower. Then see what even parts are contained between the center
and this second wing on the hanging side, for so many seete high is the top
of the tower above the level of your eye.



For example, admit you had by the fifteenth, seventeenth or twenty Chapter
following, found the distance from the station N in this figure, unto the
poincte of the tower leuel with your ese viz. S. to be an hundredth pace or five
hundredth foot, all is one, but that in getting the altitude of any thing, the
rekoning had need to be kept in feet, though for distances or longitudes,
paces, perches, pike-lengthes, or any other may suffice: those hundred paces I
reckon on the level side of the Staff, they end at I. where I place the wing.
Then directing the center of my Staff, viz. D. to the tower or wall, I cause my
partner to lift up the wing of the hanging side, until it come directly
between I and the tower top, viz. at H then I look on the Staff what even
parts I find between the sight H and the center D, admit I find eight.
Therefore I conclude, that wall or tower to be eight paces high, which is
forty foot, and in this working you shall take help if need be of the fifte
or six notes of the fifteenth Chapter following.

Chap. 12.
How you shall know by this familiar staff, the depth under the just level of
your eye, of the base of any tower vnaprochable when the same base is to be
seen.

SUch may be the advantage of the ground whereon we make our stations, that
the level of our eye may be much Of profunditie.
above the base, and then are we not satisfied for the height of the upright,
if it be vnaprochable: wherefore when you have by the last Chapter gotten the
height of the wall or tower above the level of your eye: note then some mark
on the wall, even with that level: and so may you as easily and by the self
same means get the depth of the base under the level, as in the last Chapter
you got the height of the top above the level. There is no difference in the
work, but that you must turn the extreme F of the hanging side of the staff
dounewards, and set the wing thereof justly between the wing I, and R the base
of the tower, that is to say at X as in the last Chapter you did set it at H
between I and the top of the tower P, and the parts of the staff between
the center D and the wing at X shall be your desire. Which added to the former
height P S makes up the full height from the top to the base, that is P R.

But where the ground has no great advantage of the upright, I would never
wish you to make two works of one, for if it be level with the base of the
tower, it is a small matter to lay your self down and work the last Chapter
close by the ground: if it be lower then the base, then place the level of
your eye no more above it, then that it may direct to the base: such like small
matters he that could not of himself provide for, I would not have him allowed
for an executioner of these services.



Note, that if you list not in this working to turn the hanging side of your
staff downwards, or that the ground will not admit it to sink so low as the
level of your eye marked on the tower, you may work it as well and easily,
keeping the hanging side upwards, in such manner as in the twenty six Chapter
following is taught: and then must you keep the center of the staff over the
station N and direct the extreme E of the level side toward the tower or
upright, as by the bare inspection of the triangle I V O of the figure of the
same twenty six Chapter: you may easilye conceive. The quantity I. V. of the
staff, showing the depth of the point C under X the level of the eye in that
figure as here the quantity D X shows the depth of the point R under the
point S level with the eye in this figure.

Chap. 13.
To know the length of the scaling ladder to reach over the ditch to the top
of the wall or tower.

THe height of the wall or tower together with the distance thereof from your
station first had by the 11. and 15. chapters and help of the 12. then measure
from that station directly toward the tower till you come at the out side of
the ditch where the foot of the ladder must stand, take that measure out of
the whole distance, keep the remain, and then as in the 30. chap. shall be
showed, prove with your level whether the footing of the ladder be no higher
or lower then the base of the wall, if it be higher, then take it out of the
height, if lower, add it thereto, and keep that number also. Now shall you
reckon the first number kept on the level side of your staff, set at his
square angle, and the second number kept on the hanging side, and there make
notes then applying the ioynctpeise or any part of the standerd between those
notes you may thereon tell with a stick as they say, how many foot long your
ladder shall he.

For example in the figure of the 11. chap. T is the footing of the ladder, M
the station, M T measured and taken out of M R leaves R T the first number
kept, this point T is so far under the level of the eye, as W T or S R comes
to, therefore add it to P S, so have you R S your second number kept, and
those two numbers reckoned on the several sides of the running staff as is
said, and the ioynctpeise laid between them yeildeth you the Hypothenusa P T
which must needs be the length of the scaling ladder desired.

Chap. 14.
How at any station either by the standerd or running staff the angle of
station or position between any two marks or places is to be taken two
several ways.

I Am not ignorant that an angle of position in Geography Of tal angles.
is the angle comprehended between the visuall line directed unto any place
appointed, and the meridian line of your being. But if we call the angle made
by two lines issuing from one place or station unto other two places, an angle
of position (though happily more aptly to be termed an angle of station) the
matter is not great, being it is the angle of position or placing of the one
place from the other in respect of your station. This angle shall most casely
by this familiar staff two ways be taken, the first easy and familiar to
conceive, the second more easy and familiar to be performed.

For the first way suppose P your place of station and N and T the two places
or marks whose angle of station or position you seek. Let your partner and
you get each of you your supporter mentioned in the 3. chap. on which two
supporters, you shall so rest the one leg of your staff, viz. A C. (his
center just over your statio^ mark, viz. over P yt you may by the sight
pinnes, or pegges of that leg see the one of your places, vz. N: there look
that leg of your staff lie fast on his rest, leaving that to your partners
charge by his steady holding of his supporter both with hand and knee. That
leg so settled even with the mark N, you shall gentlye open the other leg A
B lifting it up and down withal, until by the two tops of the sight pinnes
of that leg A B you may see the other mark T, and there with your center
screw pin, lock your staff fast at that angle T A N: for the same is the
angle of station or position desired. And if you take this angle by the running
staff in this manner, then does the graduators apex also show you the degrees
which that angle contains on the level side of the staff. But for your
supporters, it is not material to make such reckoning of them as to be choice
about them: for two sticks pulled out of an hedge, knit together with a point
toward the one end may serve for a shift. Or if a Captain have but his
halberd, let him stick it fast in the ground upright, and with his garter tie
the one end of the leg of the staff thereto, he may then use the other at
his pleasure without help. Or sometimes he may rest him to a tree, or on the
very barrel of the Cannon. In these cases I would have no man tied to
precepts, but be ready to supply as occasion shall minister.

Now for the second way, let year station be P. and let L. and T. be the two
places or marks, whose angle of position you seek. Stick your dagger or any
stick upright in the station mark P. in the ground, and thereon rest the
center, viz. A. of the standard or running staff. Then apply your eye unto
the extreme of his one leg, viz. to B. and let your partner apply his eye to
the extreme of the other leg, viz. to C. each of you opening his leg by little
and little so wide, till your self see the mark T. by the sight pins or pegs
of the leg A. B. and your partner see the mark L. by the sights of the leg
A. C. and there wreast fast your Staff at that angle C A. B. for the same is
equal to the angle T. A. L. by Eucly. lib. 1. propos. 15. which is the angle
of position between the marks T. and L. desired. And if you performed it by
the running staff, then shall the graduators aper, as before among the degrees
or graduation of the level side, show you also what that angle is, and how
many degrees of the circle it contains. Yea, your partner and you may as well
and more speedily do it without any dagger or rest, but that a rest may
happily guide the center of the staff just over the mark. Note also, that in
taking the angle in this manner by the running staff, let the level side be
first directed to his mark, and let him that directs it, pull the apex of
the graduator to and fro, till his partner find the hanging side opened even
with the other mark.

Chap. 15.
How (in manner of the first and plainest means, mentioned in the last
Chapter, to take the angle of position) to get the most exact distance of a
Castle or Fort from you, yea though the same Fort be two or three miles off or
more, whereby you may know how to place your maine battle as near as may be
without danger of shot from the Fort, and also in what space you may march to
the same when you will.

ALL this while we have about altitudes reckoned upon feet or paces at the
greatest, but now shall we for longitudes Of longitude or distance.
or distances, deal (and that as certainly) with paces, perches, pike lengths,
or miles, which comes near the substance of our pretense, and shall be far
more easy then the premises.

First come to the place where the ground serves you best to place your Canon,
there make a mark for your first statition, then send some spare body a
convenient distance off, that way, which you find the ground fittest, so it
be not directly backwards or forwards, to set you up another mark for your
second station. Which done, you shall with your standard staff after the first
manner of the last Chapter, take the angle of position between your second
station, and some one pinnacle or other notable mark of the Castle or forte,
thereat lock your staff by help of the center screwe at that angle that you
may carry him safely without sagging, unto your second station. This done, you
shall go to the other station, measuring the distance between with a wyre
chain, morice pikes, or how you will, but most exactly, be sure. Those perches
or pike lengths you shall reckon on that leg of your stanstard staff, which you
before directed to your station, by the even parts and numbers thereon set: and
to the end of that rexkoning place, the running bolt or sight of that leg,
and there fix him by help of his screw pin. Then place your staff again at
this second station on his supporters, so that this fixed sight pin be directly
over the mark of the second station, and the center end directed toward the
first station, which your partner shall support, and lift up the other leg
withal, putting to and fro the running fight of that leg by your
commandment and direction, until that your self do find the foresaid
mark, hole or pinnacle, directly even with the knops or tops of both the
running sight pins. And then look what number of parts you find there showed
in that further leg by the second sight pin: so many paces, perches, or pike
lengths is that mark or pinnacle from your first station.

gunnery diagram P. the first station where you would place your Canon K. or
rather N. the second station. T. a mark in the tower to be battered. R. and S
the two supporters, A B C the standard staff placed on his supporters, his
center A at the first station placed over the mark P, his one leg A C
directed to the second station at K his other leg A B to the mark T in the
tower. T A C, the angle of position taken at the station P.

Admit the distance between the stations P and K, to be forty perches or pike
lengths that number forty I seek in the leg A C, it ends at N, there I
set the running sight N fixed, which at this second station K, I place just
over K, directing the center A to P (the angle of position B A C unstirred) M.
the running sight of the other leg, set directly, between the pinnacle T, and
the sight N: so shall the number of parts comprehended between A and M on the
leg A C, show you the exact distance from the first station A, unto the
pinnacle, in such measure as you measured between your stations P and K.



Many things might be noted, which in half a days practice will be easier
found, then though I should write many nights.

1 First, the greater distance that your two stations are in sunder, except
they be unreasonable much further then the mark: the more certain is your
working.

2 The sharper that the angle is made between the legs of the Staff, as for
example, F A K in this second figure or the blunter, as G A K: The greater
distance of the stations is required: otherwise the point of Crossing either at
F or G, will hardly appear.

For these causes you must use as much discretion in pointing your second
station as the ground will allow you. The best is, when your mark makes an
equicrurall triangle with your stations or near about, as D A N and this
requires least distance between your stations. Wherefore if you may choose
your ground, point your second station so, that you never open the legs of
your staff much more or less then the right angle, though you make your
stations the shorter: a little less is always best, but never much bigger then
a right angle if you can possible choose: if so, then make your stations the
longer.

4. If you mean to get an exact distance, you had need (yea by your best
position) let the distance between your stations be no less then one eight
part of the distance to your mark as near as you can imagine. Otherwise you
shall hardly get the true point of crossing, as you may perceive at H: or at
the least let it be never less then one twelse part: either of which are
easy to be had in a small ground, and will serve for a great distance: for
forty pearches is but a reasonable distance for two stations, and are to be
found commonly in a small close, and yet that is the eight part of a mile of a
thousand pace, and it is the twelfth part of your common longest usual miles.

5 Other small conceits are to be noted as if the distance of the stations in
the last example were so small, that in account on the leg A C of your staff
it falls out so near the handle, that the running sight N might not be
brought thereto: then may you set your sight N at double that number, and when
you have done, take half the number found on the leg A B between A and the
sight M for your distance destred, or if you set him at thrice or four times,
and in the end take a third part or quarter of that you find, all comes to
one pass. Yea if the distance be very short, you may reckon every ten but
for one, and then if you r^^ct one cyphare from every number your staff is
ready figured to your contentinent.

6 One thing I had almost forgotten: for as in rekoning the distance of your
stations on the leg A C you shall ever be rather led to increase your scale,
as in the fifth note I showed, especially, for short distances or longitudes, as
they call them: So contrary wise for long distances, when as the mark desired
is a mile or two from you, except your stations be made much the larger, you
shall be driven to place half, or a third, or a quarter of your stationary
distance between A and N: and then take the double, treble, or quadruple of
that you find between A and M, for your desire, as in stead of the forty
perches between P and K to have set twenty or ten even parts between A and
N. Yea, or if your stations had been forty seven: (here because forty seven
is not easily parted into a quarter because of the fraction) you might first
work by a quarter of the even number, that is to say of forty, and then work
by the seven by it self, and add the two productes, as if by ten you found an
hundredth perches, you must take four hundredth for those: and then working by
the odd seven, you shall get seventy more to be added to four hundredth, so
is your whole distance four hundredth and seventy.

Also you must provide to have two bright marks flickering over both your
stations till you have done, that you be assured justly to take your level.

Chap. 16.
Of the Geometrical ground, and familar proof thereof, whereon the whole
working by this familliar Staff depends.

AS I have thought it very requisite to show the ground platte of these
precepts in hand, so it were in vain for me here to iterate any expositions
or diffinitions of usual terms Geometrical, since they are now a days very
common, and are of Euclide and diverse other recited, and of me in my
Mathematical Jewel 1. book sufficiently declared. Understand therefore that
if in any triangle you draw a line parallel to any one side, the same line
shall cut of a triangle like, and equiangled to the former. For example within
the triangle A B C let there be drawn the line D E parallel to C B I say
that ye triangle A D E is equiangled to the triangle A B C, that is to say, the
angle E is equal to the match angle B, and the angle D to the angle C, and the
angle A of the one, to the angle A of the other, for the angle A is common to
both, and also the triangle A D F, shall be like to the triangle A B C, that is
to say, what proportion the sides of A D E bear one unto another, the like
proportion do the sides of A B C bear one to another. For Familiar proof of
the first, open your compasses at adventure, and with one scantlet on the
centres B and E, describe two several arches cutting the several sides,
encluding the same angles B and E, as you see F G and H I, and those two arches
you shall find by your compass to be just equal the one to the other, and
therefore of necessity the angles F and B subtended by those arches are equal:
in like manner may you prove the angle D to be equal unto the angle C, and
being the angle A common to both, therefore the triangles are equiangled, if
you desire more artifyciall proof, repair to Euclide lib. 1. propos. 29. and
lib. 6. propos. 5. 6. and 7. Likewise for Familiar proof of the second, divide
any one side of the triangle A B C into some number of even parts, admiste the
side B C into ten equal parts, then divide the match side of the other
triangle into the like number of parts, viz. D E into ten equal parts also,
then measure with your compass how many of those parts of B C are contained in
the side A B of the triangle A B C, and you shall be sure to find the like
number of the parts of D E in the match side A E of the triangle A D E, and as
many parts of B C as are in A C, so many parts of D E are in A D: therefore are
they said to be like and proportional. This Familiar proof I have thought
best for my Familiar Staff: for artificial proof seek Euclide, lib. 6.
propo. 4. 5. 6. and 7. Even so in the figure of the last Chapter at the second
station K, the leg A B of your standerd Staff does cut the maine triangle T K
P or rather T N A by the line M A parallel to the side T A, making within the
jurisdiction of the Staff, the triangle N M A equiangled, and like to N T A.
Therefore being that N A is appointed so many even parts as K P contains
even perches, it follows of necessity, yt what even part you find between
M A, there must also be so many even perches in T A, which is the longitude or
distance desired. Note that the letter A wants in this figure at the station
K.

Note also that if in the former figure you draw the line O P parallel to A
C, and R S parallel to A B, they shall make a little triangle in the belly of A
B C, viz. K L M equiangled, and like to A B, yea and every triangle that you
can pick out in the same figure is equiangled, and like to A B C, and
therefore each of them to other. Thus have I opened you a great breach, which
if you thoroughly enter and possess, you may be able always to atchieue these
maistres without book at all times of need.

Chap. 17.
How to perform the fifteenth Chapter with more facillity by means of the
second manner of taking the angle of position mentioned in the 14. chap.

LEt no man be amazed at this working for it is all one in Of longit(...) or
distan(...)
substance with the 15. Chapter, but oppositely performed, which in diverse
parts of the Mathematickes produces the same troth as the direct way does.
For many times Oppositorum eadem est ratio, if I shall familiarly show you the
difference it may be compared unto a cupple of men going together toward one
place, the one with his face forwards, the other backwardes, the matter is no
more difficult, therefore mark it well. Let P and K be your two stations, and
T the tower whose distance you seek from your first station P. You shall
therefore at P with your standerd staff after the second manner of the 14.
chap. take the angle of Position between T and your second station K, or
rather L directly over it, as in this figure you see C A B, and lock fast your
staff at that angle of position, for it is the opposite angle of T A L, and
equal unto it by Eucl. lib. 1. propos. 15. as in the 14. chap. was showed.
Then repair unto your second station K, measuring the exact distaunce between
your stations with some wire cheyne or moryce pykes, and according to that
measure place the running sight of that leg of the staff, which at P was
directed to K, viz. at L. This sight L there fixed, you shall now place directly
over your second station, by resting it on your dagger or some stick stuck
into the ground, and let your partner (applying the center of the staff to his
eye) direct the same leg again to the first station P by help of the sight
pegges, as here you see. And then your self shall move too and fro the
running sight of the other leg until you may place it so that by it you may
see the tower T, even with the sight before fixed at L, viz. at O, by the
visuall line O L T. To conclude then, I say, that the even part of the staff
cut by the sight O, shall show you the exact distance of the tower T from your
first station P. The certainty hereof may well be proved by the last chap. for
the angle L A O is all one with the angle N A M because the staff is fast locked
to that angle, and therefore equal to T A L being but the opposite angle of N
A M the angle A L O being also opposite to T L A, is therefore equal unto it
by Euclyde lib. 1. propos. 15. and when two angles of any tryangle are equal
unto two angles of another tryangle, the third angles can not choose but be
equal by Eucl. lib. 1. propos. 26. then seeing the tryangle L A O is
equiangled to L A T therefore of necessity they must be like, and their sides
proportional by Eucl. lib 6. Prop. 4. and A T bereath that proportion to A L
as O A does to A L of the tryangle O A L, as if within the tryangle A T L you
did set the tryangle A L O you should easily conceive. Or if you turn the
figure vpside down, then shall the working seems all one with that of the
fiftenth Chapter, the Angle A M N being equal to A L O.

Chap. 18.
In case that a Castle or fort were dug out of some rock, or situate in
some valley between two hills, admitting but some narrow coming unto it, and
therefore enforcing your two stations to be one directly behind another. How
yet by this familiar staff you shall attain the distance of the same from you.

FIrst come as near the wall as you can without danger, Of longitu or distance
so that it be not over near, and take your running staff set at his square
angle, and both the wings placed on the hanging side. Apply the extreme of
his leuel side to your eye, carrying him as level as you can, and there look
where about you may place the upper wing to see the top of the wall, but yet
at some even number of fiues or tennes be sure because of after reckoning. The
upper wing so placed to remain fixed, then let your partner and you together
settle your staff a little further or near (his hanging side kept plumbe) till
you may from the extreme of the level side, see the highest part of the wall
or tower even with the said fixed wing. Mark that station on the ground. Then
go back a good quantity, and there choose another station, doing in the very
same manner with the other wing, placing him also fixed at some even ten or
five. Then measure exactly the distance between those two stations: For look
so many times as the even parts or distance between the two wings, are
contained amongst the even parts from the center of the staff to the upper
wing: so many times is the measurement between your two stations contained in
the whole length between your furthest station and the wall.



As for example, admit that the distance between the stations M and N were
twenty pearches, and that at the inner station N you set the one wing, to wit
L at two hundredth perches from D the center of the staff, and there fixed. And
at M the outer station, you set the other wing, that is to say H at an hundredth
and fifty parts. Your stations M and N so chosen, that at N you see the top
of the tower, to wit P, by the visuall line E L P, and at M, by the visuall
line E H P. The number of even parts (by taking an hundredth and fifty out of
two hundredth) I find fifty, between the wings L and H. Now I conclude
because L H that is to say fifty, is four times contained in L D: two
hundredth therefore four times the distance of M N that is, four times twenty
perch is the true distance from M the outermost station unto the tower, to wit,
the length of M R.

Another way is thus, get the altitude of the tower top above the level of
your eye, that is to say of P S by the ninth or tenth Chapter, which had,
reckon the same on the hanging side of your running staff, and thereto set the
wing fixed, admit at H. Then choose you a station as far from the tower as
you think good, admit at N, there direct your staff against the tower as
before, keeping the station N directly under your eye, and your eye no higher
level then S, then move the wing of the level side, that is I to and fro,
till you may by both the sightes I and H, see the top of the tower that is to
say P. Then look how many even parts are between T and D, for so many paces
is the distance from your station at N to the tower.

Note that if there be no wall or tower high enough for the exact working of
this Chapter farrinough off: you may make a shift to it, by two marks of the
wall in latitude, that is to say in the length of the wall: for that the
working by the altitude and latitude is al one, as in the end of the tenth
Chapter was noted, so you can direct your staff square thereto: but if you
happen not to direct him square, you miss so much of your distance to the wall
as makes up the square: as for example. If T P were a wall, and that aiming at
the square, you should direct your staff to the mark W thinking the square to
be there, I say you shall in stead of the distance E W, get the distance E S,
such is the certainty of your cross staff working, which you can not avoid
because of necessity, as in the second Chapter was said In transuersis visni
oredere oportet.

Chap. 19.
How you shall peerforme the 15, Chapter, where the distance of the fort or
castle is very far off, and the ground being uneven with hills, dales and
rocks, has no one level plain sufficient to make two stations for so great
a distance.

IF some valley happen between your first station, and that place where you
would willingly, according to the Of longitu or distance
third note of the 15 Chapter. Plant your second station, as here you see in
this figure described, a deep bottom between the stations P and K. In this
case you shall by a third station made on the plain, whereon the first station
is, viz. at Q. and help of the first, get the distance of the farthest station
K, beyond the said vallie, in such sort, as in the 15. or 17. Chapter is
taught, or as in the next Chap. shall be showed. And so shall you have the
distance of your 2. long statio^s P and K, as exactly as though they were in
one plain to be measured with a line. And by this means, though the valley
be never so deep between your two maine stations P and K, it shall not hinder
you, but that you may at them proceed to get the most exact distance to the
forte or tower, in all respects as in the 15. or 17. Chap. was done, even as
though the ground had been all one planne.

Chap. 20.
If in a night you have secretly gotten with your army near any forte, and
that you would with more speed then in the 15. or 17. Chapter is showed, know
the distance whether you are near enough to plant your ordinance for battery.

NOw comes in the ready use of the running staff, for Of (...) or (...)
which cause I so named him. And in this Chapter rests the sweet use of this
instrument, therefore mark it well. This matter rests wholly upon the
diligent furtherance of many helpers both of men, and horses also, if you will,
according to the proverb, Fit cito per multas praeda petita manus. There is no
more cunning in this, then was in the fifteen Chapter: rather less. But that
you must have diverse to execute it: that is to say, a couple (with horses if
you will) to speed them to the second station, there by help of the runninge
staff, to take the angle of position between the first station, and some
turret of the forte, whiles your self and your partner are as busy at the
first station with your standarde staff, taking the position angle between the
same turret and the second station, which will most speedely be done by the
second means of the 14. Chapter, and fie upon restes or supporters now we
are in have. The whiles also let two other speedily running with a wier
chain, get the exact measure between the two stations: or if the forte be far
off, or the ground vnleuell, it will not be amiss to get the distance between
those two stations by a third station, in manner of the last Chapter. Which
distance either way most exactly gotten, let him that keeps the first station
reckon it on one of the legs of the same standard staff, it is no matter,
which (for now we be in have, we must not be too curious in precepts) and to
the end of that reckoning, let him place the running bolt or sight, fixed with
help of his screwe. And if by this time his partener be not come from his
second station, then let him take a nagge and gallop to meet him, taking
special care that either of them lock their staves fast at the angles of
position before taken, least they should start with this hasty carriage. Now
then when they are met, if he that came from the second station, do but clap
the center of the running staff on the sight pin of the standard before fixed,
guiding it so that his one side cut the center of the standard, extending his
other side cross the standards other leg. Look at that crossing what parts
you find, for the parts on the standard are the distance from your first
station to the forte, and the parts of the running staff, are the distance of
the second station, to the same fort desired, which is so much more then the
standard could do of himself, besides the speed, yet for all your have, the
notes of the 15. Chapter must be regarded. And thus much farther, that you
enlarge the level side of your running staff with the joint piece of the
hanging side taken off, if cause so require.

For example: admit C A B to be the angle of the position, taken by the
standard at the first station, and D E A the angle of position, taken by the
running staff at the second station, and that on the one leg A B of the
standard, the point H, reckoned from A, expresie the distance between the two
stations mesured: there shall the running bolte or sight pin be set, and
thereon the center E, of the running staff A E D his one side, lying even with
the standards leg A B, and cutting his center A, so does the other E D cut
off in the leg A C at D the distance of the tower from the first station. And
in the point D of the side. E D of the running staff cut off by the standards
leg A C, shows the distance of the tower from the second station.

Chap. 21.
If you shall see two fortes of the enemies within view, and would know how
far they are in sonder, and whether there may be passage for an army between
them without danger of shatte from those fortes. Or to get the length and
breadth of any Forte a far off, thereby to gather of what receite the same
forte is. Or to get the width of a river fronting any fort, keeping your self
a far off without danger of shot.

FIrst you shall by the fifteenth, seventeenth, nineteenth, or Of lati
last Chapter, get the several distances of the same fortes from your station
appoincted, seek the one distance in the one leg, the other distaunce in the
other leg of your standerd Staff, and to each set the running sight pins
fixed, then pitching again at the same station, take with your standerd Staff
the angle of position between those fortes by the fourteenth Chapter, and there
wreste him fast to keep that angle sure. Lastly place the center of the
running Staff on one of the said fixed fight pinnes, applying also one of his
sides unto the other sight pin, and the number of that side of the running
Staff, there touching that other sight pin is the distaunce between the two
forts desired. Or you might apply the ioincte piece or any part of the running
Staff between the sight pinnes, but that it is not so easy to rekon as from
the center it is.

In like manner may you get the distaunce between two trees or two towers in
one forte, and thereby get the length or breadth of the same forte, and be able
by that means to descrie of what receipt the same is. Also the breadth of any
river by taking two marks, as trees, bushes, or buildings on each side of the
river one. But you are by this never the near, to know the distance between
two ships on the sea, as other writers and those no small ones, do teach you
by a like precepte arithmeticall, except those ships lie at ancor that they
stir not, yet in the twenty four Chapter following, I shall satisfy you for
that.

For example, admit the distaunce of the one forte found to be five hundred
pase from your station, the other six hundred pase: the first viz. five
hundred I rekon on the one leg of the standerd, there I set the sight
pin viz. at E, the second viz. six hundredth I reckon on the other leg of
the standerd, there I set the other sight pin viz. at D. That done, I take the
angle of position between both those fortes, or rather some two principal
towers of them, which admit to be the angle C A B, there I lock the standerd
Staff, then clapping the center of the running Staff on the sight pin before
fixed at E, I direct his own side unto the other sight pin fixed at D, and
the quantity thereof between D and E, shows me the distaunce between the
two fortes or towers desired. In like manner the distaunce between two trees,
is to be had or between any two marks whatsoever.

This is another manner of working for latitudes then that which the Cross
Staff yields: the manner whereof I noted unto you in the end of the tenth
Chapter.

Chap. 22.
If in a fort or haven on the sea coast, or abroad on the plains on the sea
banckes, you shall see any ships a far off sailing toward you, or any
army approaching by land. How you shall always be provided in such special
places, that in a moment almost and with small help, you shall know how far
they are from you, and by that means speedily find when they shall be commen
within the random or point blancke of your shot.

IN such dangerous times when any assault of an army by Of lo or did
land or of ships by sea is expected against any fort or haven, you shall
appoinct in the same haven or fort two certain towers farthest distant, in
stead of your two stations. Their exact distaunce you shall always have in a
reddinesse gotten by the last chap. Let one of these towers be called the first
station the other the second. In this first tower you shall have always your
standerd ready placed by some kind of steadfast supporter, his one leg
directly on the other tower or station, not to be easily wrested aside from
that position, the other leg next the enemy at liberty. In the second tower let
the running staff be always readily placed in like manner, his one side
steadfastly on the first station, his other side next the enemy at liberty.
Your instruments thus exactly placed, always ready at your two stations, and
the certain distaunce between them foreknowen, your work is at any time
almost performed ere you begin. Let your self at the first station, and some
practizd body at the second, guide the loose legs of your instruments directly
still upon the main top of some principal ship, or foremost Ancient of
the army, and let a third man within a little after he shall perceive both your
eyes laid to your instruments with a trumpet or horn, give a short blast: and
immediately upon the instant of the blast, let both of you lock fast your
instruments at those angles, which angles had and taken both at one instant of
the blast given. Let each of the obseruers come from their towers and bring
their instruments to meet together as speedily as they can, and clapping one
upon another in such manner, as in the 20. chap. was done, you shall there
immediately desery how far that ship or army was off at the blast giving.

But because it may be long ere two can come out of the tops of towers to
meet: besides that, because it is hard bringing such an instrument down
stayers, or letting it down with a rope for fear of sagging or slipping of
the angles taken. Therefore to remedy this, let him that observes in the
first tower, have a spare running staff, besides the standerd staff wherewith
he observes: And let him that gives the blast, be placed near about the
midst between these two station towers. And when the blast is given let him
in the second tower that observes with the running staff, look what degree of
the graduation on the level side of his staff, the graduators Apex does show,
and report it with a loud voice to this middle man: And let him report it
again to the obseruer in the first tower or station, who having the said
spare running staff shall immediately set it by the same degree and minute
reported unto the very same angle that the running staff at the second tower
is at, and therewith work in all respects as before even as though the other
running staff had been brought to him.

But if any man will object, what if there be not two towers in the haven,
then I say it is likely there is but one Church, and that it is a small matter
in such dangerous times to make scaffoldes with boordes on housen tops for
such good purposes.

Also in the very like speedy manner, you may work with a cople of stations
ready pitched on the sea banks: withal you must ever have regard to the
notes of the 15. chap.

Chap. 23.
If an army on the land, or a Navy on the sea, shall be as far off as you
may ken making toward your Fort. To know by help of this Familiar staff: How
fast their gate is, and in what time they shall according to that gate, come
within reach of your shot.

THis matter very little differs from the last chap. For your two staves
being ready planted in their towers or Of m(...) in long(...)
stations as there is showed. First take the distance of the army or Navy, as
far as you can possibly ken them, at a blast or sound given by the middleman,
whose charge shall further be for this purpose to turn up a mynute glass or
two, so soon as he has given his blast, and to keep them running. Then after
a quarter of an hour or 15. mynutes or more or less time as you will, and as
the occasion requires, prepare your selves to take the distance of that navy
or army at another short blast given in the very same manner as before. Now
having gotten the distance of the ship or army this second time: and also
upon report of the middle man how many mynutes were passed between his two
blastes given, you may easily know by the difference of the two distances
taken, how much they be come nearer at this second blast then they were at the
first, for so much do they sail or come on in so many mynutes, and according
to that rate you may easily cast how much they sail in an hour, and
consequently how many hours or mynutes it will be, if holding on their way
they approach you, and in how many mynutes they will be within the random or
poinct blancke of any great piece, and rather then to be deceived least the
wind or state of the seas should alter, you ma^y make more trials ere they
come near that.

But in stead of mynute glasses, which as they say, they use at the sea, I
should like better of a clock or watch that should turn the hand quite round
about the dyall every hour to show the exact mynute I have seen such ready
made.

Chap. 24.
If standing on the sea bancks, you see your ship of war at the sea pursuing
another ship of the enemy, to know how far by help of this Familliar Staff,
and how much the one gets of the other in sailing, whether he be like to
overtake the enemy, and in what time.

THis matter differs little from the working of the last Of motion both in
lo^gitude and latitude.
Chapter, only it asks more help. For you had need to have at the first
tower or station three standerd staves, and four obseruors, and at the second
tower or station two running staves, and two obseruors all ready pitched and
placed, as in the two and twenty Chapter was taught, in such sort, that one
pair, that is to say, one standerd Staff, and one running Staff do wholly
attend upon your ship, the other payr upon the enemies ship, and the odd
standard Staff to attend them both, by help of two obseruors, to keep
always the angle of position between the two ships, and al of them to lock
fast their angles at the instante of a blast given, and then by the two and
twenty Chapter to get the distaunce of either ship from you, and by the one
and twenty, and help of the angle of position, the distaunce of either ship
from other at the time of the blaste. Then after a quarter of an hour or
certain minutes complete, they must al to work again by warning of a second
blaste, as well for the distances of each ship from you, as of one of them
from the other. Then comparing the differences of each kind together, you have
by the one (that is to say) by their several distances from your station in
that number of minutes, as were between the two blastes given, the certainty
of each of their gates, in so much time by the last Chapter, and by the two
several distances of each ship from other at both times, you may by taking
the bigger out of the lesser, know how much the one ship has either gotten or
lost of the other, and according to that rate of time, cast how soon the one
shall overtake the other, if the wind and state of the seas alter not, or they
alter not their course. For which cause you shall make some more trialles in
the very like manner as often as you shall think good.

Chap. 25.
Your self planted on the top of an high rock, clift, or tower, by the sea
side. To know by this Familliar Staff how deep the level of the water is
under you.

IT is most common upon the sea coaste to have high rocky Of pro(...)dity.
cliftes. If therefore you would from the top of any such know how deep
directly under you, that the level of the water is, you shall espy some mark
in the bottom of the sea bancks or next clifte, even with the edge of the
water the nearest unto you that you can espy. But if there be none near
enough, then let some ship be let purposely at ancor nere unto you, the
distaunce of which ship, you shall get by two pretty stationes, such as the
top of the rock may yielde by the fifteenth or seventeenth Chapter. Or if
the rock or clifte be so stiepe and sharp, that it yield you not station
enough on the top, see then if you can discene to some lower part of the
rock for a second station, or any way by any rule in this book, help your
self to the distaunce of the ship from your station on the hill top. Which
had, take your standerd staff, and let him at a true square angle by help of
your running Staff: there lock or wreste him fast that he start not from his
square, Then place him so, that his one leg be level or parallel to the
horrizon, the other perpendiculer set by a plumme line, his center over your
station. Your standerd so placed, then your partner and you directing the
level leg toward the ship or mark: you shall between you move the
running sight pinnes of both legs to and fro in such sort, till by them you
see the said mark or ship where she lies at ancor, there wreste the sight
pinnes fast. Then set the center of the running Staff on the sight pin of
the level leg, directing his one side to the middle or center of the other
sight pin, his other side even with the center of the standerd. There lock the
running Staff fast at that angle, and mark what number of the running Staff
is there cut off by the center of the sight pin. For if that be equal to the
distaunce of the ship or mark before gotten, then does that sight pin
show your desire, if otherwise then move the running Staff fast locked at the
said angle to and fro, the center of the standerde by help of the sight pin
whercan he rides, until there be cut off in the said side of the runninge
Staff, the exact distaunce of the said ship or mark before found. And then
shall the point of cutting show you on the standerd the very height of your
eye above the level of the water desired.

This matter would have an example. Admit first on the cliste A, whose depth
to the level of the water is A B, that you find the distaunce from your eye
on the top of the clifte, to the ship set from you at ancker one hundredth
twenty perches, viz. I C, and having set up your standerd Staff, viz. O V I
fast lockte to his square angle, his one leg viz. IV, perpendiculer, his
other viz. O V level, his center V over the station, viz. A as before is
said, then by removing his sight pinnes to such two places, viz to I and O,
that by your eye you find the ship directly in one line by them both, viz.
in the line I O C, and that the sight pin in the perpendiculer leg, viz. I
do show 100. parts, the other in the level leg three hundredth parts. Now
take your running Staff and set the center thereof on the sight pin O,
and direct his own side unto I, and his other side even with the center V of
the standerd, and there lock him fast at that angle. And if now you find on
the running Staff between O and I the just number of the distaunce I C, viz
one hundredth twentye, then does I V show the exact number of perches of I B
desired. But in very deed you shall find between I and O, three hundredth
sixteen or thereabouts, which is more then one hundredth twenty. Therefore you
shall move the sight pin O, together with the running Staff inwards toward V,
until such time as you find but just one hundredth and twenty between I and
O, and then shall you have but thirty eight just between I and V, your desire.
For thereby I conclude that the depth from I to B is thyrty eyghtperches.

This Chapter seems more painful at the first show, then it will be when it
is rightly understood, and that you have made experience thereof by an example
or two the best is, it is needful to be done but once for all, in any one
place.

Chap. 26.
If a Gunner keep a block house, or have a piece or two of Ordinance planted
on the top of some very high clifte by the sea side. How by this Familliar
Staff he him self without any help at all, shall most easily and speedily in
a moment get the distaunce of any ship at the sea, making toward him or
passing along, and that most exact, for so far as the random of any great
piece will extend.

Truly this Chapter on such cliftes and places on the sea Of longitude or
distance from an high.
cost, which are very high above the water (as many such there are) is the
most necessary and ready for a gunne of all the rest. But if it be not high
above the sea, it is least worth: And the higher, so much it is the better for
this purpose, and also for the Gunner, as it should seem unto me by Tartaglia
who says in his first book, second Colloquy, that a piece either mounted or
embased from the leuel of the Horizon shoots with more force and further,
then it will, being shot level. The chief substance of our practice in this,
consists in the exact finding of the level of the water under your station
on the clifte top: For which cause I promised the last Chapter. Whereas
others have left it very absurdly to be done with a line and plummet of lead
let down from the clift top: as though every clift or any clift almost would
admit such palpable facillitie.

Well, to the purpose. In such a set place you shall have always your station
ready prepared, with the depth of the level of the water known by help of
the last Chapter: and there your standard settled at his square angle, and
always ready pitched in manner of the last Chapter, on some such rest that he
may speedely be turned which way soever any ship comes, keeping him self
still plumbe and level, the sight pin of the perpendiculer side, fixed fast
with his scrue at the even part, answering the hight of your station above the
water, your standard staff thus always set in a readiness, your work is
done in manner ere you begin. For so soon as you espy any ship making
near to your cost, direct the extreme of the level leg of the standard to
the ship, and clap on the center of your running staff, to ride on the fired
sight pin of the hanging leg, and there lifting up or down the one side of
the running staff close by the said level leg directed to the ship,
until by the sight pegges of that side of the running staff you see the
ship. Then shall the even part of that side of the running staff, cut by the
level leg of the standerd, be the distaunce of the ship desired, al which
by this figure you may perceive.



A the station on the clifte N VI, the standerd Staff always ready placed
thereon his leuel leg V N directed to the ship G approaching, I the sight of
the standerds hanging leg, whereon the center of the running Staff is placed,
whose one side I N, directed close by the standerds leg V N to the bottom of
the ship, G is cut off by V N at N. Thereby I conclude that the even parts
between I and N shows the distaunce from your eye to the ship viz. I G
desired.

Note that the other side of the running Staff is to no use in this practice.
And one thing more I thought good to warn you off, that in placing of your
sight pin I, you have a care of the rising or falling of the level of the
water by reason of the tides. For which cause, you had need to have some
special marks purposely set in the bottom of the next clifte or sea
bancks, by which you may at any time gather how much the water is risen, or
fallen, and according to that rising or falling you must fix the sight put I
higher or lower when you begin your work.

Note that this Chapter and the last also, might as well have been performed
in manner of the twelfth Chapter, by turning the extreme of the hanging side
of the staff downwards if the place do admit, and happily that course may
seem the more familiar, and propper way for profundities although both come to
one pass.

Chap. 27.
If a man were prisoner with the enemy, how being in the top of a tower on the
leads, or out of his prison window, he might by this Familliar Staff know the
depth to the ground, to see if he were able with any device to let himself
down without danger.

FOr this purpose, yea, or almost any precept of altitudes, an instrument of
ten inches long, is as good as one of ten foot, Of profundity.
and such a one a man might privily have conveyed unto him, and easily wild it
in a chamber. You shall out at a window by the eighteenth Chapter, or from the
top of the leads, by the fifteenth or seuenteeth chapter, get the direct
distance from you of some tower next yours, which suppose were XC, whose base C
you may see out at your window, viz. IX, then place your instrument plum and
level toward that tower XC, in such sort as was done in the last Chapter.
But contrariwise to the last Chapter, place that distance IX, gotten on the
level side at O fixed. Then putting up or down the sight pin of the hanging
side, viz. I, till by it and the sight pin O, you may see the base of that
tower, viz. C, by the usual line IOC. There I say, shall the sight pin I show
you the deapth of the tower XC, viz. from x the level of your eis, unto C the
base, and so high from the ground you may presume that your selse are in that
room where you are prisoner. Let your self down and you can, saving your
neck piece.

Happily this Chapter were more easily performed by turning the hanging side of
the Staff downwards, according to the note in the end of the last Chapter,
because the instrument is small, and may easily rest in the one end.

Chap. 28.
If afort or tower stand upon an high hill how by this Familiar staff, to know
the joint and heights both of the hill and tower.

TO help us for want of a figure, you shall admit that Y Of (...) and (...) of
(...)
were the top of the hill, and base of the tower, and PY the the tower standing
thereon. Which granted. The first thing you shall do, get the distante from
your standing, viz. N, unto the point S level with your eye, directly under
the base of the tower, by the eighteenth Chapter. But if the hill and tower be
far off, then if by the fifteenth or seventeenth Chapter you get the distance
IY, and by discretion take somewhat less then that for the distance IS, a
little error in that longitude will not hurt us for the altitude. This distance
IS any way gotten, you shall reckon the same on the level side of your
running Staff ED directed to the hill, and there set the one wing, viz. I, and
from it direct your usual line to the towers base, viz. to Y, and set the
other wing on the hanging side directly between I and Y at V. I say the number
at V showed by that wing, is the height of the hill desired, viz. of IS, and if
from I you direct your usual line again to the top of the tower on the hill,
viz. to P. Then shall the wing on the hanging side cut at H, where again you
shall have the whole height both of tower and hill viz. of PS, and the distance
between H and V shows the height of the tower PY several.

Chap. 29.
If being at the sea, you would cast ancor as near some fort or harbor, as
you might be free from reach of their shot, how by this Familiar Staff you
shall exactlie get the distance thereof, of the distance of any other ship
from your ship, being both fleeting at once upon the wild sea.

THis is the most curious matter which we had to deal withal, and as
slightly dealt in by other writers, whose whole device hitherto, has been to
look from the top of the ship wherein they are, unto the bottom of the other
ship, performing it after the same reason that in my 26. Chapter is showed. For
they appoint the known length of the mast of their ship, in stead of the
known height of the clift in that 26 Chapter. And to make the matter seem of
more account, they call this a distance gotten at one station. A goodly thing:
as who says that the square angle, which they imagine at the bottom of the
maste, and the length of the mast known, is not in all respects a second
station, as it were ready, made to their hand. Let me always have a
reentangled triangle to deal with, and I will never ask you but one such
station, for all that I have before written. But now look yet nearer unto the
matter, and though the ground of this their working is infallible, yet see to
how small purpose, and in manner absurd, their precept is in this. For if (as
in the fourth note of the foureteenth Chapter I showed) the second ship be
distant above ten or twelve masts length, their working is of small account,
even on plain ground: but then consider the tottering of the ship on the
water, they shall be forced for want of steady taking of the angle even
totalliter errare. For which causes I cannot content my self to deliver this
matter so slightly, as that I think it to any purpose to be done in any
ship, but rather by help of two ships, or in a calm one ship and help of
the cockbote. Let both those ships be grapled or linked together with a strong
rope or cable, and let sailers and sternes men, keep the ship with side winds,
and laboring the ruthers or stearnes at the full length of the rope, facing
the fort, harborow, or other ship, whose distance you seek, and at the two
ends of those two ships farthest distant, let the standard staff Here should
stand the picture that is in the 27. Chapter.

in the one, and the running staff, in the other, be placed with two
obseruors to each staff, to take the angle of position, after the second
manner of the foureteenth Chapter, between the said forte and his fellow
obseruors, in the other ship suddenly at a blast given, as was done in the 22.
Chapter, there locking fast their instruments, and hasting by haling in the
ships to bring them together, they shall descrie the distance to the forte
desired, in such sort as in the 20. or 22. Chapter was done, or without haling
the ships together by reporting the angle taken one to another, and help of a
spare running staff, as in the end of the said 22. Chapter is showed. For the
length of the cable and both ships known, yeldeth the distance between your
two stations.

And for the more speedy and sure taking of those angles, let each pair of
obseruors hang a very white cloth under the center of their instruments. In
this figure H and G are the two ships linked together with a cable rope, and F
is a ship at sea, whose distance they seek.

Note that if a man be so straight driven, that he has no help but one bare
ship, then let him do it in the very like manner, placing his obseruors at
both ends of the ship, as far of as may be, which shall perform his desire:
much more certain then from the top of the mast. And if any man would do it
from the mast, then let him take the angle down to the bottom of the ship
with a sea Astrolabe, and after set his running staff to the same angle, and
his standard staff to a square angle, and then perform it in manner of the
sieve and twenteth Chapter.

Chap. 30.
How by this familiar staff to carry the leuel of one place to any other,
necessary for such as shall undermine afort, to know always how deep they
are: or for such as would try whether waters may be brought from one place to
fortisie another.

THis matter is very easy, requiring more diligence then skill. For if you
set the level side of your staff leuel with the Horizon, by help of a plumme
line, and having a couple of assistants to carry two poles before you, with
bright marks sliding up and down on them. Then all the matter consists in
the diligent noting of the rising or falling of the ground, by help of those
moveable marks carrior from place to place on those poles, until you come to
your ways end: and then shall you compare them together, whether is the greater
of all the risings or all the fallings, each added severally together into a
gross sum: For if they be equal, then the level at the end is equal to
the level at the beginning: if unequal, the^ difference shows the
difference of the rising or sinking accordingly.

And if you should carry the leuelmany miles, to the intent to lead water in a
conduite, then for the fall thereof, you must have also a regard of the
roundnesse of the massy globe of the earth and water. Of which I shall at some
other time more at large signify.

Chap. 31.
How by help of this familliar Staff, you shall carry a mine under the
ground, and set barrells of gunpowder directlye under any tower or thief
place of any castle or forte.

THis is no rare matter neither hard to perform. First get the exact
distaunce to the same tower from the place where you mean to begin your mine,
by the fifteenth, seventeenth, or twenty Chapter. Then sincke your self into
the ground at the mouth of the mine, as much under as you think meet, and
there by two plumlines from above pitched directly upon the middle of the
tower, set the level side of your running Staff under ground directly upon
the tower, by which direction you shall carry your mine straight till you come
almost there. And if you be hindered that you can not dig straight in any
place, by means of some rock make a square, return by direction of your
Staff, till you are past the same rock, and you must of necessity when you
come almost there, make two or three square retournes out of the way, and still
bring your self to your direct way again, to the end to stay the force of the
powder for issuing directly back out of the oven or cave closed up, thereby
hindering his exploite. So keeping your note book certainly of your goings
aside out of the direct way, you may by the like square angles return again
just as much unto the same, and then proceed direct again. And also keeping
notes how you go either shallow or deep, in manner of the last Chapter, you
shall at the last both know when you are gone so far as the distance first
taken above ground amounted to: and also how deep or shallow you are from the
bottom of the tower to be blown up.

Chap. 32.
How a Captain may by this familiar staff, set in platte or map any
province of the enemies country.

THis matter is all ready handled of many writers to be don by the circle,
quadrante, or cross Staff, but specially by the circle, and is in our
English tongue published by diverse namely, Master Digges, William Boorne,
Master L^^^r, and others, unto whom I therefore refer you for the
circumstaunce, because they shall not be idle the whiles. Only thus much I
thought good to note unto you, that look what angles of position they take by
their cyrcle, the same may you and your partner more speedily take by the
second manner of the foreteenth Chapter, and your running Staff, and note the
degrees of every angle or position in a book or tables as they do. And when
you have those angles noted, and would reduce them into map, if you can not
otherwise more readily do it, then take pains in such manner as they teach,
by help of that small cyrcle, which they call, and fitly a protuactor, in the
mean while till I may have a wished time to write of this my Instrument more at
large. Then will I teach you to lay a side your detractor, and show you more
knacks then I dare at this time to name or make promise of for my own quiet
sake, least I should be by some importimacyes interrupted from the second
part of my Jewel, which I would most gladly bring forth with as convenient
speed as may be.

An Appendix of the author, touching some alteration of this Familliar Staff.
Having on the four and twentieth of January last, presented the copy of this
small treatise in written hand, together with ye Staff, framed in such manner,
as in the third and fourth Chapter is showed. It pleased his Honor within two
days after, to see trial of some of the conclusions in Green which park.
Upon the good liking whereof, his H. showed the same to diverse, both Noble,
Hondrable, and worshipful, in the Court: and withal delivered me again the
written copy, as a thing which he thought more meet to be made public, for
the benefit of his country, then to be referued to his own private use. But
I well nowd that the general opinion of the greater number of best judgment,
was, to have him made in two several staves, in such manner as in the end of
the third or fourth Chapter I noted, thereby to have them both of a more
convenient tractable quantity. Which I more willingly consent unto, because I
find some want of a third slippinge rule in the sta^derd Staff, like unto
the graduator of the running Staff, to keep him sure and steadfast in working:
which after the first fabrication may not be well conucied.

But now if she shall like of this alteration of our Staff: there are also
many things of the third and fourth Chapter to be quite altered.

The first is, that you have two several channells in the hollownesse of your
Staff, the undermost for the graduator, and the bolte leading his apex to and
fro: the vppermoste for the running bolts that must carry your sight pinnes to
and fro, which bolts shall also now have your wings or broad sights of brass
(appointed to the running Staff) so annexed unto them, that they may fold or
shut into the Staff, when you carry it. Secondly the graduators of these
several staves shall have no manner of degrees or graduation upon them except
you list.

Thirdly there shall be no ioincte piece like unto G F to be taken off and
on, but both legs shall be whole and sound quite through.

Fourthly, whereas the chiefest cause of the ioincte piece G F was in respect
to be taken off, when the running Staff was to be used for the leueling or
mounting of a piece of ordinunce, in manner of the sixth Chapter. We shall
supply that use (though both legs of the Staff be whole) by setting the
gunners points on the level side D E, by help of a quadrant, described on the
point G, as in the fourth Chapter you did set them on the graduator G H, by
help of a quadrant described on the point D. the Saffe standing still at his
square angle. Orels (which I think better) you may set the Staff unto the
angle of forty five degrees, and there fasten him, and then on N describe a
quadrante, and thereby set on, either the twelfth gunners points, or the 90.
degrees on the side D E as before, and so shall a line drawn from G to the
middle point of the twelfth, be perpendiculer to D E: for which cause you
shall now number them, from that middle point, but unto six on either side,
because the one half of these twelve points, shall now serve for mounting a
piece unto the sixth poincte, which as Tartaglia stteth down is the furthest
random, the other half serves for embasing your piece unto the sixth point,
under the level or point blancke, in all respects to be used as in the sixth
Chapter is showed, saving that now the hanging side D G F must be turned
upwards, which there was turned downwards, and the angle F D E set at the
angle of forty five degrees, which there was set at the square angle.

Note that if you ^^ste, you may set the points of mounting, beyond the sea
point, as far as the length of the side D E will extend.

Touching the proportion and the timber fit for this Staff.
I Thought it not amiss to note, that making your Instrument into two several
Staves, the fittest proportion that I like, is, that each leg of your Staff
be five or six feet in length, one inche bread, and one inche and an half
thick to receive the channells.

The one channel for the graduator to be shut into, off, half inche wide,
the other for the bolts of the running sights, to slip to and fro in: of one
quarter of in inche wide, and the three cheeks enclosing these two channels,
to be each one quarter inche thick: so is your whole inch and half thicknes
bestowed.

Now for him that will bestow cost, let each of these legs be made of five
rule pieces, that is tosay, three, to serve for the said three cheeks, which
must be of pear tree or plum tree, as well for tough strength, as to receive
the grauinge, the other two pieces serve to fill up or back the channelles
which must be of Cedar, or some such very light and strong wood, to the end
your Staff be not over heavy. Also for a Captain it may be fashioned, out to
a sharp point above the iointe (not much unlike the number of a pair of
common fire tongs) to the end, toreceaue thereon the head of a pike or leading
Staff.

Or if any man will bestow somewhat less cost, then let each leg be made
but of three rule pieces, and have but one channel, the two out sides of pear
tree; the middlemost of ceader as before. But then he must have some forecast,
that the boltes for his running sight pins, and the bolt that leads the
graduators apex to and fro, may all run and work their wills in that one
channel, which I know may be done.

Lastly, for the common sort that will bestow little cost, let each leg be made
but of one piece, keeping the former breadth and thickness, and let the
channel or channels be cut out of the whole wood, but then make him not over
long, least he sagge. For assure your self, the more pieces he is made of,
the stronger he is from sagging, and the surer from warping. And howsoever he
be made, let him at the least be brought to an eight square, or rounded, for
the more pleasant handling.

To conclude, any thing here set down for have without figures, that may not
bewell conceived or gathered by the premises, my self will be most ready to
give directions for, upon any small request. I shall easily be heard of about
master Treasurers lodging in the Court, or at Swallowfield by Reading, where I
dwell. There dwells a very arteficiall workman in Hosier lane, called John
Read, who can further you, whose help I have used about one or two of these
staves.

Touching Marine causes.
AMongst many that took view of my Familliar Staff at the Court, the right
noble and wopshipfull Knight, Sir George Carew, Knight Marshall of England, and
chief Captain of the I Will of Wight, took no small notice of his necessary
parts, and requited me instantly to apply him as well for the use of the sea,
as I had don for the land: which amongst a number of other Astronomicall and
Geometrical conclusions, I meant to have reserved for ny second edition. But
yet to satisfy his Worthiness and others of like affection: let it be known,
that for taking the altitude of the Sun, Moon, or Star. If you put a short
pegge into the center of your Staff, and rest the same peg on the very utter
corner of your eye, and then open the legs of your staff, until (with your
eye so rested on the same peg, and your other eye closed) you see by the one
leg or his sight pin, the brim or parting of the sea from the element: by the
other leg, the Sun, Moon, or Star desired, there shall the graduators apex
show you, among the degrees or graduation of the Staff, the altitude desired.

Note that your Staff being shut almost close, you may by a thread fastened to
the Apex, pull the Staff open it pleasure.

Then for taking the distance of two Stars or Planets, which as I take it, is
a second matter used at sea. You cannot possibly (as I gather) do it better by
the Cross staff it self, the^ you and your partner may do it, after the
second manner of the fourteenth Chapter before.

I could also show you means, by applying the extreme of the level side to
your eye, and pulling the graduators apex toward you, how you might take the
altitude or distance of stars by sinking of the hanging side, by little and
little from the square angle, in mae^er, Cross staff wise: but these things,
with a number other^^r have I let pass, presuming that the ingenious will
easily find the^ out of themselves.

To make a final end, if for these Marine causes you make my staff no longer,
then their common Cross staves are, I see no cause, but it is as ready, and
my be handled with as much facility as their Cross staff. And if yet there
remain any doubt or defect, I make no doubt, but upon aduertisements thereof
to supply it.

Farewell my Familliar Staff, commend me to mine old acquaintance Richard
Stockwel, Gumer of the I Will of Gernsie, if thou meet him, tell him thou art
priuided to satisfy him of al our communication had at Greyes this last
Summer, and let him lodge thee in the stored shrine of all his pretty conceits.

FINIS.

