A DISPROOFE OF D. ABBOTS COVNTERPROOFE AGAINST D. BISHOPS REPROOF of the
defense of M. Perkins reformed Catholic. THE FIRST PART. wherein the now Roman
church is maintained to be the true ancient Catholic church, and is cleared
from the unjust imputation of Donatisme. where is also briefly handled, whether
every Christian can be saved in his own religion. BY W. B. P. AND D. IN
DIVINITY.

Ex Augustino con. epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 1. Cum non desinant fremere ad
dominici gregis caulas, atque ad diripiendas tanto pretio redemptas oues,
aditum vndique rimari, commune nobis est, etc. pestilentibus and infidiantibus
eorum scriptis, medentia and munientia scripta praetendere: quibus rabies qua
furunt aut etiam ipsa sanetur, aut a laedendis alijs repellatur. AT PARIS,
Printed by CLAVDI MORELL. M.DC.XIV.

CVM huius libri Auctor nobis infra scriptis de fide and eruditione sit probe
cognitus, alijque and S. Theologiae and linguae Anglicanae periti contestati
sint, nihil in eo contineri, quod non sit Catholicae fidei and pietati
consentaneum, ex ipsorum fidecensemus eundem vtiliter excudi and publicari
posse.

MICHAEL AVBRY. NICOLAVS ISEMBERT. Doctores Sorbonici. Idem ex propria scientia
Testor ANTHONIVS CHAMPNEVS, Doctor item Sorbonicus.

To fill up this spare room, I set this sentence of S. Austins against the
Donatist Petilian that it may be added unto the resemblances between the
Donatists and the Protestants touched in this book page 364. l. 3. c. 40 co.
lit. pet.


Then he went on with a slanderous tongue in the dispraise of Monasteries and
Monks, blaming me also, that I had instituted that kind of life. Of which
manner of life either he is utterly ignorant, or rather he faynes himself
ignorant of that which is famouslie known all the world over. Observe, that it
is a Donatisticall trick, to inveigh against religious houses, and religious
persons, by the Protestants revived and much augmented.

ILLVSTRISSIMO ET REVERENDISSIMO S. R. E. CARDINALI, D. D. Francisco de
Ioyeuse, Episcopo Ostiensi, and Sacri Cardinalium Collegij Decano, Guilielmus
Bishop Anglus, aeternam foelicitatem.
CVM amplissimo ac nobilissimo Clero Gallicano nos plurimum debere, and
agnoscamus ingenue and perlibenter praedicemus, quod nos Anglos (patria quidem
religionis Catholicae ergo pulsos, and eiusdem defendendae causa I arisus
collectos) annua sua pensione subleuare atque cohonestare voluerint; tum
vestram certe illustriss. dignitatem [quae summum inter illos locum merito iure
obtinet] singulari quadam beneuolentia complecti, eximio etiam honor prosequi,
quam aequissimum esse censent omnes.

Hinc factum est, vt interim dum opus Latin elaboratum paremus (quod omnibus
quoquo modo possit inseruire) libellum hunc Anglicana lingua conscriptum,
Celsitudini vestrae dedicarem; quo appareret nos tempus non conterere otio, sed
aliquid in singulos dies meditari, quod publicum Catholicae Ecclesiae bonum
promoueat. Si vero initium a charissima nobis patria ducamus, quo and
parentibus simul prodesse poterimus, nemo aequus rerum aestimator [vti
speramus] id aegre feret: nec vulgarem (certescio) Galliae vestrae afferret vel
voluptate, veletiam commoditatem, si Anglia nostra ad Catholicam religionem,
dei praepotentis gratia reduceretur.

Praeterea, praecipuus huius libelli scopus hic est, summi Pontificis and
Sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae integritatem, dignitatem, auctoritatem a
maleuolis aduersariorum calumnijs and obtrectationibus non tueri modo and
conseruare, sed eandem etiam nonnullis, e sacris literis and sanctorum patrum
monumentis petitis argumentis, illustrare atque propugnare: cui igitur potius
opuscalum hoc inscribendum fuit, quam eiusdem S. R. E. lumini splendissimo,
firmissimoque columini? qui Illustrissimum esse Cardinalem (quae in ecclesia
clarissima est dignitas) pro paruo ducere possit, cum celeberrimi, sanctissimi,
and totius orbis terrarum supremi illius Senatus, primum etiam locum obtineat
Decanus dignissimus. Nec Christianissimi tantum ac amplissimi Galliarum regni,
in Romana curia Protector iamdiu extitit potentissimus; sed and in summi^
Apostolicae sedis cum florentiss. Venetorum statu difficultatibus, mediator
adfuit summus, and veluti moderator gratiosissimus. Adeo vt Catholici omnes non
minus fere Illustrissimae D. vestrae debeant, quod ingruens illud bellum,
Reipub. Christianae periculosissimum sapienter auerterit, quam quod ad
obtinendum totius Ecclesiae Primatum, Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum Paulum Papam
quintum, (primo illo honoris gradu vtique dignissimum) praecipue adiuuerit. Si
igitur aliquid summi Pontificis principatu dignum mea quam exilis industria
elaborare possit [quod sentio quam sit exiguum] digniorem cui illud dicaretur,
D. vestra Illustrissima reperirem neminem.

Huc accedit quod Diaecesi Rhotomagensi (nobis proximae,) sacrosanctus praesis
Archiepiscopus, and in altissimo illo munere administrando tam multa adeo
praeclare gesseris, vt nostros and oculos and animos ad Illustrissimam D.
vestram suspiciendam colendamque attraxerint. Egregia^ vestram in templa,
aliaque pia and loca, and opera magnificentiam, tacitus praeteribo, quia ad
maiora quae disciplinam Ecclesiasticam propius spectant, festino.

Salutem populi ex sacerdotum honestate, scientia and industria dependere
plurimum, nemo est qui nescit. Quam ob causam semmarium vestris fundastis
sumptibus, in quo melioris notae ac indolis iuuenes, ad diuinarum rerum
cognitionem, and morum probitatem recte instituantur, vt boni effecti pastores,
commissum sibi gregem in via mandatorum dei, ad gloriosissimu^ caelorum regnum
faeliciter perducant.

Insuper cum venerabiles ac pios congregationis Oratorij patres spiritu
imprimis feruere, and oratione pollere animaduerteritis, domicilium illis
perquam commodum in Diaecesi vestra collocastis; quo doctrinae lumine and vitae
exemplo, tam eos qui in virtutum stadio decurrunt, vt vehementius current,
incitarent, quam vt illos qui haereticorum retibus irretiti, de via veritatis
aberrant, ad Catholicae Ecclesiae caulas, suis humeris reportarent.

Nec his solum qui in communi vitae genere deo deseruiunt, consuluisse,
singulari vestrae charitati satis fuit, nisi monasterium etiam dotaret, in quod
sanctissimae virgins (quae crucem Christi mundi delitijs anteponentes) sese e
mari hoc procelloso quasi in tranquillum portum reciperent, vt liberius and
before sponso suo caelesti vacare, and pro huius miserrimi saeculi peccatis,
ardentius interpellare possent.

Cum and his qui in saeculo, and illis quae in Claustro sancte viuere stude^t,
a prudente vestra pietate adeo affluenter prouisum sit, an hic tandem fuit
vigilantissimae vestrae curae pastoralis finis? Minime vero. Etenim cum hinc ob
consilij maturitatem, and longam maximarum rerum experientiam prope Regem ad
maxima Reipub. negotia peragenda sedere compellimini, illinc vero propter
senilem infirmitatem, amplissimam vestram prouinciam peragrare, and quomodo se
quisque suo in munere gerat, perlustrare non possetis, adiutorem vobis
elegistis nobilissimum Dominum, D. Franciscum de Harlay, virum omnium virtutum
laud florentem: qui ex illustri ortus familia, inter magnates sane, si
voluisset, sple^dide viuere potuisset: sed ab ineunte aetate saeculi pompis
nuncium remittens, in altissimarum rerum contemplationem, mentem suam tanto
studio, tantaque ingenij foelicitate intendit, vt non in Latinis modo and
Graecis literis, sed and in omni scientiarum genere, tam miros breui tempore
fecerit progressus, vt inter grauissimos Theologos Parisienses iuuenis summa
cum laud professus sit: qui rerum etiam occultarum cognitioni raram quandam
prudentiam coniungens, ad res magnas and sacras eximie gerendas admodum
habeatur idoneus. Hic talis ac tantus iuuenis vestram sustinens personam, ac
grauiore vestro illustratus consilio, gregem vest^um vigilantissime inspiciet,
and omnia quae ab boni Pontificis munus spectare intelligit, prudentissime
administrabit.

Quum igitur prouinciam nobis proximam, ab Illustrissima D. vestra adeo omni ex
part excellenter gubernari perspexerimus, mirum videri non debet si nos, qui
omni proprij Episcopi auxilio penitus destituimur, ad tanti Archiepiscopi
patrocinium confugiamus. Itaque humillime ab Illustrissima vestra Amplitudine
petimus, vt in suam nos clientelam benign admittere; and libellum hunc,
perpetui nostri erga Illustrissimam D. vestram obsequij, quasi arrhabonem
recipere dignetur. Deumque Opt. Max. quotidie rogabimus, vt Illustrissimam D.
vestram ecclesiae suae quam diutissime incolumem conseruet.

Parisiis xxi. Nouembris, Anno Domini 1614.
AN ANSWER UNTO MR ABBOTS EPISTLE DEDICAtorie.
GOOD Christian reader I being prisoner by the gatehouse in westminster, when
Mr. R. Abbots last book entitled, the true ancient Roman Catholic, came
forth against me was you may be sure well enough looked unto for writing then
any reply. Since my enlargement I was a long time occupied partlye in
flanders, partlye in Paris about ordinary business well known to many, so that
I had small respite to read over that which M. Abbots had written against me.
At length coming to have better leisure, (albeit I have never since bin free
from the same care) and not willing to spend my spare time idly, but to set in
hand with some piece of work I was by my grave and understanding frinds
advised, to begin with a confutation of the same book, as coming forth latest,
and being indeed the only book which M. Abbot had labored in defense of himself
against me. I at my loving frinds insta^ce perusing over that book more
diligently, found it fuller of words, tauntes and cauills, tha^ of weighty
and sound matter: and would therefore rather have made choice of some other
book of more importance; not making any great reckning of his untrue
imputations and bitter speeches against my self. because the most honorable
prelates of the primitive Church, and best deserving Doctors (whose books I am
not Worthy to carry after them) writing against bitter and broadmouthed
Heretics, never lightly escaped better cheap: for what these mild hornets
wanted in sound reasonnig, that they were wont to supply in foul railing. My
kind frinds replied, that how little account soever I made of mine own
interest, yet M. Abbot being now grown a man of name, and chosen for the
divinity reader in the famous university of Oxford, that ought not to be
contemned which he and his frinds deemed worthy the print. Besides he
pretends it to be a piece of great price, long premeditated, and esteemed by
him a matter worthy a large treatise, and therefore not to be let pass as a
thing of naught without an answer.

whereupon in part, and withal to justify that in my book which he catches
at as least justifiable belike, (for he does not answer it orderly as it
lies, though it were but a little one, but picketh out certain parcelles) I in
fine resolved to examine briefly the weight and worth of that his book, which
he surnameth a counterproofe, not improperly: because he does in it very
often hunt the counter, (as they say) that is, rather run up and down,
forward and backward, turn this way and that way very idly and
impertinently, then fall to any serious proof, or pursue the points in
question directly.

Notwithstanding I will not deal with M. Abbot after such a hafting and abrupt
manner, as he does with me, by cutting of at the first clapp fowerscore and
eight pages of my small discourse without amy word of auswere thereunto,
mangling also the middle of it, and leaving out a great part of the latter end:
but will begin with him at his Epistle Dedicatory, and thenceforth prosecute it
orderly as it lies, not omitting by the way any matter of moment: though I
mean not to set down his whole text word by word, because that would cost
me more the printing then it is worth by agreat deal, And we here in
banishment have not so much spare money: but the sum and substance of all he
handles, shall be sincerely related, as the judicious and upright Reader, if
he please to confer this my answer with that his book, shall easily
perceive.

Having in few words showed the reasons that moved me to undergo this work,
and the method that I mean to observe therein, without any further preface I
will presently come to M. Abbots Epistle Dedicatorie: in the first entry
whereof he seems to play the triuant and for want either of judgment or of
fitter invention, to fall into a faulty Exordium, by the skillful in that art
called Commune common; which his adverse party may as well (if not better) use
against himself, then he does against his adversary. Neither needs it any
other answer but a plain return of the same words with a very little
alteration. Let us try whether M. Abbots proeme proposed against us, will not
in the judgment of an indifferent Reader serve for us against them: Thus it
begmneth.

Mr. Abbots text turned against his own party. MOST gracious and renowned
prince, such is the malice and fury of Antichrist and his army of priests (as
Gregory calls the^) in oppugning the Religion and faith of Christ, Greg lib.
4. Ep. 38.
as gives cause to us that fight for Christ, to stand continually upon our
guard, and to be ready still in arms, to entertain the assaults, that are
made continually against us.


W. B. THE first staff of this wartier like sentence, because it has in it
the names of Antichrist and Priests, may at the first blush seem to some
protestants to hitt us: but if they please to consider that such Priests
only be touched therein, whom Gregory the great (pope of Rome, and a maine
pillar of the Roman faith) does condemn: they shall discover presently those
to be either runnagate Priests, such as were Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza,
Jewel, fox, and the like turne-coates; or else counterfeit and bastard
priests, whom in England men call Ministers; of which false and wicked
priests both sorts are in Gregory's judgment the sworn soldiers (not of
the Pope of Rome a feyned Antichrist) but of that great and open Enemy of
Jesus Christ, that shall in the latter end of the world be revealed, as for
many other their enormous and blasphemous opinions, so namely for their
inueterate malice and obstinate rebellion against the Church of Rome, whereof S.
Gregory was both an illustrious Doctor and chief Governor: All which being
most perspicuous and clear, the whole periode (laying M. Abbots malice and
fury aside) runs roundly for us against him and his fellow Ministers.


To the second.R. AB. THey carry themselves now toward us more eagerly and
angerly, for that they see themselves deceived of the prey which they long
hoped for, imagining by this time out of the troubled, waters of this state, to
have fished some what for advantage to themselves.


W. B. THE former part of this sentence ca^ ill be applied unto poor and
afflicted Catholics, who carry themselves neither angerly nor eagerly, but
with all submission, by long patience and modest behavior seeking to mitigate
the exasperate minds of their persecutors, and to move co^passio^ in others
more pitiful over the manifold unspeakable miseries which for so many
years they have endured. It touches indeed to the quick some malitiouse
restles Ministers, and others over spiteful and busy Officers, who year by
year, month, by month, nay day by day carry themselves so eagerly and
a^gerlie toward all sorts of Catholics, me^ women and Children: that even
many of the milder sort of Protestants themselves, are astonished at their
barbarous in humanity and insatiable cruelty. Albeit we cannot but feel
exceedinge great grief through this long toedious and bitter persecution: yet
some comfort we may pike even out of the extreme eagernes thereof: because it
is one good sign that it will not last long for this is by the spirit of God
noted of that peerles persecutor in the revelations: having great wrath, Apoc
12. v. 12.
knowing that he had but a little time: which is as much to say, as the
greater and more eager their anger is, the sooner shall it by gods sweet
providence have an end. And surely me thinks their own experience should
assure them (were they not wonderfully transported with passion) that how
eagerly or angerlie so ever they seek the extirpation of the Catholic faith
out of our country (which is the prey they have so many years greedily
hu^ted after, and with all wit of man labored to catch) yet they shall never
be able to compass it, let them trouble the waters of life, as far forth as
God will give them leave. for they cannot but see to their small comfort, that
not withstanding all their severe laws, and grievous executions of them
against Catholics, their number by Gods mighty hand does daily increase and
multiply. And many Priests are more ready to offer their lives in that holy
quarrel, then their persecutors willing to put them to death therefore. That
dark speech of M. Abbot, of fishing for advantage in troubled waters, does
most properly appartaine unto Protestants, who have taken the opportunity of
garboiles and civil wars, to plant the Ungracious graft of their fruitless
Gospel in most countries of Europe, where it has gotten any root. see
concerning this point the discourses of Florimond Reymond a very noble french
writer of this age. Let us return to M. Abbots text turned against his own
party.


R. AB. Veuel 12.15.
Which expectation being by the mercy of God wholy frustrat they imitate the
Dragon in the revelation, casting out of their mouths calumniations and
slanders, and all outrage and importunity of malicious contradictions, even
floods of water to carry away violenly and to drown (if it were possible)
the woman, even the Church of Christ amongst us, that have escaped their
cruel and bloody hands.


W. B. VVo sees not how plainly these words do paint to the life M. Abbot
and his pew fellows, who are the only men that by fraudulent persuasion, and
violent persecution do the uttermost that lies in them, if not by drowning,
yet by hanging and quartering, and casting into dark and stinking dungeons, to
carry away violently those poor Priests and Catholics, that have as yet
escaped their cruel and bloody hands: for when M. Abbot or any other
Protestant of our Country of his age, were in the cruel and bloody hands of
the Papists, neither he nor they I trow do remember; for if any such thing
were, it must needs be before they were borne. And if tart venomous speeches,
and most deadly calumniations do transform men into Dragons; who more sib to
a serpent then M R. Abbot, who poisoneth his papers with heaps of most noisome
and loathsome corruption. Take a taste of him in this very Epistle, which benig
dedicated unto so high and mighty a Prince, it imported him much to have made
some show at least of a modest Divines spirit: but he seems so full gorged of
such cancred putrefaction, that he could not hold it in or dissemble it,
before you heard, the malice and fury of Antichrist and his priests: here we
are resembled to a dragon casting up calummations, malicious contradictions,
floudes of waters, all outrage: their cruel and bloody hands: afterward,
disgorg the veno and poison of his wicked and corrupt heart: his deceitful
and traitorous attempt; his impostures, drunkenness, vvilfull railing: he runs
on me furiously* like an ungracious thief at the bar he impudently cries
out; desperately bent to pervert, to forge, to face; utter ruin and confusion
of the great Capitolian priest, we believe that god will give strength to your
arm, and give Edge to your svvord to strike through the loins of all them
that are the supporters of that Antichristian and wicked state. is it not time
to stay here? does not this Minister strive I will not say to imitate, but
to outflie that fell Dragon whereof he speaks? comes there not out of his
mouth rather flashes of fire, the^ floods of water, that fears not to set
down in print, that he thirsts after the blood of all Catholics: and
prays to his God Mars I ween (for unto the God of mercies no Christian heart
ca^ so pray) that he will give strength to his princes sword to strike
through the loins of all (note that a few will not serve his turn) that are
supporters of the Catholic Roman faith: for all them he reputeth to be
contained within the state of Antichrist. Virum sanguinum and dolosum
abominabitur Dominus, a blood thirsty and deceifull man our lord does abhor.
God send you gentle sir a little more Charity. It follows in your text which
will very currantlie serve against your self.


R. AB. IN vhich service of Antichrist M. ABBOT our countryman has very
industriously done his part, M. Bishop.
and has labored if not to excel, yet to equal almost any of his fellows
in the subverting of the wayvvard, and in animating of men to obstinacy
against the truth of God: who having to the kings most excellent majesty
disgorged against us the venomed poison of his wicked and corrupt heart, and
being by me duly chastised for his disloyal and traitorous attempt (to delude
by false suggestions his liege and souareigne lord) seeing his impostures and
frauds most plainly discovered and laid open, has added dronkennes to his
thirst, and sought to fill up the measure of his former iniquity, by vvilfull
railing at those things which he knows to be true. And having no other
way to revenge the impeaching of his credit (greatly touched as he conceived
by the answering of his book) has in a latter book run upon me furiously,
and laden me (as much as in him lies) with odious imputations of abusing,
falsifying, misconstruing and misapplying both scriptures and fathers, like the
ungracious thief at the bar, who convicted by most clear and apparent
evidence, yet still impudently cries out that all is false, etc.


W. B. HItherto are M. Abbots words, with the only change of my name into
his, which every man that has seen what books passed between us, can witness
how fitly they may be returned upon himself. for in his answer to my Epistle
to his Majesty, he does bitterly inveigh against me, and goes about by very
untrue suggestions to abuse his highness. which I partly discovering in my
book called the reproof, he seeking to uphold his credit much impeached (as
he thought) there by, has since surcharged me with more odious imputations.
True it is that neither he nor I do come near unto many other writers of
this age on both sides: though I keeping the tenor of his own words, (which do
attribute unto me much more then I deserve,) do signify that he laboreth to
equal almost any of his fellows; always excepting the uncivil rudenes of
his style, which is much more cancred then becomes the Candor of a Divine. but
if that be the natural and incureable malady of the fervent hot spirit in the
new turmoiling Gospel, all mild and sweet peacible natures will assuredly in
short time learn to abhor it.

whereas M. Abbot charge me to have endeavored to delude my sovereign by
false suggestions, all upright co^scie^ces will judge that he rather has so
done then I, if it shall please them to take to their considerations but this
one inducement. M. Abbot in his first book did burden me with the same
crime, to which I returned him in print this Answer. I vvish very heartily that
you could and would obtain of his majesty, that we both in person might
appear before his highness, there to justify whether of us had sought to
abuse his Majesty by lies, and by pretending antiquity for those things
which by antiquity were condemned. I to show the assurance I had in the truth
of my allegations, and in the vprightnes of the Catholic cause, having
publicly made this earnest request unto M. Abbot: it being my hap afterward to
fall into his brothers hands, and by him to be laid up in prison, where M.
Abbot might have spoken with me at his pleasure and leisure; should not he
then at the least, if he had had any confidence in the goodness of his cause,
have confronted me, and convinced me of some of the pretended falshoodes,
whereof he had accused me? He cannot say that he knew not of it, or had not
sufficient time to think of the matter: for I was holden there in expectation
eleven months; during which space he was once at London that I heard of, and
had leisure to go to a Readers feast, but small devotion (as it seems) to
visit a poor prisoner, and less affection to come to a conference about those
allegations and reasons: which though he had cuningly patched together, and
gilded over goodly: yet his own conscience told him, that they would not abide
the hammering of an equal conference: they might serve to deceive the simple,
but would not hold weight in the balla^ce of a learned Disputation. wherefore he
had reason to think it better policy to avoid that trial, which might
perhaps have turned to his further shame. yea his Majesty of his own grations
disposition being willing (as I credibly heard) to have spoken with me, was by
M. Abbots frinds possessed with sundry slanderous informations against me,
to divert his Majesty therfro. Seeing therefore that I both offered, requested,
and expected a meeting with M. Abbot about the verification of our writings,
and he having not only the opportunity of time and place, but the advantage
also of other Circumstances, would not appear and show himself; what
reasonable men can doubt, but that he at the least did fear and mistrust his
own cause? and thereupon assure themselves (who cannot be so privy to M. Abbots
dealings as he is himself) that M. Abbots allegations and arguments are to be
vehemently suspected and feared; and consequently that very unwise are they,
who in matter of salvation and damnation do rely upon him.

Hitherto I have used M. Abbots words aganist himself, now I come to the rest
which speak more distinctly for him.


R. AB. Which plainly appearing to be so, little reason had I to trouble my
self to give any further answer to it. Nevertheless because the further answer
of the chiefest part of it, has fallen within the compass of my intention of
describing the true ancient Roman Catholic, and no difference there is, but
that whereas I might have walked at my own liberty, I now tie my self to
follow him: I have yielded so much to him, that whereas by comparison I formerly
showed, that the now church of Rome in faith and religion is far estranged from
the old, so it may now more fully appear that it is so: and that M. Bishop
contending for the contrary, has done it only for his belly; and for his
credits sake, having made the deceiving of souls his occupation to live by,
and being ashamed at these years to confess that he himself hithero has
been deceived.


W. B. M. Abbot (as he here says) would not have answered my little book
howsoever it was to purpose, had it not fallen within the compass of a former
pretended treatise of his own: how much less cause have I to withdraw my hand
from more serious and substantial work, to give answer unto his long tedious
trifling books? that man's head that should not ache, before M. Abbot had
soundly proved the now Roman church, to be in any one point of faith estranged
from the old; were like to live many a fair day without need of a Physician.
He has showed his good will I confess by giving the essay: but has done
little more thereby, then bewrayed how unable he is to perform it. so that one
may wonder at his simplicity (shall I say) or at his audacity, or rather at
both? at his simplicity, for wanting wit to understand when it was so plainly
told him how impertinentlie he deals in the matter. At his audacity, if seeing
his rash and raw Enterprise succeed no better, he would nevertheless hold on
still and proceed farther.

Let it be by the way observed that M. Abbots intention was and is to
describe, the true Roman Catholic: for that you shall hear him hereafter, in
the heat of disputation very busy to prove, that there is such an
incompatible repugnance between the very terms Roman and Catholic, that they
can no more be coupled together, the^ particular and universal: yet here more
calm and better advised, he acknowledges that they may stand well joined
together and be attributed to one particular person: and by the like reason, to
one particular Church. so that howsoever he cry there against us, for
couchnig together the Catholic Roman Church: yet here he must needs approve
it, or else contradict himself, and give over his intended description of the
true Roman Catholic. well be it pardonable for a new ghospelling Minister to
vnsaie that in one place, which he says in another: yet that calumniation of
my poor labors employed in the service of the Catholic cause for my bellies
sake (as he writes) is not tolerable: but the imputation is so gross and
palpable, God be thanked, that M. Abbot cannot choose but receive shame by it:
which I will declare by this brief Antithesis between himself and me, hoping
that the good Reader will give me leave (being put to it) to relate that of my
self, which is commonly known. It is not unknown to many that I did forsake
the apparent hope of a poor gentleman's estate, to become a Roman Priest: he to
escape misery, crept into the Ministry. I wittingly and willingly made my
self thereby incapable of all spiritual livings and promotio^s, which our noble
country does afford in great plenty unto men of the Church. he contrariwise
as it seems, followed the study of new divinity, to fill himself with fat
benefices, if the greedy apperite which his former penury bred in him, can be
satisfied. for having three or four livings already, he is thought to gape
still after some greater. In a word I do strive to walk in the narrow and
hard path of fasting, prayer and contine^cie from all corporal pleasures: he
lives at large following the carnal liberty of Luthers Gospel of wiuing,
eating, and fulfilling the desires of the flesh. All which being duly
considered let the indifferent Reader judge, whether of us two be likelier to
contend about matters of religion for our bellies sake? The same may be said
for the point of honor and reputation; he running the full carriere of our
country to high dignities and promotions: I treading in their foosteps, who
be they never so learned or virtuous, may truly say with the Apostle. I
think that God has showed us the last, 1. Cor. 4. v. 9.
as it were deputed to death, and the dross of all even until this day.
wherefore all wordly credit, and belly commodities lying in M. Abbots way, and
against my profession; were his wits at home (think you) when he vpbraided me
with them? And if I would make deceiving of souls my occupation, as he for his
credits sake and gain, seems to have made it his: I might perhaps have been
little behind him in wordlie wealth and reputation. But god forbid that to gain
all the good in the world, I should once go about so much as to endanger the
salvation of mine own soul: so far of am I (our blessed lord be praised
therefore) from being any whit disposed to follow M. Abbots trade and occupation
in deceyuing of others.


R. AB. WHICH work I most humbly desire may go forth under the protection of
your highness, who according unto that eminent wisdom and knowledge, wherewith
God has endued your tender years, I make the judge of this quarrel, and
therefore the first part thereof I do now tender at your highness feet, for a
testimony of my loyal and dutiful affection, and for acknowledgment of my
devotions unto Almighty God for the preservation of your highness and the
continuance and increase of his graces and blessings toward you: that your
princely name may more and more grow great, and be a terror unto the self
exalting kingdom and Monarchy of the great Capitolian Priest, at length to
work the utter ruin and confusion thereof. which as we believe not to be far
of, so we hope that in that glorious revenge of the cause of Almighty God,
your highness shall have a chief and honorable part: and that God will
strengthen your arm, and give edge to your sword, to strike through the loins
of all them that are the supporters of that Antichristian and wicked state
which all other additions of honor and renown both with God and men, I w^ll
never cease to further by my prayers unto almighty God* so I rest always to
your highness service most humbly and affectionately devoted. R. Abbot.


W. B. AS we do most freely confess almighty Gods exceeding bou^tifulnes
toward that our gracious young Prince Henry (now deceased) in pouring out upon
him plentifully singular natural gifts of both valor and understanding, and do
dolefullie bewail the great loss of such a glittering ornament and comfort of
our unfortunate country; so we hartelie wish and do daily pray, that it may
please the imme^se divine bounty to bless that tender young prince Charles
his dear and noble brother, with the true knowledge of the Catholic and
Apostolic faith: that he may to God Almighties glory, to the true honor and
peace of our country, and to his own eternal salvation, return unto the
ancient and holy Religion of his best renowned and most puissant progenitors;
that growing as in age, so in understanding and true piety, he may become,
though no competent Judge in matter of faith, as M. Abbot too flatteringlie
would make his royal brother in his nonage (for the judgment of those high
supernatural points of religion do belong rather to the vocation of godly and
grave learned Bishops, than to youthful princes:) yet to be a devout imbracer
and a zealous mainteyner of that heavenly ingraffed word which only can save
our souls: for the defense whereof the glorious title of defender of the faith,
was annexed to the crown of England. In which, and for which principally, his
most royal and gracious Grandmother was put to death: which to have been the
now Roman faith and Religion, no honest man can or will (I think) deny. And
who is such a stranger in the estate of our neighbor countries, that does not
clearlie behold the ready way to advance his princely name and renown, and to
increase both the wealth and strength of our kingdom, is to receive, or admit
of the Roman religion; which spain, France, and Flanders (the richest and
noblest regions adjoining next to us) do follow and uphold? The ministers rare
devotions unto the Almighty for the preservation of the noble Princes life, and
increase of honors, were vain and frivolous, yea God send they were not hurt
full and ominous. for of such like the holy Ghost faith, Prouer. 28.9.
Oration eius erit execrabilis, their prayer shall be accursed. God commonly
punishing them, whom Satan's servants pray for: and many times cursing them,
whom they do bless. And what marvel if we consider but the strange
disposition of his Charity, shall I say, or rather of his fury: that would
have his Prince bath his sword in the blood of innoce^ts, and to sheath it in
the Bowels not of some hundreds or thousands of such as never offended him,
but of innumerable hundreds of thousands, of what sort, nation or country
soever, so they be favorers and supporters of the Roman religion. was it any
marvel I say, that the father of mercies, and God of all comfort was highly
displeased at the pittiles petition of this bloody Minister, or rather monster?

From his deuotious and charity suitable to his profession, let us pass unto
his hope expressed in this passage. his hope was that Prince Henry's highness
should have a chief part in the suppressing of this Roman religion. May he not
now (as once he told me) cry out with the no-vaine poet: O spes fallaces, o
false and deceitful hopes; o vain confidence in earthly creatures, be they
never so noble and powerful. good reason has he to do so, seeing he would not
harken unto the divine prophet when he said: Psalm. 145. v. 2.
Nolite confidere in principibus, in filijs hominum, in quibus non est salus.
Do not put your trust in princes, nor in any sons of mortal men, in whom
there is no help, principally for the atchieuing of any such ungodly and
merciles exployte.

I come now to the new article of M. Abbots belief, that the utter ruin
(forfooth) of the Roman religion is not far of: of which peradventure he may
be as well assured, as every protestant is of his own salvation. But because
this seems to be rather a kind of prophecy, then any article of faith: why
may not M. Abbot (who is not yet known to be either a prophet or the son of
a prophet) as well fail in this his belief, as he was deceined in his hope.
And it being the divination but of a blear eied if not of a blind prophet,
proceeding rather out of his own lo^ging, then of any foresight he has of
future events, no man (I trow) is bound to believe him unless he list. Some
likelihoods there be (I grant) in worldly men's opinions, that the Catholic
religion may be rooted out of England. but when we lift up our hearts to heaven,
and weigh well the true qualities and nature of Christian religion, we see noe
evident cause to fear any such imminent danger: nay we discover rather
motives to persuade us to the contrary, to wit, that our redemption and the
restoration of Catholic religion in our country is near at hand.

Not to answer M. Abbot (who has brought no one reason for his surmise) but
for the consolation of many heavily distressed, and most pitifully afflicted
Catholics, my most dear and best beloved countrymen, I will briefly examine
the causes that may move worldlings to imagine their fathers old faith to be now
in great hazard of utter ruin and destruction; that I may withal show some
reasonable grounds of hope for the speedy reparation thereof: The first and
principal cause of the decay of the Catholic faith in our country, earthly
me^ esteem to be the impouerishing of all them that constantly profess and
maintain the same: for seeing all Catholics (whom they call Recusants) to be
fleeced and spoiled of all their goods, and to have nothing left for
themselves, their wives, and their children to live upon, they presently judge
that they cannot long hold out. And all men of means being once impouerished,
neither priests (who by doctrine, administration of Sacraments, and good
example of life are great proppes and stays of religion) can be harbored and
interteined; nor poor prisoners succored and relieved: and consequently all
Catholics in short space must needs be utterly extinguished. Behold the
presumptuous discourse of dust and ashes, who being not able to raise their
thoughts above the flatt of the earth, or over the heads of their cattle, do
seldom meditate upon those words of our blessed Savior: pauperes
Euangelizantur the Gospel is preached to the poor. poor men do more
readily embrace the glad tidings of the gospel then the rich; or upon that
golden sentence of the chosen vessel of his grace. videte vocationem vestram
fratres, 1. Cor. 1. v. 26.
etc. see your vocation brethren that not many wise according to the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble: but the foolish things of the world has God
chosen that he may confound the wise: and the weak things of the world has
God chosen, that he may confound the strong; and the base things of the world
and contemptible has God chosen, and those things which are not, that he may
destroy those tings that are: that no flesh may glory in his sight. Being then
assured by the truth it self that poor, base, contemptible creatures in the
eye of the world, be such as Christ makes special choice of, to receive,
embrace, and preach his word: How can it be probable to amy christian, that the
stripping men out of their goods, is an assured way to make them to fly from
their faith? If poor fishermen, and others, that voluntariely forsook all
they had, were esteemed by Christ Jesus, (the grand master of that heavenly
work) the fittest men to make pillars and chief members of his holy faith
and religion; how grossly are they deceived in the estate and manageing of
heavenly affairs, who do dream that to make all Catholics poor, is to
extirpate the Catholic religion? when as it is in deed a ready way to make
most absolute and perfect christians, discharged of all earthly clogges, more
nimble, proper, and at better leisure to employ themplues wholly and heartily in
that spiritual business. And thereby also indearing themselves unto Almighty
God, (for whose quarrel they have lost all) do become more capable and worthy
of his greater gifts and blessings. who can tell whither our forefathers did
not, through abundance and superfluity of temporal wealth, forget their duty
to God, and by the sins that followed thereupon, made way to that dissolution
of religion which after ensued in our miserable country? for so it happened
often in Israel as Moises foretold, my beloved waxed gross and Kicked, Deuteronomy.
32. v. 15.
he was gross and exceeding fatt: he forsook God his Creator, and turned
away from his savior. And may it not well be the just judgment of the same
Almighty Lord, to punish us their Children (whom God often visits for their
fathers faults) in the same kind, according to that rule of the law: in quo
quis peccat, in eo and puniatur. Let them be punished in the same kind that
they did offend. why should we not then be content to redeem our religion
with penury, which our Ancestors morgaged through their ouergreat superfluity?
yea although that were not so, let us imitate that wise and well advised
merchant commended in the Gospel, who having found out the precious pearl of
the true Christian faith and religion, went and sold all that he had and
bought it. I dare be bold (because I have the warrant of Gods word for it) to
assure all them that so do, that they thereby make the richest purchase that
can be made upon the earth: unto which if the best bargains that wordlings
make be compared, they are but shadows and mere dreams. If there were a
stately galla^t fair rich Lordshyp to be sold, at two or three years
purchase, what press would there be of buyers? how willing would the veriest
pinchpennies in a conutry be to bestow their money there upon? and what is this
earthly bargain if it be paralleld to that heavenly? of which our savior
speaks in the gospel: Matt. 19 v. 29.
he that forsakes father or any other frind, he that leaves land or living,
or any other comoditie for my names sake, he shall receive, not one for one,
but a hundredth for one and to boot in the world to come, life everlasting. And
they that doubt least in the mean season, they shall want necessary
sustenance: they must needs confess themselves censured by our Savior to be
modicae fidei, Matthew. 6. v. 30.
men of small faith, that do not trust confidentlie in the providence of our
heavenly father, who feeds the fowls of the air, and clotheth the grass
of the field: of which he has not so much care as of us Christians: if they be
worthy the name of Christians that dare not rely upon Christ's infallible
promise: quaerite regnum Dei and Iustitiam eius, Matthew. 6. v. 33.
and haec omnia adijcientur vobis. Let them that feign would, yet with much
ado can overcome this temptation of poverty, ponder these few points often
and advisedly, and pray to God to strengthen their weakness: then no doubt but
they shall be able to prefer poverty with Christ, before the riches of this
world with the loss of Christ, and of their souls. I that do but handle this
matter by the way may not dwell long in it, but will make it up with these
memorable and comfortable words of the Apostle: Heb. 13. v. 5.
Let your manners he without avarice, contented with things present: for he
(that is, the sovereign Lord of heaven and earth) said; I will not leave thee,
neither will I forsake thee: so that we do confidentlie say, Our Lord is my
helper, and I will not fear what man can do to me. To our purpose then M.
Abbot, how wise an Auguret soever he would seem to be, cannot by the
impouerishing of Catholics, divine that the vtterruin of their religion as at
hand: when as by blessed poverty patiently endured for Christ's sake, it is
much more like, that the same holy religion shall be the sooner restored.

1. Nor imprisonement.
Moreover they cannot be assured to make an end of the said religion by
imprisoning the constant professors thereof. If to be locked up in prison were
to be secluded from Gods help, as they are debarred of their wordlie frinds
company: or to be deprived of our heavenly fathers favor, as it is of some
earthly men's countenance: then there were no doubt but that poor weak mortal
men, would quickly wax weary of their Imprisonment. but if to be a ptisoner
for that holy cause of the Catholic religion, be rather a retreit from the
conversation of worldlings, and a recalling of our minds from all terrestrial
cares, to be more neat, pure, and at better leisure to receive and intertayne
celestial inspirations: then surely to him that knows to make the true use
of that enclosure, imprisonment will seem, as a promotion in the favor of
God, so an augmentation in the feruor of his religion. Are we not by prison
wayned from many vanities and follies, yea preserved from diverse dangerous
temptations, which others living at their liberty and pleasure abroad do often
fall into? And how many thousands of devout souls, have of their own free
choice most willingly forsaken all the world, and shut themselves up within
religious Cloisters, to be freed from the ordinary perils of wordly
conversation, and to live a more retired and religious life? why then should
not Christ's prisoners make a virtue of necessity, and seeing that now by Gods
pleasure they are drawn from their own houses, and household affairs (where
they were perhaps to much busied about horses, sheep, hawks, hounds or other
like base or idle creatures,) let them hardely employ their study to make a
good general confession, thereby to enter assuredly in to the fast favor of
the almighty. let them study to answer well (according to that measure of
understanding and learning that God has given them) in the cause of religion,
for which they suffer. Let them spend the most of their time in prayer, and
other works of Christian devotion and piety: and then no doubt their
imprisonment will not seem tedious unto them, but must needs be very
comfortable and fruitful. because thereby they purge their souls from sin,
make satisfaction for their faults past, break of many evil customs, lay a
good foundation for the time to come, purchase the favor of God, and draw his
manifold heavenly blessings upon themselves, their family, and friends. finally
they shall serve for burning lamps to the world abroad, and for good example
to their neighbors and acquaintance at home. for albeit their bodies be
confined within a small compass; yet the fame of their constancy, and virtuous
retired life, will fly abroad far and near: and carry with it a very sweet
fragrant savor unto others, animating them to suffer more willingly and
constantly, what they see their honorable frinds, or honest neighbors to have
well passed through before them.

Neither ought any man to fear over much the laying up in dark loathsome
holes or deep dungeons: 3. Not dungeous.
for if it please our heavenly father to suffer that rigor to be exercised upon
us, he will give us courage and strength enough to abide it The chaste patriarch
Joseph was cast into a dongeon, and it is recorded to our comfort, Sapient.
10.14.
that the wisdom of God descended down with him, and did not forsake him in
his fetters. Daniel. 6 22
That great Prophet Daniel was cast into a den of lions, And his God was with
him there, shutting up the mouths of those cruel hungry beasts, and
delivered him therhence safe and sound. The farther we are shut from all
company of men, the nearer we are set unto the quiers of Angels. As we must
heerin needs confess and acknowledge our own natural weakness and frailty, and
that we are not able so much as to think one good thought of our selves, and
much less to be able to endure any such great extremity, as so close an
imprisonment would be to fleshand blood: so on the part of God (for whom we
suffer) we must be confident, and say after that most zealous Apostle Saint
Paul: Phil. 4. v. 13.
Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat, I can do all things with his heavenly
help and gracious favor that does comfort and strengthen me: and be bold to
pray with Saint Austin. Da Domine quod iubes, and Iube quod vis. give me o
blessed Lord force to do that which thou commaundest, and command me
whatsoever thou please: Fidelis enim est Deus, 1. Cor. 10 v. 13.
qui non patitur vos tentari supra id quod potestis, etc. For God is faith
full, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able to
bear: but will make also with temptation a way forth, that you may be able to
sustain. It cannot but greatly comfort all such prisoners, to set before
their eyes the most noble example, of that worthy spectacle of all retired
persons Saint Anthony. he having lived some years in the wilderness in very
great austeritie, and being for his singular virtues, Athanas. in vita S.
Antonij.
and most godly instructions, much sought unto by many that desired to
imitate his holy life; he (I say) to avoid that resort, would wander yet
further into the wilderness. At length it was his hap to light upon the ruins
of an old decayed castle, in which the wild beasts and venomous serpents had
made their de^nes and nestes. This was a place alone for a champion of his
faith, spirit, and resolution. There he taking up his lodging, the serpents and
beasts as if they had known good manners avoided suddenly, and gave place to
that honorable servant of the most high god: and the Citizens of heaven came
often (no doubt) to visit him. This holy soldier of Christ condemned himself
to a hollow cave of the said ruined Castle, and there lived full twenty years,
admitting no man to come to him, saving one only, who twice in the year
brought him some poor provision of bread and water. At length being found out
by the religious souls, who sought up and down after him all the wilderness
over: at their instant entreatie to do service to others, he came out of that
voluntary prison, as if it had bin out of a paradise, so sound of body, so
fresh of color, with such a sweet mild countenance, that all who beheld him
were astonished to see it. But what marvel? for if the court be comonlie said
to be there where the king is: who can doubt but that cave might very well be
resembled to the court of heaven? assuredly the king of heaven attended on by
his celestial train, came thithe often to visit his be loved servant and
dear son Anthony. And what comfort could he want that conuersed so
familiarly with the courtiers of heaven? can he that lives in such special
favor of the Almighty, (at whose commandment be all things both in heaven
and earth) be destitute of any necessaries? This every man that shall stand in
need of it, may very well apply unto himself with the help of these words
taken out of the like in S. Austen. Quod fecit vnus homo, facere potest and
alter homo, illius gratia per quem factus est omnis homo: that which one man
has done, a another man may do, through his gracious aid and assistance that
made all men.

Though Protestants cannot either by spoiling Catholics of their goods, 4. Nor
death.
or casting of them into prisons and dongeons, extinguish the Catholic Roman
faith in our country, yet by hanging and quartering of them as traitors, may
they not bring that to pass? for making away many worthy priests in that
cruel bloody manner, it may hap to fright all other out of the country, and
then the laity wanting the gracious help of Sacraments, and the necessary
comfort of their spiritual fathers, will quickly quail and yield. O wise
folly, or rather foolish wisdom of wordlings. indeed if the course of the
divine providence were squared out by the leaden rule of our vain discourses,
then it were not unlike to fall out after the protestants imagination. but god
himself having revealed unto us in his holy word, that the putting to death of
his faithful preachers, shall nothing hinder, but much further, increase, and
multiply the fruit of their divine doctrine: Are they not rather to be
esteemed Atheists then Christians, that are persuaded, that the way to
extinguish Christian religion, is to make great havoc and slaughter of Christ's
disciples? does not our blessed savior himself teach most plainly, yea and
binds it (as it were) with an oath. Amen Amen, dico vobis: verelie verelie I
say unto you, unless the grain of wheat falling into the earth do die, it
remains alone: Joan. 12. v. 14.
but if it do die, it brings forth much fruit. by which similitude Christ
gives us to understand, that like as one grain of corn mortified in the
bowels of the Earth, does produce some thirty, some sixty, some a hundredth
fold increase: Even so every holy Martyr (who is of the purest wheat of
Christ's flour) pouring out his innocent blood in testimony of the Catholic
Roman religion, does through the virtue of Gods powerful grace, wonderfully
move all well disposed minds to embrace the same religion. for how can they be
persuaded otherwise, then that the Almighty has given to them great assurance
of a most happy estate in the life to come, whom they behold in the midst of
torments to depart this life so holily, mildly and comfortably. Pretiosa in
conspectu Domini, Psalm 115. v. 5.
mors sanctorum eius. the glorious death of gods Saints is so precious in his
sight, he so dearly esteems of them who endure death for his honor, that
not themselves only, who die so happily, shall be highly advanced in his
heavenly kingdom; but for their sakes and at their requests, God will over
and besides convert multitudes of others. the holy doctors were of opinion
that the death and prayer of S. Stephen, was the special means of S. Paul's
Conversion. but what need we any testimony of man for this matter, when as
God himself has in express terms testified, that he will show mercy unto
thowsands, Exodus 20
for ones sake that loves him, and keeps his comandements: And no man can
better testify his love toward God, then to lay down his life for him, and
with his very hearts blood to seal (as it were) his service and love toward
him. Ioh. 15.^.
maiorem Charitatem nemo habet, quam vt animam suam ponat quis pro amico suo.
wherefore in the primitive church it was the common opinion of all Christians,
that sanguis Martyrum semen sit ecclesiae, the blood of Martirs, is the seed
of the church. the sense whereof is recorded in these words of ancient
Tertullian directed to the Heathen persecutors. Tertul in fine Apolog.
Neither does your over curious and diligent cruelty prevail any whit at all
against us, but is rather an allurement to our religion, we are multiplied and
made more, as often as we are mowed and cut down by you. for the blood of
Martirs is the seed of Christians: Matthew. 13
yea it is compared by diverse holy fathers to that seed which was sowed in the
best ground, and brought forth an hundredth fold increase. Justin. in Apolog.
That glorious and learned Martyr S. Justin, comparing Christians to a vine (as
in the scriptures they be often resembled) says: Esai. 5. Ioh. 15.
that as a vine every year must be pruned, and have all superfluous branches
cut of, to make it yield more stoare and better fruit: so some Christians now
and then cut down, and put to death for the Christian religion, does both
multiply, and make more perfect Christians. To be short I will rehearse but
one passage uttered by that golden mouth of S. Io: Chrysostom, wherein all the
forsaid branches of loss of goods, loss of liberty, and life are couched
together, without any fear of loss of their religion. Chrisost. quod
Christus sit Deus.
Albeit (says he) the faithful Christians were disgraced, despised, lost
their goods, and were cast into prison: yea were butchered, burned, drowned,
and put to all kind of tortures, with the greatest shame and spite, that could
be devised, like Traitors and public enemies of the common weal: yet did they
always increase and multiply. As well Masters as scholars, Priests as Lay
men, were fettered and suffered a thousand kind of evils: yet the number of
both Masters and Scholars did grow daily greater and greater. Thus Saint
Chrysostom, and much more to the same purpose. And if it would please our own
Magistrates, who are of greater years, to call to mind how few priests and
recusants were in the days of Queen Elizabeth, when they began first to put
priests to death, and to heap such heavy penalties upon recusants, in
comparison of them that now be: they must needs (if passion do not much blind
them) cleerlie see, that their persecution has mightily augmented our number.
I out of my small experience may be bold to avouch, that since I can well
remember, for one Roman priest that then was in England, there are now little
less then twenty; And for one recusant then, now more then a hundred Have we
not therefore just cause (following even the light of humane reason and policy)
to think, that the Protestants themselves who sit at the helm of government
yielding unto that sensible argument of their own manifest experience) will
shortly cease the heat of the persecution, and bridle those distempered
restless spirits, that seem to feed upon other men's sorrows, if it be for no
other cause, but for the preservation of their own religion. I mean not here
to propound to them (who are without all comparison exceedingly far wiser then
my self) how many great commodities both at home and abroad, they might reap
by holding a milder course in matter of religion: because I find small
disposition in them to accept of that service. but for the comfort of afflicted
Catholics my most dear countrymen and brethrene, and for the fuller
confutation of the new article of M. Abbots false belief: I have briefly
showed, that to stripp Catholics of their goods, for their religion, is to put
them (though perhaps against their wills) to purchase the redemption of that
with their penury, which their Ancestors lost through over much superfluity.
To cast and keep them in prison, is to sequester them from their worldly
occupations, and thereby to make them much apter for heavenly meditations: To
hang them like traitors, is to prefer them to the glorious crown of Martirs.
And all this put together, comes so far to short from rooting out the Roman
Religion, or from daunting of others from the liking of it: that it works
marvelous effects in many good souls, and procures multitudes to embrace it.
wherefore M. Abbots dream of the utter ruin thereof to be at hand, may be
aptly compared to the divination of those pagans, which S. Austin recorded as
most absurd. when the Gentiles (says he) saw that the church of Christ could
not be rooted out with so many greiuous persecutions as it had endured, Aug.
l. 18. de ciuit. 54.
but that it was thereby wounderously enlarged: they never theles were so
blindly bent against it, that they would needs appoint a certain time, w^thin
the which it should be utterly rooted out. which was expired before S. Austen
had written those his worthy Books of the city of God, the christian Church
much more flourishing, and enlarging it self then before. The like success will
be no doubt unto M. Abbots dream; (who would needs counterfeit those
malicious Pagans, in prognosticating the utter decay of the Roman religion to
approach) if we remain constant, and do with patience after the example of
those ancient noble Christians, bear the loss of our goods, lands, liberty,
and life; in the quarrel of Gods cause, and for his sacred religion.

I am not of their mind who looking upon the help of men, do out of human
probability, either appoint some time when this shall come to pass: or on the
other side, not seeing any man's aid ready at hand, do utterly despair of
the recovery of it. but do like maruelously well of them, who hu^blie
acknowledging our own and our forefathers manifold grievous iniquites to be
such, that we have not yet suffered the hundredth part of that which they and we
have justly deserved. yet lifting their hearts toward heaven, and maturelie
pondering upon God almighties incomprehe^sible mercy, wisdom, and power, do
conceive good hope of our speedy redemption for noe Christian can say his
creed, but he finds in the first article thereof that God is Almighty, he can
do all things when he will, and as soon as he will; with one word of his
mouth, one fiat of his (by which he made heaven and earth) is more then a
thousand times sufficient, to alter the whole course of the protestants
proceeding; yea to work such a strange alteration, that they who now be most
earnest persecutors of the Roman religion, may after the manner of Saint Paul
become most zealous professors and planters of the same. for most true is that
which good Mardocheus in his devout prayer confessed. Hester 13
O Lord God, the disposition of all things does he in thy hands, and there is
no man that can resist thy will, if thou please to save us. yea the stronger,
the more emine^t, subtle, and vehement, Gods enemies be to oppose against his
servants, the sooner are they overthrown; for he delights sometimes to give
his adversaries all the advantages they can require: that they may be many
against few; mighty and rich against weak and poor; wise and politic,
against simple and plain men; to the end, that a few, weak, simple and poor
people under his conduct, ouercoming many strong wealthy witty adversaries,
all the glory may redound to God alone: and others understanding thereby who be
the true people of God, may wholly and hartelie join with them in his service.
here to preve^t the cauills of the malicious, I would have it observed, that we
Catholics do not put our trust in any foreign invasious or domestical
garboiles, but in the mere mercies and might of the sovereign Lord of heaven
and Earth: who (as we hope) will for our blessed saviors sake, at the
intercession of the most holy mother of God (whose dowry England has bin and
is esteemed) and of all the blessed Saints, turn the hearts of our
persecutors, and effectually move even them, who now are most greedy to
spoil Catholics of their goods, to bestow their own, toward the restoring
of the Catholic Religion: And they that are now so hasty to cast Catholics
into prison, and to seek their deaths, shall be so zealous and forward for the
setting up of the same, that they will therefore most willingly lose their own
liberty and lives. And albeit this may seem strange unto the dull and dark
understanding of worldlinges: yet the faithful must needs confess, that he
whose words laid the blustering winds, and calmed in an instant the raging waves
of the sea, can (no question) as easily, and as speedily turn the hearts of our
persecutors, and make them in a moment our honorable frinds. yea make them as
freely and largely, to spend their own riches, in favor and defense of the
Catholic cause, as now they do couetously hunt after the spoil of others, for
profession of the same. of gods power to bring this to pass, there can be no
doubt among the faithful. but all the question is, whether he will do it or not, or how soon it shall please him to do it. I can scarce understand how
the true faithful soul, casting her eye upon the inestimable mercies of the
Almighty, can stand in any doubt, whether he will have compassion of us or no?
Let the dejected for their consolation, weigh well these comfortable sentences
taken out of holy scriptures. Can God forget to have mercy, Psalm. 76.
or will he bury his mercy in his wrath? Nothing less, as it is said in an
other place, Our Lord is merciful and gracious, Psalm. 102.
flow to anger and plenteous in mercy, he will not always chide, nor keep
his anger for ever. and, Psalm. 2.
when his wrath is kindled, it will last but for a little while. Again, when
he has bin angry, Abaruc. 3. Psalm. 144
he will remember to show mercy: his mercies are above all his works. he will
therefore sooner forgett all other his wonderful works, then his most
excellent mercies. which Esaias the prophet does reco^me^d to us, by the tender
compassion of a mother over her infant, in this manner: can a woman forgett her
sucking babe, that she should not have compassion on the son of her own
womb? yea she may forgett him, Esaias 49.15.
yet I will not forgett thee. for I have graven thee in the palms of my hands,
and thy walls are continually before me. Behold how many causes of
confidence, this one sentence of holy scripture, does close together as it were
in one Cluster. first the father of mercies, and God of all consolation does
assure us, that though the kind tender hearted mother should so much forget her
self, as not to show compassion to her own Infant, crying unto her for
relief; which is in any good nature impossible: yet God so tenderly affects
his spiritual Children, his creatures made after his own image and likeness,
that although she should, yet he will not shutt up the Bowels of his tender
mercies toward his infantes, hartly repenting them of their sins, and humbly
flying unto him for succor. secondly the print of the nails graven in the
palms of our blessed saviors hands, always present before the face of God,
are both most assured pledges of his inestimable kindness showed toward us: and
be most forcible suitors to his heavenly father, to move him speedily to bend
his forces to our aid. yet farther, the holy Angels patrons of our country in
general and guardians of all English in particular, And all the valiant
Martirs and other saints of our nation (who in holy writ be resembled to
walls of defense and safeguard) are continually before God, both graciously
tendering our prayers and pains patiently endured for his holy names sake; and
praying also themselves most fervently, for the restitution of Christ's
religion in our country. All these motives concurring, must he not be very
lumpish, or rather overwhelmed with heavines, that cannot persuade himself
hopefully to attend and expect his own release and redemption, from the
omnipotent and merciful hands of his heavenly father, so inclinable of
himself, and so provoked thereunto, through the merits of our Redeemer, and
intercession of his saints. Specially if he do remember, that it is not any
earthly good, but Gods own honor and glory that we seek after: that he may
be truly known, loved and served of all me^: that our whole country may be
once again blessed with the happy fruition of his holy religion: that all
manner of vice (which now reigns there in a very high degree) may be rooted
out, and the seeds of all holy virtues sowe^ in a most fertile soil. This being
(I say) the sum of all that we most instantly do sue unto his divine
majesty to obtain, how can we but live in great hope to see it brought to
pass by God Almighty, that does infinitely more then we our selves desire
it? And can by ten thousand manner of ways more then our dull wits are able to
comprehe^d, effect, and perform it. true it is that the grave majesty of the
Almighty (with whom a thousand years are as it were yesterday) seameth to our
shuttle short capacity, to proceed very slowly in this business.
Notwithstanding he is most sure in his courses, and will in due season,
recompense his slownes with abundance of favors, far surpassing the
expectation and hopes of all men. yea many times when he seems most to have
forgotten his humble servants, and to be fardest of from their help; then is
their deliverance nearest at hand. He suffered the Egiptians to do their
uttermost endeavor to oppress and make an end of all the Israelites: yet when
they were even at the very brim of desperation, he sent them a savior: who out
of that their miserable bondage, brought them into a land flowing with milk
and honey. Like wise did his divine wisdom permit the cruel and bloody
Emperors, Diocletian and Maximinia^, to do all the mischief that the malice
of man could devise, to make hauock of all Christians, and a final
extermination of all monuments of Christian religion: nevertheless when they had
powered out the extremity of their outrageous malice, they died most
miserably: and the great Constantine (our most glorious countriman) that
succeeded them, did very shortly after triumphantly set up the Christian
religion, unto the unspeakable comfort of all Christians. wherefore albeit to
the eye of man, there do not appear any present redress of our miseries, yet
reposing our trust in the might, mercies and promises of God, let us
confidently say with S. Peter. 1. Pet. 3.9.
Our Lord slacketh not his promise as some do esteem it: but he does patiently
for you, not willing that any perish, but that all return to penance. It may
be very well that he has stayed the longer, partly to scour our the rust of
our former fautes: partly that the number of those glorious Martirs and
confessors, (wherewith he will have our realm fenced and adorned) may be
accomplished: or that the conversio^ of many that went astraie, might be
wrought, by beholding the constant suffering of his servants. finally, that the
full measure of the impenitent may be made up. The sovereign lord of heaven
and earth having upon these or the like considerations (known only to his
unsearchable wisdom) made stay of our deliverance until this present, must
not therefore be thought to have cast us of for ever, and to have wholly
forgotten his mercies; but we must with longanimitie attend his good pleasure
and leisure, and in any case not leese our confidence in him. which he does not
only expect at our hands, but does also so much respect it, that for it alone
he promises deliverance. Psalm. 90.
Quoniam in mesperauit, liberabo eum, protegam eum quia cognouit nomen meum. I
will deliver him, because he put his trust in me: I will protect and defend
him, because he knew my name; that is, my might, my mercy, my love, to all
that call upon me, and put their trust in me. Again, Our Lord will help
them and deliver them, Psalm. 36.
and save them, Quia sperauerunt in eo: even for that they trusted in him. The
house of Israel trusted in our lord, and he was their helper and protector: the
house of Aaron trusted in our lord, and he was their helper and protector, they
that fear our lord, let themtrust in our lord, Psalm. 113.
for he will be their helper and protector. Call upon me in the day of
tribulation and I will deliver thee, Psalm. 49.
and thou shall honor me: behold God takes it for honor done unto him, to
call upon him in our distress and to be so well persuaded of his honorable
care ouerall his people, that he will not let them perish under his hands.
These being words of comfort vttred by the spirit of God, and recorded in his
holy word; would it not grieve any Christian heart to hear some, other wise
good souls, to say: oh I shall never see any amendment, things will never go
better, while I live. Now poor spirited people, why do you to your own
grief and others discomfort, take upon you to determine that which you are
altogether ignorant of? who made you privy to Gods counsels? what can you
tell how long you shall live your selves, or what shall happen in your days?
you may very well say, that we have not deserved any such great grace at
Gods hands, nay rather that we are most unworthy of it: wherefore if God deal
with us after our deserts, we shall never see that happy day: but do not take
upon you to set bonds to Gods infinite mercies? the highest point whereof is
to surpass infinitely, and to prevent all merit of man, and to go far beyond
all humane expectation. It troubles me not to hear our persecutors say of
us: Psalm. 70.11.
God has forsaken them, come, let us persecute and apprehend them, for there
is no body to deliver them: or to cry out with the children of Edom against
Jerusalem: raze it, raze it, even unto the foundation thereof. Psalm 1, 6.7.
for they do but show blind Zeal, and over great confidence in their bad
cause. But to see Gods servants not to be as courageous in his quarrel, and as
hopeful in his help and succor: is a great sorrow to my heart. which
pusillanimity of ours springs from no other root, then from want of deep,
and often meditation of our blessed lords sovereign power, goodness, and mercy:
and for want of due consideration, that it is only the true honor of God, and
the restitution of his holy religion, which we so vehemently thirst after, and
earnestly desire to see once again flourishing in our country. which (we
doing our parts) God will no doubt, for his own glories sake in time perform.
To those puling and dejected spirits, let me be bold to speak in these words
of the Apostle. Heb. 10.35.
Do not therefore cast away your confidence, which has a great recompense of
reward. for patience is necessary for you, that doing the will of God, you may
receive the promise. for yet a little, and a very little; he that is to come,
will come, and will not slack or tarry. and my just lives by faith. And if any
man draw back, he shall not please my soul. But we are not children of
withdrawing to perdition: but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul.
which words of the Apostle are taken out of the like of the prophet Abacuc who
says. If he make delaie, wait for him, for coming he will come (that is, he
will not fail but surely come) and will not stay long. Abac. 2.3
behold he that will not believe this, his soul is not right, but the just man
shall live in his faith. Out of both which the prophets, and Apostles words, I
gather a necessity imposed upon all right and good souls, if not to believe
assuredly, yet to live in great hope and confidence, of speedy succor from
God for their delivery. otherwise they not only want that special virtue of
hope, but also are in danger (according to the foraleaged testimony of the
holy Ghost) of drawing back and falling away from the state of salvation to
their own everlasting perdition. After these plain testimonies taken out of
the word of God, I hope the good Catholic Reader will give me leave to employ
one probable conjecture taken out of the prudent observation of some virtuous
judgments. It cannot be denied that priests and religious persons be under
God the chief planters and waterers of the Catholic Roman religion. for they
by preaching, teaching, administering of Sacraments, and trayning up of others
in virtue, and by their good example do settle, uphold, and confirm all the
rest in matter of faith and religion. It is long sithence it pleased God of his
great goodness to grant us in foreign nations some colleges, and seminaries to
breed and bring up virtuous and learned priests. And within these few years
(since the persecution at home waxed hotter) diverse houses both for religious
men and women, have bin erected for our countrymen abroad, and many worthy
persons inspired by God, have retired themselves into the same. Behold then the
foundation laid by the providence and mercy of God, for the erecting and
building up of Christ's Catholic church amongst us again. Now I am well
assured that no man dare say, that God is to be likened to that foolish
builder reprehe^ded in the Gospel, who having laid the foundation of a tower
could not bring it to perfection, and was therefore worthily mocked of the
beholders, saying; Luc. 14.
hic homo coepit aedificare and non potuit consummare. this man began to build
but could not bring his work to an end. Our savior then having already (as
we be verily persuaded) planted the foundation of that most holy Edifice, he
will not fail in short time to bring it to perfection. Many goodly great
stones and fair tall timber trees, with other necessary furniture to build up
the walls of Jerusalem are already prepared: now to rough hew, square, and
smooth them, persecution is permitted: And much blood of Martirs has bin
plentifully powered out, to temper the lyme and sand, that must unite and join
fast together all the parts of that spiritual building. It may be that some
principal pieces or workmen do yet want, whom when it shall please the great
master of the work, to convert and assemble with there est: what let will
there be, even in ma^s judgment, for the accomplishement of this heavenly
work? wherefore with comfortable confidence let us ride out the storm, and
with patient longanimitie persever faith full unto the end: with earnest
devoute prayers, craving the aid of our most merciful father in heaven, and
with humble obedient behauior toward our prince and his Magistrates, seek to
assuage their wrath kindled (as we know) without cause, so vehemently against
us in earth. then shall we both fulfill toward others, and finally (by the
grace of God) shall see fulfilled toward us, that which the famous ancient
Doctor Origin, has recorded of the best Christians in the primitive Church, in
these memorable words, with which I will conclude this Chapter. Orig l 2.
contrac^^ sum responsione ad 2. Call.
Christians taught not to fight against their persecutors, have by observing
duly the mild temperate law of their sounder Christ Jesus, more prevailed,
then if they had received commission from him to have waged war against their
enemies. God almighty defending them, and fighting for them, and at seasonable
times restrayning the persecutors of the Christian name. Some noble champions
of his, he suffered (for their greater approbation and glory) to be put to
death: that the beholders of their constant valor, and sweet mildnes in that
bloody agony, might thereby be the sooner induced to embrace their religion:
yet God so mitigated the matter, that he permitted not all that holy kind of
people to be cut down. for his divine purpose was, that they should grow, and
that all nations should be replenished with their godly and saving doctrine.
And sometimes he gave calmes, that the weaker sort and wearied, might have
respite to breath, to repair their losses, and to gather new forces: until at
length it pleased his divine Majesty, of his infinite mercy and compassion
toward his faithful servants, so to defeat all their adversaries plotts and
devises against them: that neither the king nor the presidents and Judges, nor
any other Magistrates, no not the common people could be exasperated and
stirred up, to persecute them any longer. which wonderful grace the
omnipotent (that has set bounds unto the billoes of the roaring seas, saying
hitherto ye shall pass, but go no further) out of his most tender mercies
grant unto his much afflicted, yet very faithful servants, in our poor
country. Amen.


AN ANSWER TO M. ABBOTS PREface to the Reader.
MR. Abbot to make his reader understand the manner of his proceeding in this
book of his, relates what he had done before, in this manner.

First (says he) I have challenged the name Catholic from the popish use,
and proved that the papists could no more take that title to them, but by mere
usurpation. Afterward I entered into a comparison consisting of three parts.
whereof the first was to declare, that neither S. Paul's, nor S. Peter's Epistles,
contain any defense of the doctrine now taught at Rome. the second, that
sundry definitions of the ancient Roman faith, were wholly agreeable to that
which the protestants teach, and is impugned by the church of Rome that now is.
the third and last was to prove, that sundry heresies condemned of old by the
Roman church, be now defended by the same church of Rome.

which points being (as every man sees) all and every one, of mavelous
great moment; yet M. Abbot does here confess and acknowledge, that in his
answer unto my Epistle to his Majesty, he handled them only positiuelie,
that is to say, briefly and superficially, the occasion then (as here he
says) requiring no more; purposing afterward when opportunity should serve a
longer treatise thereof. in the mean time (says he) Doctor Bishop published a
reproof of my defense of the reformed Catholic: setting under this title a
Gorgons head, to affright all men concerning me, as having abused Gods
sacredword; mangled, misapplied, and falsified the ancient fathers sentences:
so that whosoever has any care of his own salvation, can never hereafter
credit me in matter of faith and religion. Concerning which hideous outcry of
my falsifications, I refer thee to the aduertisment which I have added to the
third part of that defense, where I have scourged him accordingly. this is the
effect of M. Abbots entry into this his work.

W. B. THIS being but a preparation to make way to that which follows, I
need not stand long upon it. that vain and untrue vant of his, that the has
woone the name and title of Catholic from us, I pass over here as a vanity:
because it is elsewhere to be handled more at large. but I may not omit to put
the Reader in mind, how contrary M. Abbot is to himself in his own judgment
about his own work. here he says (as you have heard) that he did set down
in his answer to my Epistle, those three branches of comparison between the
ancient and modern church of Rome, only positiuely: yielding also the reason,
because the occasion then required no more. yet whosoever pleases to read his
preface of the same defense of the reformed Catholic.
work to the reader, shall find him there to speak in an other keie. I have
(says he there) had care to give the reader satisfaction in the questions
here discussed (of which these comparisons were a great part) and to stop the
adversaries mouth, that he may have no thing further to reply. I have
according to Tertullians rule, endeavored to make truth to use all her strength.
I have taken time convenient to levy such troops and bands, that I may not
need to doubt of the victory. compare these places together, and tell me
whether they be not plain contradictorie? to handle questions positiuelie and
briefly: And to treat of them so fully, and in such exquisite manner, that
to the very adversary nothing should be left to reply. there he wrote, that
he took convenient leisure to leavie such troops and bands, that he needed
not to doubt of victory. here having seen his said troops and bands harassed
and defeated, he is of another mind, and upon better advise acknowledges,
that his former furniture was slender, and that he handled the matter but
superficially. whether of these should the good Reader believe? both he
cannot, being so contrary the one to the other. yet being one and the same
great Doctor that has set down both in print, and recomended both to his
reader; he may hap to stagger, which of them he is to take for true. M. Abbot
so highly magnified there, his uttermost endevor to discuss those matters
plentifully and exactly: that he left to himself here no color for this poor
excuse which he comes in withal, of handling these questions positiuely.
well, if the master of the work himself surveying it better over upon my
aduertisment, do think his former arguments and answers, (which then he took
to be complete and insoluble) to be both slender and feeble: I make no doubt
but that the discreet reader will do him so much honor and credit, as to
follow his judgment therein, and to esteem no better of them, then he himself
does, that favors them most, and should know them best. surely me thinks
it must needs be a sufficient wrning to any man to beware how he believes
him, who does not believe himself in his former writings. Now to that big
brag of his, that he has in a brief advertisment trowneed me terribly, and
like a Saturnian frowning angry scholemaister scourged me accordingly: God
be thanked, his words be but wind. for the poor scholar so piteously whipped
by him, feels no pain at all. But what meant he to hide that Choleric
pamphlet of his (written in more have belike, then good speed) in such a
corner, that a man must ride to the latter end of the third part of his long
tedious books, ere he can find it out? well since it has pleased him to range
it in that place so far out of the way, he cannot be offended that I do not
answer it, till I come thither. in the mean season let the judicious reader,
take a scantling by this my answer unto his work of longer meditation, how
easily that short pamphlett, written both in have and in passion, may be
answered.


M. AB. BUT in that reproof of his, very little it is that he has said, for
justifying what he himself had before written: not being able in deed to
defend any one point thereof. only he found some what to cavil, concerning
my debating of the name Catholic, and the comparison I made betwixt the old
and new Roman church: and thereof as touching the matter in substance, he has
framed his book.


W. B. What he should say or do, that deals with such a shameless writer, I
assure thee good Reader I do not well know. my book is extant, and in many
men's hands, as he cannot be ignorant: Let them all, or whosoever else pleases
to read it, be judges between us, whether from the very preface unto the end
of my boo^^ I do any thing else then plead in justification of what I had
before written? putting down, word by word, first, what exception M. Abbot had
taken against the same: then answering directly to every point and parcel
thereof. must he not then (if any grace be left in him) blush at these his
words, that I said very little for iustifieing what I had before written? where
more is said to that very purpose, I think then he will be well able to answer
these seven years. he that in the Entry of his book sticks not to tell
such gross tales, what credit does he deserve in the residue? he confesses
that I said something of the nam^ Catholic, and of his comparison between the
old and new Roman church: which is true. but when he signifies that thereof in
substance my whole book was framed, he goes about to deceive, and that very
grossly. for besides sundry other matters, I treated of these very three points
in particular, which M. Abbot pretends to be most pertinent to his purpose. To
wit, the first, that Saint Paul both in his Epistle to the Romans, and in the
rest, does teach most branches of the Roman doctrine. which is handled from
the page of my book 134. unto 149. The second that so did also some of the
most holy and best learned ancient Bishops of Rome; from p. 149. unto p. 219.
And as plainly against the third point, I declared that not so much as one
heresy condemned of old, is by the modern church of Rome reviued or
countenanced: but that the protestants do in express terms revive, boulster
out, and uphold many old rotten errors and heresies, recorded and condemned
for such by the most sound, sincere and Iuditiouse witnesses of the primitive
church; S. Augustine, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome S. Epiphanius, and others;
see the page 251. and many after. all which being to be found most certain
and true, with a wett finger (as they say) by turning only to the places
quoted; the reader if he have any care to find out the truth, and to avoid
errors, will (I hope) take notice at the length of M. Abbots most palpable and
notorious leasings, who would make him believe that there were nothing of
substance in my book of any of those matters.


R. ABBOT. TO this therefore I have addressed my description of the ancient
Roman Catholic, forbearing that more orderly course, which I had intended for
the performance of this work, and chosing rather to follow him step by step,
as formerlie I have done, only beginning where he comes to the purpose, and
leaving all his vagaries, and affected discourses to he more briefly touched
in the end of all.


W. B. YOU may here discover why M. Abbot was bold to strain a point, and to
say that I only touched the name Catholic, and that comparison: that he
(forsooth) addressing an answer thereunto, might be taken to have, if not
proceeded orderly, yet to have spoken to the purpose directly. But it being
evident and clear, that I handled as well those other three points, and in
the same order, as he propounded them: every understanding man may perceive,
that his purpose was rather to shift from orderly proceeding, and to thrust out
some such stuff as he had ready for the present, to entertain his favorable
reader, and for the rest to take a longer day. whereas he says, that he has
followed me step by step, he should rather have said leap by leap: and that
with such unexpected nimble dexterity in a man of his declining age, and heavy
constitution: that at the very first feese, he has overlept fowerscore and
seven pages of mine; smoothing the matter over, as though all that had been
vagaries, and volu^tarie discourses of mine own: when as in deed there is not
one passage of them, but in answer to another of his, there also set down, as
every one may see. And that the reader may take a vieu of his substantial
answering my book, may it please him to consider, that in my whole book
there are but two hundred, fourscore and six pages in quarto. unto threescore
and one whereof, M. Abbots answer does extend only: he beginning at the 87.
and ending at the 148. and yet has he chopped of by the way 7 pages at one
blow, as he co^fessesh himself in the 227. page of his book: so that in all,
he has answered unto 54 sides, that is 27 leaves in quarto: which does not
amonut to 7 sheets of paper. Now out of these 7 sheets, you must also draw M.
Abbots own text which is comprised within mine, and takes up near hand the
third part thereof; so that in true reckoning his pretty thick book in quarto,
is but an answer to little more then four sheets of mine; And yet the vanity
of this braggadochio is such, that he would make his simple reader believe,
that he has coursed me Iolily, following me step by step, and leaving nothing
of substance in all my book unanswered.


R. AB. OF this work I have finished but one only part, wherein I have at large
discovered their vain ostentation of the Catholic name and faith, and showed
plainly, that the Romish religion accords not with Saint Paul's Epistle to
the Romans; nor with his other Epistles which M. Bishrop Calls to assist
him: because he finds nothing to help him in that Epistle to the Romans. In
all which I have been careful (gentle reader) to give thee satisfaction by the
Clear testimony, either of some learned Bishop of Rome, or by some other
famouslie approved and commended by that church. Being now required a service of
another kind, so that I cannot yet go forward with the rest: I have thought
good to publish this in the mean time. If I have promised any thing in this,
that is not here performed, expect it in that that is to come. Assist me I
pray thee, with thy prayers unto Almighlie God, by whose grace I hope in due
time to supply that that is wanting now.


w. B. BEcause I have (as I hope) sufficiently displaied in my former book,
the man's vain humor in presuming above measure upon his own strength, and
showed that his vaunting words do far surpass his slender works: Therefore I
do now only desiret the reader to suspend his Judgment, till he come to behold
the combat it self. which I trust to obtain the sooner, because M. Abbot
himself notwithstanding his former flourish, seems here to fear some after
clapp: And therefore entreats his gentle reader to bear with him, if he has
not performed in this, that which he promised: and to pray to God to help him
forth with it, and then to expect (by tom long the carrier) some more worthy
piece of work for a supply. I am glad to see some more modesty in the man
then was wont to be. we have not now as he fondly vaunted in his first book,
the whole truth furnished and set out with all its strength, and such troops
and bands levied, as should fright and put to flight all the world: but one
part of a poor piece of work, wherein he doubts also whether he has
performed so much as he promised. seeing the world so amended and such a
towardly disposition in him, my poor prayers shall not be wanting that he may
have grace to see his wn weakness, to understand daily better and better the
badnes of their cause, to feel more and more the feeblenes of man's wit,
setting it self against the might of Gods truth; and so by little and little to
retire himself from the bolstering out of that which he perceives not to be
substa^tiall and sound: and begin at length to employ his talents to the honor
of him, and in defense of his cause, that has bestowed them upon him. In the
mean season goods ir, what reason have you to except against me, for
employing the other Epistles of S. Paul, as well as that to the Romans, in
favor of the Roman religion? be not proofs taken out of any of the other as
pregnant and forcible, as if they were taken out of that? are they not all
alike canonical and of the same divine authority? you do but dream, when
you imagine, that proofs taken out of that to the Romans, be more proper then
others, for confirmation of the Romain faith. should not the Romans believe
any thing delivered in the other Epistles of S. Paul as firmly, and receive
it as currantlie, as if it had been written to themselves? Again, that Epistle
was not penned by the Romans to declare their faith, but was by the Apostle
addressed to them for their further instruction and consolation. wherefore it
can be no more properly called a profession of their faith, then of any other
Christians: every Christian being as well bound to believe all written therein,
as the Romans.

M. Abbot contrary to his own knowledge and eie-sight, does say that I craved
aid of the other Epistles of S. Paul, because I could find nothing to help
me, in that to the Romans. for I do allege many texts out of that very
Epistle, in proof of the Catholic cause. I desire thee reader but to turn to
the 135. page of my book, and if he there do not find, that I have employed as
many sentences thereof to maintain our cause, as M. Abbot (that braggs so much
of it) has done to uphold theirs: then let him take M. Abbot for a true man:
but it being certain that I have as plentifully produced testimonies out of it,
how can thou choose but censure M. Abbot for a man, that makes small
conscience what he says of his adversaries writing? finally to vnderpropp
his credit, which he saw tottering and like to decay; he auerreth that he
has been careful to give his Reader satisfaction in his allegations used in
this book. having made choice only, either of some learned Bishops of Rome,
or of others famously approved by that church. But what if that be not so
neither? does he not by heaping one false tale in the neck of another, much
hasten on the downfall of his reputation and creditt? who is ignorant that the
Roman church has condemned by name Cornelius Agrippas book de vanitate
scientiarum? and yet M. Abbot page 851 does solemnly cite him, for one of his
grave Authors. All the learned know that the church of Rome does not greatly
approve Erasmus censures and annotations upon S. Hieromes, and other Doctors
works. yet is he one of M. Abbots alleged Authors page 72, Now for watsons
Quodlibets, Anianus fables, and other such like puddles, out of which M. Abbot
takes some dreggs, to give his gentle reader, satisfaction shall I say, or
rather infection? I say no more, but that they must needs be very kind,
favorable, yea foolish and simple readers too, that will take such base coin
for good payment. And M. Abbot thereby is convinced to be no man of his word.
for having promised nothing but taken out of Authors famously approved by us,
he does notwithstanding produce many writers of no estimation at all in our
church.

Thus have I briefly run over all. M. Abbots preface, that the whole drist of
his book might be disclosed, and that the impartial reader might withal
take a taste of the manner of his dealing; which if it consist much of craking,
shifting, and misreporting, he may conjecture what he is to expect of him in
that which follows. I have stood here upon the particulers, to show the
reader what advantage I might take of his words, if I would do the like in his
whole book. But well weighing how small profitt the reader should reap out of
any such verbal contention; I will utterly avoid it, and in as short and
perspicuous sort as may be, I will relate truly the sense and substance of
what M. Abbot says, and there unto frame my answer. That the good reader may
leese no time, but with ease and speed, trace out and find where the truth
rests. God grant him grace to embrace and follow it, and in his prayers to
recommend unto the father of light (from whom all good gifts do descend) my
poor endeavors, that through his heavenly blessing, they may yield that fruit
which I desire. And that both they and I, may serve his divine majesty
faithfully all the days of this life, and finally through his infinite mercy
obtain life everlasting. Amen.


AN ANSWER UNTO M. ABBOTS FIRST CHAPTER. The contents.
whether the church of Rome, does vainly and absurdly challenge to her self, the
name of the Catholic church.
THIS first paragraff or section M. Abbot does make to justify the manner of
his proceeding, before he come to the matter: but before all he thought it
expedient, how indecent soever it were, to begin with a flourish in his own
commendation thus.

R. AB. AS for the victory which I ominated to my self, thanks be to God I
have obtained it, being become Master of the field: And M. Bishop enforced to
leave the main battle, contented now out of a corner to thrust an ambush, that
he may make some show, that he is not quite spent: I triu^ph over him in his
own conscience.


W. B. NAturam expellas furca licet, vsque recurret. see how hard a thing it is
to drive a man from his old by as? M. Abbot has been prettily well canvased,
for his unmannerly vaunting of his own doings: yet he cannot be taught to
leave it. custom is another nature. what will you? he dwells belike far
from good neighbors, and is therefore enforced to praise himself. well, if he
will needs prove himself a wisard, and one that can ominate, and tell good
fortunes before they fall, how should I hinder him? I willingly confess that
he does but his duty, to thank the Lord for his good luck: and might for
more complete joy, have called in his fellow Ministers with their wives, to
have congratulated with him. But to put the censure of his triumph to his
adversaries conscience, seems to excessive an amplification. for he was cock
sure to be condemned by me, for singing a triumph before the victory, that
before had told him plainly enough, that I scarce found any weighty point in
his book worth the answering: and that there was better proof of their
doctrine in two leaves of M. Perkins treatise, In my preface of the reproof.
then in ten of his. yea I moreover made so bold as to tell him, that his
printed papers were more fit and proper to stopp mustard potts, Ibidem. Page
94.
then any mean scholars mouth. was there any reason after such plain
warning given him before hand of my dislike, once to imagine (if he had not
been wonderfully conceited of himself) that I so highly esteemed of his
writings, that I would without fail give him the prick and price. But why do I
exact reason of an Augurer, or wiseman as they call him, that will needs dine
into the secrets of my conscience? may not he peradventure by help of his
Astronomicall skill, see there that, which I cannot epsy my self?

In good sadness honest sir, tell me I pray you, why you say, that I left the
maine battle, and was content out of a corner to thrust out an ambush? when as
I marched in the face of your forces, and encountered with the forefront of your
battle; setting down your discourse even as your self had ranged it, making
answer to the very first words, and so continuing without interruption: very
impertinently then do you charge me with lying in ambush, and setting on you
out of corners. These odd terms of an old rustie ragged soldiour, may be much
more properly returned on your self, that has leapt over so many scores of
the first pages of my book, and left as many of the last unanswered; slipping
over also some of the midst. what is to ly in ambush and to set on a book
out of corners, if this answering of it by snatches be not? but leaving these
idle speeches wherewith M. Abbots book is stiff bu^basted, let us come fair and
roundly to the matter; which in this section is to show, whether he has
proceeded orderly or no in his discourse? that the learned reader may the
better be able to judge of it, I will summarily rehearse how we fell into
this Question, whether the Roman church be the Catholic church or not.

I in the Epistle Dedicatory of my first book aganist M. Perkins, humbly.
besought his Majesty that he would be pleased to embrace that true Catholic
and Apostolic faith, in which his most royal progenitors lived and died,
whereunto M. Abbot answered, that my petition was needles; because his Majesty
had already embraced the same true, Catholic, and Apostolic faith. which to
prove he made as it were this argument. The Catholic church is that which is
spread over all the world, but the Roman church is not spread over all the world,
therefore the Roman church is not the Catholic church. To which I replied, that
granting the mayor or first proposition to be true; the minor or second was
not so direct to his purpose, as if he- should have subsumed: but the English
church, (the faith whereof his Majesty embraces) is spread over all the world.
or at least, the English church is a true member of that church, which is spread
over all the world; for whether the church of Rome be the Catholic church or
no, the faith which his Majesty embraces cannot be Catholic, unless it be
that which either has been, or now is spread over all the world. therefore no
man can deny, but that it had been a more direct and speedy course, to have
proved their own church to be Catholic, then to go about to disprove the
church of Rome to be Catholic. for let us suppose that which M. Abbot would
have, (though it be most untrue) that the church of Rome were not the
Catholic church; Does it thervpo^ follow, that the church of England is
Catholic? nothing less. for there have been and are many erring and no
Catholic congregations by the consent of all men, different and dissenting
from the church of Rome. as for example were of old the Arrians, the Donatists,
Macedonians. and at this time be, the Trinitarians, Anabaptists, and such
like. supposing then the church of Rome not to be Catholic, and that the
English church does not agree with the said church; may it not nevertheless
be some other erroneous congregation, that is fa^r enough of from being
Catholic? there being in the world so many other of that bad mark and
stamp? It must needs then follow, that M. Abbot beginning with the church of
Rome, neither took a speedy and direct, nor yet a sure course, to prove his
majesty's faith to be Catholic. M. Abbot in his own excuse says: that to
prove his majesty's faith to be Catholic, he must needs declare what the
Catholic church was: because of the Catholic church it is, that the faith is
called the Catholic faith. This I admit for good doctrine, and do desire the
Reader to bear it well in mind: that the Catholic faith must needs be
sought for in the Catholic church, and cannot be found out, before we have
the Catholic church to teach it us. because as M. Abbot affirms here, of
the Catholic church it is, that the faith is called the Catholic faith. well
go on good Sir, I grant that you did well to declare what was the Catholic
faith, and what was the Catholic church too, But having declared what was the
Catholic church and faith, why did you not go in hand to prove your English
faith that his majesty maintains; or your English church, which he
vpholdeth, to be that same true Catholic church? To say that that stumbling
block, to wit, that the church of Rome was the Catholic church) was first to
be removed out of the way, will not serve the turn. for that was not
necessary. when as the other if it had been true, might have been performed by
it self, without any mention made of the church of Rome. And if your fingers
itched to have a fling at the church of Rome, would it not have been more
seemly and decent, first to have confirmed your own faith to be Catholic,
which you took in hand? then having laid that foundation, to have declared
that the faith of Rome was not Catholic. wherefore (I did neither idly nor
preposterously (as you write) require so much at your hands. but very
preposterously do you proceed, and beyond all measure. extravagantly: that
having spoken somewhat to declare what the Catholic church was, and that the
church of Rome was not that Catholic church, do afterward run through seven
or eight questions more, and make an end of your book too, before you come to
take one chapter to prove that your English church is the Catholic church; or
that your English faith, is the Catholic faith. Is not this to forgett your
self in the highest degree that is possible? to institute a treatise to prove
his majesty's faith to be Catholic, and to profess in the beginning of it,
that to find out the Catholic faith, we must first find out the Catholic
church: which being soon found out, and agreed upon; to be that which is
spredd over all the world: after wards in all the ensuing discourse, not to
have one chapter to prove the English church or faith, to be spread all the
world over. was not this utterly to leese himself, and to leave his reader as
it were. in the middle of a maze? Pervse gentle reader the contents of all the
chapters of M. Abbots book, which be fowreteene in number, thou shall not
find one of them, so much as pretend to prove directly, the faith of England to
have been dilated into all countries, the first is, that the church of Rome
does vainly pretend to be the Catholic church; the second consists of a
comparison between the Papists and the Donatists. the third is about the
Papists abuse of the name Catholic. the fourth, that the church before Christ,
was a part of the Catholic church: and that the old and new testament do not
differ in substance of faith. The fifth, that religion cannot satly be grounded
upon the example of fathers and forefathers. the sixth, that the reasons of
popery are not urgent and forcible. The seventh, of the flourishing and best
state of the church of Rome: and of the fulness of doctrine contained in Saint
Paul's Epistle to the Romans: of Idolatry in worstipping of Saints. The eighth
of justification before God. The ninth, of justification before man. The tenth,
that eternal life cannot be purchased by meritt. The eleaventh, the first
motion of concupiscence is sin. The twelfth; that the spirit gives witness to
the faithful, that they be the sons of God. The 13. that good works are
not meritorious of life to come The 14. that the Epistles of Saint Paul are
loosely alleged by the papists. lo here is the end of the book and as a man
may well say, finis ante principium, a conclusion of the work, before he
begin to handle the principal point in question. to wit, whether that faith
which his Majesty embraces, be the Catholic faith. that is, whether at any
time it has been received in all Christian countries. so that in one word this
book of M. Abbots may be answered with a nihil dicit, as our com^on lawiers
term it, that is, he has said just nothing to that which he undertook to
perform therein. for having taken in hand to prove, that the faith of the
English congregation is Catholic, and consequently that it has been
universally planted in all nations: now to let that stand a cooling, and to
argue that the church of Rome is not the Catholic church, but rather
Donasticall: and that it abuses the name Catholic: that the church in old
father Abraham's days, was a part of the Catholic church; and such other
impertinent questions: was it not rather (as one may say) to lead a wild Goose
chase, and to wander up and down very strangely, then to speak to the point
of the question propounded? And albeit it draw some what nearer the matter to
go about to prove the Protestants doctrine, to be more conformable unto the old
and new Testament, then the doctrine of the Catholics: yet that is a several
distinct question, and to be handled after another manner. for I do in one
chapter join Issue with M. Abbot therein, and doubt not to make it good against
any protestant, that the Catholic Roman faith is much more suitable even unto
the very true text of tke Bible, then the Protestants: and that by conference
of our doctrine word by word, and sentence by sentence, with the very words
and sentences of holy writ. But to prove our faith to be Catholic we take
another course, and do demonstrate that the chief prelates and Doctors of the
Catholic church, who have flourished in most Christian countries since the
Apostles time, have taught the very same doctrine which we teach, and
maintained the same faith, and served God with the same Religion, that we do.
which M. Abbot must perform for their faith and religion, if he will have any
wise men believe them to be Catholics: even by his own explication of the
name Catholic; in his answer to my Epistle; and by his own confession here,
when he faith; that we cannot find out the Catholic faith, before we have
found out the Catholic church; of which the faith is named Catholic. Now no
man can find out the Catholic church, but by tracing out that company of the
faithful who have peopled all Christian nations. which M. Abbot not being able
to do for the protesta^tes faith, does return the same question to me: and
would have me to do the same for our doctrine, and namely, for that point of
the popes power to depose Princes: which (as he says) Cardinal Bellarmine
does hold to be one of the chief points of our faith, Bell. Epistola ad A^b.
apud ^ath. To^um.
and the very foundation of Catholic religion. Albeit M. Abbot would not at
my request, do that honor to his own religion, and right to himself as to
satisfy my just demand, he having before also undertaken it; yet I will not
refuse at his instance, to demonstrate that article of faith (which Cardinal
Bellarmin there mentions) to have been believed, taught, and practiced in
most christian countries, in the most flourishing time of the Catholic church:
And that by the testimony of the best renowned fathers of the very same age.
I will bring him in more authentik evidence for this issue then would be the
hands and seals of the modern churches of Grecia, Armenia, Ethiopia, Russia,
and such like schismatic and erring congregations, (which M. Abbot here
demands) as the reader shall see in the next paragraffe or division, where
that question of the supremacy, shall be treated of. But honest sir, why do you
by the way so wound your credit in misalleadging that most learned Cardinals
words? does he in the place by you quoted say, that the supremacly of the
pope, for the deposing of kings, is one of the chief points of the Catholic
faith? will no warning serve the turn, to make you cite your authors
sincerely? if this be the shuffling wherein your best skill consists, the
reader in deed has great need to look well to your fingers; Card. Bellarmine,
both there and elsewhere does teach, that the popes supremacy is one of the
principalle heads of our religion. But he does not affirm there, that the
popes power to depose princes, is any chief article of our faith. though he
taught that to be a most probable opinion, and in some sort to appertain to
the supremacy, as a dependant thereupon. Now to that which follows out of an
other place of Card. Bellarmin; he (you say) shall free us from need to
travel for this proof (to wit that our English faith has been spread all the
world over) who says, that though one only province did retain the true
faith, yet the same might properly be called the Catholic church (and
therefore their faith the Catholic faith) so long as it could be clearly
showed, that the same is one and the same, with that, which at any time was
spread over the whole world. whereupon M. Abbot infers, that to prove their faith
to be the Catholic faith, it wilbee sufficient to prove, that is was that
which once was spread over all the world. Now with the proof thereof M. Bishop
(says he) is chooked already. Behold the babbling of this vain man. first the
Cardinal does not ease him any whitt at all, from proving their faith to have
been spread over all the world: but only says upon supposition, ( Si sola vna
provincia retineret veram fidem, if one only province kept the true faith)
that then it might be called Catholic: yet so, that it could be cleerlie
showed, to have been spread in times past, over all the world. where you see,
that he requires of necessity, that it must be clearly showed, that the same
faith which wilbee accounted Catholic, has been before at lest spredd over
all the world. so that M. Abbot is as far to seek as he was before, and that
he must needs come to this stake, how unwilling soever he be, and either
show that their faith has been received all Christendom over, or else confess
that it cannot be called Catholic. Come of then gentle Sir, fly not from the
point, seek not to hide your head in a corner, but perform that piece of
service bravely, and then hardly talk of chooking M. Bishop. but to avouch
that M. Bishop is chooked already, long before any proof thereof be brought,
with only hearing you to speak of it, is too too childish, and full of doting
vanity.

I found fault with M. Abbot, for shuffling and flitting from the faith and
religion of the Romans, unto the particular persons that inhabit the city of
Rome: because their faith may be Catholic and spredd over all the world,
albeit their persons be confined within the bounds of one country or city.
he answers, that he has shuffled amiss for us: for that he has shuffled
us from b^ing Catholics; and the Roman church, from being the Catholic
church. which is not to the purpose: And how true it is, shall be tried in the
next chapter. In the mean season it must needs be taken for a foul fault in
arguing, to change the terms, and to flitt from one thing to another: and for
the faith of the Romans, to take the persons that inhabit Rome; there being no
less difference between the person of a man and his faith; then there is
between a fox and a fearnebrake. finally M. Abbot says that, his shuffling
will yield us but a bad game, if I cut not wisely: And if we have no better
Cards (says he) we shall s^rely le^se all. well gentle sir, seeing you
confess your self to be such a cunning shuffler, and give me so fair
warning of it before hand: I will take the pain to shuffle your Cards after
you: or else will cut them in such sort, that your skill in packing shall stand
you in little steed. If there be no remedy but that you will needs have about
with the church of Rome, be it by order, or be it by disorder; look you
handle your weapons more handsomely then you have done hitherto, or else you are
like enough to receive the foil.


An answer unto the second section of the first chapter.
MR. Abbot to make a smoother that he enters unto them, to note the absurdity
implied in this common style of Catholics, the Catholic Roman church. How now
good sir? have you so soon forgotten the errand wherabout you went? did not
you undertake to demonstrate, that his majesty had already embraced the
Catholic faith? And if you will needs leave that which you professed to pursue
in the suddes for a season, and fall upon the church of Rome; do not stand
triffling upon terms and titles, like an idle Caviller: but as it beseemes a
Doctor of the chair, prove soundly if you can that the now church of Rome,
does not believe and profess all points of the Catholic faith. whether the
church of Rome, may be called absolutely the Catholic church or no, or in
what sense it is so called, are other by questions, scarce incident, at least
nothing necessary, to that we have now in hand. for whether the church of
Rome be styled the Catholic church or no, so that it hold entirely the true
Catholic faith, then may his majesty lawfully and laudably, receive and
defend the whole doctrine of the said church: and to obtain salvation, must
make himself a member thereof. which was all that I humbly craved of his most
excellent Majesty. The issue then of this present question, and the mark that
M. Abbot should level at, is to show, that his majesty embracing the faith
of the church of Rome, should not embrace the true Catholic faith. if he do
not effect this, he does nothing. if leaving his issue, he fall to plucking
of vizards (as he to excuse his unseasonable digression does write) from I
know not whose faces, (as though he going about this matter, had met by the
way, with some mask or mummery) may he not well be resembled to a boy that
sent on an errant falls to blowing of feathers, whither the wind will carry
them, and lets his Masters business alone till he has ended his own sport?
but such is the man's humor, he must be dispensed withal for observing any
good order; well, seeing there is no remedy, let him range at his pleasure, let
us wink at the method, so the matter be tolerable. thus then does he go
about to prove the Roman church not to be Catholic. No particular church can
be the Catholic church; but the Roman church is a particular church. Ergo the
Roman church is not the Catholic church. Again to the same effect, No part
can be the whole; but the Roman church is a part of the Catholic church.
therefore it cannot be the whole Catholic church. These be his arguments
reviewed, and put into the best frame that may be, to avoid all disputes
about the form. As I do very willingly also let pass his most idle bables
of Balaams and Anianus Asses, and his scarce sweet poem of horse balls singing
in the poole. Nos poma natamus: because such scurrility becomes not divines,
yea is scarce tolerable in any sort of civil men: to the Arguments then thus I
answer.

If the conclusion were granted to M. Abbot, no particular church can be the
Catholic church, but the church of England is a particular church, therefore it
cannot be the Catholic church? which is so apparent, that M. Abbot cannot
deny it. whereupon it follows most clearly, that this argument can serve no
more for dissuading his majesty from admitting the doctrine of the church of
Rome, Page 13.
then from entertayning the doctrine of the church of England. therefore it is
to be rejected, as wholly impertinent to this purpose. But M. Abbot says, that
atleast it will serve to convince the absurdity of the papists style, who use
to coople together these two terms Catholic Roman: which hangs no better
together (says he here) then universal particular. though afterward better
advised, he within the compass of two leaves does confess, that both these
terms may in good sense be joined together. these be his words. Particular
churches are called Catholic, and particular persons are Called Catholics, as
a man would say, vniuersalists, for maintayning communion and fellowship of
the Catholic faith with the church of the whole world; so that even after M.
Abbots own declaration, a Roman Catholic is not as much to say as a
particular universal, but a particular man or church, that holds communion
of faith with the universal church.

was it not then a great oversight in a man reputed to ^ee of some Judgment, to
insist so vehement^^e upon trifling terms, that were both besides the
purpose; and withal true in themselves (as you shall hear afterward) if
they be evenlie and fairly taken. Notwithstanding because the foresaid
arguments be as it were the common hackneys of protestants, ever and anon in
their mouths and writings, and have not been formerly answered by any that I
have seen; and for that the solution of them will serve to answer all that M.
Abbot has raked together against the church of Rome in four paragraffes of
this chapter, I will more particularly and fully dissolve them.

I say then first, the argument is mistaken, and does not conclude that which
is in question. the question is not, whether the Roman church be the Catholic
church in universal: but whether the Roman church may be called the
Catholic church, or rather whether it may be couched together in style with
the Catholic church. M. Abbot says no, these be his words. For the pulling
of this vizard from their faces, I noted the absurdity that is employed in
that style, of the Catholic Roman church: for the Catholic church (I say) is
the universal church, the Roman church is a particular church, therefore to
say the Catholic Roman church, is all one as to say, the universal
particular church. This was M. Abbots first argument; and the drift of it was
to disprove that style of ours, the Catholic Roman church. Now in his latter
reformed argument, he is come to change the terms, and in stead of that, the
particular Roman church, cannot be said, called or styled, the Catholic
church: does bring in his conclusion, the Roman church is not the Catholic
church: wherein lies a great fallacy; for as the learned do well know, tranfire
a rebus ad voces, v^le contra, a vocibus adres, est agere sophistam. he plays
the part of a sophister, that passes either from things to words, or from
words to things. which all protestants do, when they use this kind of
argument: for the question is about terms and a style of speech: wherefore the
conclusion must be, so it may not be termed, or so it cannot be styled; and
not passing from the term or style, to conclude so it is not. here one may
well demand how things can be so termed, if they be not so in themselves? I
answer that it often falls out, that one thing is called by the name of
another thing, though it be not fully out the same. for example, some part
may be called by the name of whole, though it be not the whole, as a part of
the air, is called the air: any part of the water, is called water. Against
which if a man should reason as M. Abbot does, no part is the whole, but this
is a part of water, therefore it is not the whole; the conclusion might be
granted him, and yet had he gotten nothing thereby, but the imputation of
misarguing, and not concluding that which was in question; the question being,
whether a part might be called by the name of the whole, which he touches
not: and not whether it were the whole or not, which only he disputes. it
fares even so in the former argument. for the question being whether with the
Catholic church, might be linked in the same style, the church of Rome; he
concludes only that the church of Rome is not the Catholic church: which if
we grant him, he were never the nearer: for albeit the church of Rome were not
the Catholic church taken in vniuerso, or absolutely: yet may it be called by
the name of the whole, and much more, be in style linked with the whole. first,
because every particular church (that keeps communion of faith and religion
with the universal Catholic church) may be called and termed the Catholic
church. which M. Abbot himself confesses, Page 17.
and cites diverse good auctours to prove it: as Leo Epistola 12.
Leo pope of the Catholic church of Rome: Collat. cu^ donat. cognitione 1. c.
16.
Aurelius, Bishop of the Catholic church of Carthage. August. co^^rescon. l.
3. c. 13.
All the Africane Catholic churches, and so forth. where you see by the
ancient style of approved prelates and Doctors, Catholic Roman, and Catholic
African, and such like may very well in style be joined together, without any
fear of being scorned by the unskillful, for a particular universal. The
second reason why we rather join Roman to Catholic, then the name of any
other church, is for that the Roman church in faith and religion never has
been, nor never shall be separated from the universal Catholic church, as
shall be here after declared. whereupon as they shall ever hold together in
soundnes of faith, so may they be always linked together in verity of
style. Thirdly, for that we believe (as every good Christian ought to do,
which in this sectio^ shall beproued) the Roman church to be the chief, and as
it were the head of the universal church, and therefore the Roman may rather
in style be coopled with the universal Catholic then any other. This then
is the first fault and that a very foul one. which M. Abbot does committ in
this argument, he does not conclude that which is in question, but flitteth
away from it and quite changes the terms. wherefore having altered it he
does say untruly, that he has reduced it into mood and figure; which if he
would have done rightly, thus he should have framed his argument. No
particular church can be joined in style with the Catholic church, or can be
called the Catholic church; but the Roman church is a particular church: Ergo,
it cannot be joined in style or called the Catholic church. If it had been
thus reduced into mood and figure, as true scholasticall, and plain dealing
required, it had not had in it any one good proposition. I have proved already
that the mayor is false, because any particular church (sound in faith and
religion) may be called the Catholic church, and joined in style with the
Catholic: even as well and as truly, as any part of the air, may be called
the air. And more specially the churh of Rome, for the privileges it has of
continuing always in the true faith; and for her superiority in government.
The minor also or second proposition is not universally true. for albeit that
church of Rome, that is contained within the walls and Diocese of Rome, be a
particular church: yet the church of Rome in a larger signification, may be
taken for the whole Catholic church, and design as well the true church of
france, of England, or any other nation, as that of Italy. which I will
demonstrate in the next paragraff. wherefore the minor proposition (which is,
but the church of Rome, is a particular church) is not absolutely true: because
it may as well be taken for the universal, as for a particular church. both
the premises then and former propositions, being subject to reprehension, the
conclusion must needs be stark naught. Briefly in that argument whereof the
Protestants do make such account, there be three foul faults. Two be in it,
as they frame it: the first, in that it mistaketh or changes the terms, and
in steed of co^cluding the Roman church, not to be called or styled the
Catholic church, they conclude, that it is not the Catholic. The second, in
that they take for granted, that the Roman church is only a particular church,
when as it may and is often taken for the universal. The third fault, will
show it self in the first proposition when the argument comes to be rightly
framed thus. No particular church can be called or styled the Catholic church:
which is most false. because every true particular church may be called the
Catholic church or styled with the Catholic.

M. Abbots second argument being not much unlike the first may in like manner
be defeated, yet more shall be said of it in the fourth paragraff.



Concerning the supremacy of the church of Rome, M. Abbot acknowledges to
belong unto that church as it then was, eminency of place, precede^ce of
honor, authority of estimation; but no authority of power, or superiority in
government, over any of the rest. which to make good, he instituteth a long
disorderly discourse, now carping at that which I said before, in defense of
that superiority of government: then pouring forth many arguments confusedly,
some here, some there, to disprove the same: so that, I can scarce devise how
to range them in any good order. yet to make the matter as se^sible and
perspicuous, as his perplexed proceeding will give me leave: I will gather
into the first place what he has scatteringly disputed against the supremacy
of the church of Rome, and give answer to that. Secondly I will confirm our
part. Lastly, I will examine how sufficiently he has answered my former
arguments, made to prove the same. M. Abbots first argument against the
primacye of the sea of Rome, is taken ab authoritate negative, as scholars do
use to speak, from authority negatiuelie. which kind of reasoning, though
among the protestants it be holden for current in matter of faith: yet he can
not be ignorant, that we allow not of it; who hold some points of faith to be
delivered by unwritten tradition: wherefore if he had not wanted judgment, he
should not so confidentlie have used such kind of arguments against us.

But let us hear them such as they be. S. this is a very vain and
insufficient argument, even in the way of protestants. for albeit they would
grant, that if there were no warrant for it in all the old or new testament,
that then it were not to be creditted: yet they would not deny, but that it
might be a matter of faith, though there were no mention made of it in S.
Peter, or S. Paul's Epistles, so that it be recorded in any other part of the
scriptures: for all parts of the holy scriptures are alike true: wherefore any
thing written in any parcel thereof, is as well to be believed, as if it were
written in S. Peter's or S. Paul's Epistles. But M. Abbot urges in this manner:
S. Paul writ an Epistle to the Romans, and therefore he would not have omitted
that their privilege, if any such had been. I answer that S. Paul writ to
the Romans not of all matters, but to instruct them in some importa^t poi^ts of
doctrine, and to comfort them in their tribulatio^s: which he might well do,
without maki^g any mention of the privileges of their church. besides neither
M. Abbot not any man else (I think) is able to show, that S. Paul in all that
Epistle does so much as once treat of Bishops, or church government: wherefore
he had no occasion ministered to talk of the Roman churches supremacy. Let it
for this time suffice, that S. Paul does else where acknowledge S. Peter for a
person of excellency, and his superior: as the holy learned Doctors do gather
out of these his words. Then, after three years I came to Jerusalem to see
Peter, Gallat. 1.18.
and tarried with him fifteen days. That going up of S. Paul to Jerusalem to
visit S. Peter was not of curiosity, but of duty, and by the law of faith, as
Tertul. de praescrip. cap. 23. Paulus sicut ipse narrat ascendit Hierosolymam
cognoscendi Petri causa ex officio, and turc scilicet eiusdem fidei and
praedicationis.
Tertullian takes it. S. Chrysostom Chrysostomus superillum locum.

Vi les quemad ^odum illis tribuit congruentem honorem, neque solum non ducit
scipsum illis meliorem, verum ne parem quidem esse putat, id quod ex ipsa
profectione liquet: non dixit (...). sed (...). quomodo loqui solent,
quiinvisunt magnas vrbes vel viros sanctos.


out of the Energie of the greek word collecteth, that it was to see and to
visit Peter, as a person of excellency and majesty. And upon S. John's Chrysostom
hom 87. in Ioannem. Petrus os erat Apostolorum, and Princeps, and vertex ipsius
coetus, propterea and Paulus eum preter alios, visurus ascendit, simul vt ei
ostenderet tam ei fiduciam habendam.
Gospel adds another cause of. that visit to have been, to certify Saint
Peter of his extraordinary commission to preach the Gospel, that he might be
creditted of the Christians. which Saint Ambrose confirms in these words: It
was meet Ambros in 1 cap. ad Galatas.

Dignum fuit vt cuperet videre Petrum, qui primus erat inter Apostolos, cui
delegauerat Saluator curam ecclesiarum: non vtique vt aliquid ab eo disceret,
quia iam ab auctore didicerit, a quo et ipse Petrus fuerat instructus; sed
propter affectum Apostolatus, and vt sciret Petrus illi datam licentiam, quam
and ipse acceperat.


meet that Saint Paul should covett to see S. Peter, who was the chief among
the Apostles, to whom our Savior had com^itted the charge of the churches. Not
that he should learn any thing of him, who had before been instructed of the
same master, that S. Peter was: but for the quality of his Apostleshipp, and
that S. Peter might know the same commission to be given to S. Paul of
preaching which he had before received. Hieronimi Epla 89.

Denique tantae authoritatis Petrus fuit vt Paulus in Epistola sua scripserit:
deinde post annos tres veni Hierosoliman videre Petrum, etc.


S. Hierome says to the same effect. S. Peter was of so great authority, that
S. Paul writes he went to Jerusalem to visit him. Theodoret in 1. ad Galatas.

Et hoc rursus Pauli virtutem ostendit: etenim cum humana doctrina non
indigeret, vt qui ab vniuersorum deo eam ante accepisset, Apostolorum principi
quem par est honorem tribuit.


Theodoret thus: when S. Paul needed no instruction of men, having been taught
by the Lord of all, he nevertheles deferred that honor to the ptince of the
Apostles which was due. Theophilactus ibidem.

Paulus ad Petrum abijt non vtilitatis gratia sed solo visendi studio,
honoranseum maiorem se, and notat ibidem verbum (...) significare, cum
obseruatione intueri.


Theophilact. S. Paul desired to see S. Peter, as a personage greater then
himself, and went up with reverence to behold him.

By the record of all these ancient fathers S. Paul went up to Jerusalem to
visit S. Peter, as the prince of the Apostles, and as the chief governor of the
church: and to acquaint him with his extraordinary vocation; that having
gotten his approbation, he might without contradiction be received of all
others. Now to M. Abbots second argument, which is yet worse then the former.
S. John did honor to the seven churches of Asia, Apoc. 2. and 3.
writing to them; and yet he would never speak of the seven hills of Rome,
but as of the seat of the whore of Babylon. Ergo what you please: a mess of
plumme pottage if you will, for this pleasant Iester, rather then disputer.
has this sophisme so much as the shadow of a sorry argument? S. John in the 2.
and 3. chapters of the revelations, makes no mention of the church of Romes
supremacy: Ergo there is no such matter in all the scripture. M. Abbot blushing
at the ugly shape of this ilfavoured argument, to botch it out, does add:
that by those seven churches, are figured the whole church of Christ, and yet
there is not a word in the^ of the supremacy of the church of Rome. I think
well, nor of thundreth matters more that belong to the christian religion. for
these seven short letters which S. John writes to the seven churches, are
contained within the compass of three pages of one little leaf in octauo, in
their own bible: and can any man be so simple as to dream, that all the
points of our faith are comprehended within them? S. John com^ends the virtues,
and reprehends the vices of those churches; but does treat of very few points
of doctrine: and therefore no strange case, if he spoke not of the supremacy
of the church of Rome.

M. Abbots third argument, the church of Rome has a special caution given
her, not to presume upon her stabilitie in the faith, lest she fall. Romans 11.20.
S. Paul saying to her: Be not high minded but fear: for if God spared not the
natural branches, take heed also lest he spare not thee. Behold the
bountifulnes of God toward thee, if thou continue in his bou^tifulnes, or else
also thou shall be cut of. Ergo what: he had need to be a cunning fletcher,
that could make either a bolt or a shaft of this, fit for the purpose. First,
here is nothing at all against the church of Romes supremacy, nor yet any
certain assertion against her stability in the received faith. For here is
as well a promise of Gods bountifulnes toward them, if they will do well: as a
threat against them, if they do evil. Again, all this is besides the cushion:
for though that Epistle be to the Romans, yet S. Paul there does expressly
direct that discourse not to the Romans in particular, but in general to all
the Gentiles, beginning it thus: for to you Gentiles I say, etc. Ibid. v. 13
and goes on with a comparison between the Jews and the Gentiles: so that
nothing is more perspicuous, then that the warning there given, is not special
to the Romans, but general to all Gentiles. These (lo) be the foregalla^ts
(shall I say) or rather the forlorn hope of M. Abbots terrible arguments,
marshalled by himself in the forefro^t of his batlle, to dau^t the Enemy; are
we not like (think you) to have a hott skirmish of it, where such dross and
refuse of arguments, are thought worthy the first and best place? but it were
pity that such a bad cause should be burnished and set out with any better.

that I give him chalk for cheese; because I promised a deduction out of the
word of God, and in steed thereof, bring an exposition of the ancient fathers.
Mark gentle reader my words, and then thou can not but find M. Abbot to be
an egregious wrangler. for I performed that deduction which I promised out of
Gods word, naming the very place out of which it is deduced. but because I
joined with it, (according unto the exposition of ancient fathers) he like a
man scarce well in his wits cries out, that in steed of scriptures I bring in
an exposition of the fathers. when I do make mention of the fathers exposition,
not as the ground of my deduction, but only for the true sense of those words
of holy scripture, out of which I do make the said collection. The deduction in
my former book was very brief, because I did there point only at the places
of holy scriptures, out of which it might be gathered; the question of the
supremacy being there but touched by the way. whereof M. Abbot takes advantage
and says, that I am dumb, and can say no more: because I will not be like to
him, and out of season thrust forth long discourses of by questions. I having
also before written a whole chapter of the supremacy, in my second part against
M. Perkins: where M. Abbot saw well enough, that I could have said here much
more of the same matter if need had so required. but such is his impudency,
that he cares not what he say, so he may make a show to his simple reader,
that he has canvased his adversary. seeing that M. Abbot has here hudled
together very much of that matter, I will more at large set down these
deductions, and orderly confirm each member thereof. The first fountain out
of which all the rest do flow as rivers, is this. The chief superiority in
government, and authority of power over all the church, was by our blessed
Savior given to S. Peter, and to his successors unto the end of the world: but
the Bishops of Rome, are S. Peter's successors: therefore the Bishops of Rome
have from our saviors grant and gift authority of power, and superiority of
government over all the church. The mayor of this argument is to be deduced out
of the word of God. the minor being a matter of fact, and that which happened
after S. Peter's death, to wit, who was his successor: shall have sound proof
out of the most approved testimony, of the best witnesses since that age. All
which being performed, the conclusion, that the Bishop of Rome has supreme
commanding power over all the church, must needs stand most assured. That our
blessed savior gave superiority of government to S. Peter, under the metaphore
of a rock or foundation in building when he said, Thou art Peter, Math. 16
and upon this rock I will build my church; Thus I prove. Christ made Peter
the rock or foundation of his church: therefore he gave to him the chiefest
place of government in it. for as the foundation is first placed and does
uphold all the rest of the building: so he that is the foundation in the
spiritual building of Christ's church, has the chiefest place therein, and is
to com^and over all the rest. To make this more perspicuous, we must call to
mind, that amongst other titles and names of the church of God, one is a
house, as the Apostle shows: that thou may know how to converse in the
house of God, 2. Tim. 3.15.
which is the church: and the faithful are called by the same Apostle, 1. Cor.
3.9. Ephesians. 4.12.
the building of God, Dei aedificatio estis. Again God gave some Apostles,
some Doctors, etc. to the building up of the body of Christ. S. Paul as a wise
Architect laid the foundation, and others builded thereupon. Now in that
supernatural and heavenly building, 1. Cor. 3.
though our savior Christ Jesus be the chief fundation and corner stone: yet
next to himself he has placed Saint Peter, and has upon him, as upon a firm
rock, builded his church: which is as much to say, as that he gave him firm
and infallible authority, upon which all the faithful should rely, for final
resolution, in all doubts of faith, religion, and manners, which do necessarily
appartayne to the edifying of Christ's church. this may serve for a cursory
exposition of the first fountain of holy scripture, out of which I derived
that our Savior bestowed upon S. Peter the supreme place of government in his
church: a fuller confirmation of it shall follow by and by.

6 I might add for further proof of the same position out of Saint John's
Gospel, how our blessed Lord severing Saint Peter from the rest of the
Apostles, and intimating how S. Peter loved him more then any of them; gave to
him as head pastor, the charge of both his sheep and lambs, that is, of all
Christians, as well the clergy as the laity, to be by him instructed, ruled
and governed, as the flock of sheep is fed and ruled by the shepherd, which
according to the ancient doctors testimony, does very plainly confirm Saint
Peter's supremacy, as you shall hear presently out of their own words. yet
this, though it be most pregnant among the rest, I then omitted: because the
question of the supremacy was not to be handled there at the full. I touched
also a third text to prove that the Bishop of Rome, as Saint Peter's successor,
should never fail in confirming of his brethren in the true faith; taken out
of Saint Luke. where our Lord says. Simon, Simon, behold, Luca 22.
satan has required to have you for to sifte as wheat; but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not; and thou once converted, confirm thy brethren.
where upon it follows that all others ought to repair to him and his
successors for resolution of all controversies in faith, to be confirmed by
him; and are bound thereby to obey him as the person, to whom Christ gave power
to confirm his brethren. Of the first text of scripture shall be treated more
at large in this section; for the others I will only note some places of the
holy fathers, where the reader may see the very same explication of Christ's
words and deduction that I make here by their authority approved: because M.
Abbot does here very hotly call for such testimonies, and seems so earnestly
set upon the sight of them, that I must needs give him out of hand, at least
the quotations of them in the margent, and then (small doubt) but he will
presently be satisfied, if there be such honesty in him, as he makes show
of, well, if it be no more then for the good readers content, I will give him
more then he demau^deth, that is not only the quotations in the margent, but
their words also in the text.

Origenes in cap. 6. ad Romans Petro cum summa rerum de pascendis ovibus
traderetur, and super ipsum velut super terram, fundaretur ecclesia, nullius
confessio virtutis alterius ab eo, nisi charitas cuigitur.
To begin Origin says when the church was founded upon S. Peter and supreme
power of feeding Christ's sheep was com^itted to him, the profession of no
other virtue then of charity was demanded of him. Cipri. de vnitate eccles.

Petro post resurrectionem dominus dicit, pasce oves meas: super illum vnum
aedificat ecclesiam suam, and illi pascendas mandat, oves suas.


S. Ciprian Christ after his resurrection said to Peter: feed my sheep, and
upon him alone does build his church. In both these sentences are linked two
texts of the Evangelists, that concern Saint Peter's supremacy. Ambros. 10. in
Lucam cap. 24.

Contristatur quia tertio interrogatur, Amas me? i^ enim interrogatur de quo
dubitatur: sed dominus non dubitabat, qui interrogabat, non vt disceret, sed vt
doceret, quem elevandus in caelum amoris sui nobis velut vicarium relinquebat.
and paulo post: ideo quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus antefertur.
ibidem: tertio dominus non iam diligis me^? sed amas me, interrogauit, and iam
non agnos vt primo, quodam lacte pascendos; nec oviculas vt secundo, sed oues
pascere iubetur, perfectiores vt perfectior gubernaret.


Saint Ambrose. Our lord not to learn himself but to teach us, did ask him,
whom he (being to ascend into heaven) would leave us as it were the vicar of
his love. for so thou have: Simon son of John: do thou love me, etc. Peter
testified his affection, and therefore because he alone made that profes^ion,
he is preferred before the rest. and a little after: he is commanded to feed
the sheep as well as the lambs, that the perfecter sort might be governed by
him that was more perfect. behold sheep and lambs to be governed by Saint
Peter. Chrisost. homil. 1. de penitentia.

Poenitentia post tantum malum iterum cum ad priorem honorem reuehit, and
ecclesiae primatum, gubernationem que ipsi per vniuersum orbem tradidic.
Chrisost. homil 80. in Ioannem. Cum magna Christus Petro co^municasset and ei
orbis terrarum curam demandasset, etc.


S. Chrysostom: the primacie of the church and the government throughout the
whole world is by Christ committed to S. Peter. see him also in his last homily
upon S. John's Gospel, and in his second book of priesthood. whom Theophil.
cap. 21. Ioannis.

Totius orbis onium praefecturam Petro committit, non autem alij, sed huic
tradit.


Theophi lact upon the same place does follow saying. Christ grants to S.
Peter and to none else, the government of the church through the whole world.

Leo sermo 3. de assump.

De toto mundo vnus Petrus eligitur, qui and vniuersarum gentium vocationi and
omnibus Apostolis, ^unctisque Ecclesiae patribu^ praeponatur: vt quamuis in
populo dei mul^^ sacerdotes sint, multiqu^ pastores; omnes tamen proprie regat
Petrus, quos principaliter regit and Christus.


S. Leo among all the me^ of the wo^ld only Peter is chosen, who is placed
over the Apostles and fathers of the church, and over the vocation of the
Gentiles. And albeit among the people of God there be many priests and many
Pastors, yet Peter does rule all them properly, over whom our Savior Christ
does rule principally. observe the rule over all that appertain to Christ, to
be given by Christ to S. Peter.

Eucherius Lug in vigilia S. Petri.

Dicit ei, pasce oves meas: prius agnos, deinde oues co^misit ei. quia non
solum pastorem, sed pastorum pastorem eum constituit. pascit igitur Petrus
agnos, pascit and oues pascit filios, pascit and matres: regit and subditos and
praelatos: omniu^ igitur pastor est, quia praeter agnos and oues in ecclesia
nihil est.


Eucherius Archbishop of Lyo^s. Christ said unto peter. feed my sheep. first he
committed to him his lambs, then his sheep, because he did not only
constitute him a pastor, but the pastor of pastors. therefore Peter does feed
the lambs and the sheep; he feeds the yonglinges and their dammes, he does
govern the subjects and the Prelates. wherefore he is pastor of all, because
besides lambs and sheep, there is nothing in the church.

Gregorius lib. 4. Epist. 32.

Cunctis ergo Euangelium scientibus liquet, quod voce dominica, sancto and
omnium Apostolorum principi Petro Apostolo, totius Ecclesiae cura co^missa est.
ipsi quippe dicitur Petro, amas me? pasce oues meas: ipsi dicitur, ecce Satanas
expetiuit cribarevos sicut triticum, and ego pro te rogavi Petre vt non
deficiat fides tua, etc.


Gregory the great. it is manifest to all that know the Gospel, that the charge
of the whole church, was by our lords voice committed, to holy S. Peter prince
of all the Apostles. for to him it was said: Peter, do thou love me? feed
my sheep. to him it was said; behold Satan has desired to sift you as wheat.
And I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith shall not fail: and thou once
converted confirm thy brethren.

In which passage you see that other place of S. Luke employed to establish the
supremacy. which Leo ser: 3. ass:

Commune erat omnibus Apostolis periculum de te^tatione formidinis, and diuinae
protectionis auxilio pariter indigebant, etc. and tamen specialis a domino
Petri cura suscipitur and pro fide Patri proprie supplicatur, tanquam aliorum
status certior sit futurus, si men's principis victa non fuerit.


S. Leo also does in the forealleaged place in these words. Our lord took
special care of Peter, and for the faith of Peter did he pray peculiarly:
for the state of others should become more certain, if the mind of the Prince
were not overcome. And after a little. Christ made Peter prince of the whole
church. S. Chrysostom understood the supremacy to be given to S. Peter in the
same words, when he thus reasons.

Chrisostom. in 3. act. Apostolorum.

Quam est feruidus? quam agnoscit creditum a Christo gregom? quam in choro
princeps est, and obique primus onnium incipit loqui?


Behold the fervor of S. Peter how well did he know the charge of the flock
to be committed to him by Christ? how well does he show himself the prince of
that company? and does always speak first: mark the reason. for to him had
Christ said: And thou once converted confirm thy brethren. In like manner
Ambros. in Psalm: 43.

Denique Petrus ecclesia praeponitu^ postquam tentatus a diabolo est adeoque
ante significat dominus quid est illud quod postea cum pastorem elegit dominici
gregis, nam huic dixit: tu autem conuersus co^firma fratres tuos, etc.


S. Ambrose. Peter is made President of the church; Christ did signify before
what he meant by that, that he chose him pastor of our Lords stock: for to
him he said, thou being converted confirm thy brethren. So does Theophil in
c. 22. Lu^ae.

Tu conuersus: planus huius loci intellectus est, quia te habeo vt principem
discipulorum, postquam me abnegato, fleueris, and ad panit^ntiam veneris,
confirma cet^r^^, hoc enim tedecet, qui post (...) petra es et firmamentum.


Theophilact. the plain sense of this place is: because I esteem of thee, as
of the prince of my disciples, after that thou (having denied me) shall weep,
and come to repentance, do thou confirm the rest: for that becomes thee, who
after me art the rock and foundation of the church.

These texts of holy Scriptures, and testimonies of ancient fathers (to omit
many others) I deliver by the way, in confirmation of S. Peter's primacy, to
give M. Abbot a proof, that I could have said more for that cause, then I said
in my former book: where I did pass over that point speedely, as scarce
belonging to the question then in hand.

7 Now I return to that text recorded in S. Matthew. Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock will I build my church: upon which we must stand the longer,
because M. Abbot does say what he could devise, against the true sense of it.
by it therefore I will prove according to my former deduction, first that the
primacy was given to S. Peter: and afterward show that it is derived to the
popes of Rome his successors. M. Abbot confesses that the fathers sometimes
take Peter to be that rock, upon which Christ built his church; but avoucheth
that none ever said that the church of Rome was the rock, yea adds very
groslie, that I belie the fathers, and father that on them which they never
meant, when I say, that they out of that text gathered the Pope of Romes
supremacy, how audaciously and untruly this is spoken shall appear, as soon
as I have dispatched the former part, about S. Peter himself. Let it therefore
be first duly considered, what a worthy company of the ancient renowned
fathers, both Greek and Latin do interpret S. Peter to be that rock, upon
which our blessed savior built his church, and therewith gave him power and
authority to govern the same: that no man may doubt that to be the true
literal sense first intended; though secundarily, it may admit other
constructions. I will begin with that famous Clarke Origin, who is one of the
auncienst amongst the Greeks, that has written comentaries upon the
Testament: he styles Origin. homil. 5. in Exodum.

Vide magno illi ecclesiae fundamento, and Petrae solidissimae, super quam
Christus fundauit ecclesiam quid dicatur a domino, modicae inquit fides, quaro
dubitasti?


S. Peter the great foundation of the church, and most sound rock upon which
Christ built his church. Hipolitus, Hipolit de constructione mundi

Princeps Petrus, fidei petra, quem beatum iadicauit Christus deus nost^r, ille
doctor ecclesiae, ille primus discipulorum, qui regus claues habuit, etc.


Peter the prince, the rock of faith, the Doctor of the church, the chief of
the Apostles whom our lord pronounced to be blessed. Eusebius Eusebius lib. 6.
historiae. 19. resert ex Origin.

Petrus super quem Christi ecclesia (contra quam ^nferorum p^rtae non
praeualebunt) aedificata est, etc.


recites these words: Peter upon whom was built the church of Christ, against
which hell gates shall not prevail. Epiphan in Ancorato non long a principio.

Ipse dominus constituit Petrum primum Apostolorum, petram firmam super quam
ecclesia dei aedificata est, and portae inferorum non praepraeualebunt aduersus
illam.


Epiphanius. Our lord made Peter the chief of the Apostles a firm rock upon
which he built his church.

Basilius super 2. cap. Esaiae.

Apost^loram vnus erat Petrus, super quam petram pollicitus fuerat s^am se
aedificaturum ecclesiam and statim: anima autem beati Petri nominata merito est
petra sublimis, quod in^ de radices solid infixerat, and aduersus plagas
stabiliter segesserit.


S. Basil. One of these Apostl^s or mountains was Peter upon which rock our
savior promised to build his church for the soul of Blessed peter was
worthily called a rock, for the fastnes of his faith, and fortitude against
tribulations etc. Gregor. Nazianz oratione 26 de moderatione in disputatione
seruanda.

Vide quemadmodum ex Christi discipulus, magnis vtique omnibus and excelsis,
atque electione dign^, hic Petrus petra vocetur, atque ecclesiae fundamenta in
fidem suam accipiat


S. Gregory Nazianzene, thous^est how among Chr^sts disciples, who were all
surely great worthy persons, Peter was called a rock: and the foundation of
the church committed to his fidelity. Chrisost. de laudibus Petri and Pauli.

De Petro quid dicemus, qui dulce spectaculum est ecclesiae, splendortotius
mudi, Apostolorum doctor, Angelus and homo, firma fidei petra, semlu ecclesiae
sapientia, etc Idem homil. 1. de penit. Petrum cum dico, petram omnino
infragilem, crepidinem immobilem, Apostolum magnum, primum discipulum, etc.


S. Chrysostom Peter the br^ghtnes of all the world, an Angel and a man, the
Doctor of the Apostles, the firm rock of faith, the grace and sage wisdom
of the church etc. and in an other place, when I say Peter, I name a rock that
cannot be battered, an immovable turrett. Cirill Cirill. Alexand. l. 2. c.
12. in Ioannem.

Respicit vt deum decet qui corda and renes scrutatur, videtque qui nihil
ignorant, ad quantam and fidem and virtutem discipulus peruenturus sit, etc. nec
Simon fore tam nomen sibi, sed Petrus, pradicit, vocabulo ipso commode
significans, quod in eo, tanquam in l'etra, lapideque firmissimo, suam esset
adificaturus ecclesiam.


Alex. Christ did heerby teach Peter, that he knows all things before they
be done, and did tell him before hand that his name should not be Simon, but
Peter (which is interpreted a rock) by the name it self fitly signifying, that
upon him as upon a rock, and most firm stone he would build his church.
Theodoretus libro 3. Psellus apud Theodoretum lib 3 in Cantica.

Per hutus crura Petrum intellige Apostolorum principem, in hoc enim dominus in
Euangelio, se Ecclesiam adificaturum promisit.


in Cantica does out of ancient Psellus teach, that our lord, promised to build
his church upon S. Peter Prince of the Apostles. Evagtius in lib 2. histor ca 4.

Petrus, qui est petra, et basis Catholicae Ecclesiae, et fides Orthodoxae
fundamentum, resert ex Concilio Chalcedonensi.


Evagrius: the most blessed Apostle Peter, with all praise to be extolled, who
is the rock, the base and foundation of the Catholic Orthodox faith.
Damascen. historia barlam. cap. 10.

Princeps Apostolorum Petrus, fidei petra, magister orbis ordinatus fuit.


Damascenus, the Prince of the Apostles Peter, the rock of faith, who as he
was made master of the whole world, so was he a pattern of penance.
Theophilactus in 22. Lucae: and ad cap 16. Math.

Remunerat Petrum Dominus, mercedem illi dans magna^, quod super eum
aedificauit Ecclesiam.


Theophilact before cited, Peter after Christ is the rock and fondat^on of the
church. and upon Saint Matthew: saying, our lord rewarded peter, bestowing on
him a great recompense in that he built his church upon him.

Let these twelve renowned Grecians serve for the testimony of the Greek
church: now to the Latin, I will begin with Te^tul. de praescriptione c. 22.

Latuit aliquid Petrum adificandae E^clesia Petram dictum, claves regni
coelorum consecutum?


Tertullian for his antiquity. Peter was called the rock, upon which the
church was to be builded. Cyprianus.

Deus vnu^ed and Christus vnus, et vna ecclesia, et Cathedra vna super Petrum
Domini voce fundata epist. 40. Petrus supra quem aedificata ab eodem domino
fuerat ecclesia, epistola 55. Loquitur hic Petrus super quem aedificata fuit
ecclesia epist 69. Petrus, quem primum dominus elegit, et super quem
aedificavit ecclesiam suam, etc epist 71.


S. Ciprian, Our lord chose Peter to be the chief, upon whom he built his
church. which he repeateth very often. Ambrosius sermon. 2. de sanctis.

Petrus pro soliditate devotionis ecclesiarum petra dicitur, sicut ait dominus:
Tu (...) Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam. petra enim
dicitur, eo quod primus in nationibus fidei fundamenta posuerit: and tanquam
saxum immobile operis totius Christiani compagem molemque contineat, recte
confortium meretur nominis, qui consortium meretur et operis.


S. Ambrose. Peter for the soundnes of his devotion, is called a rock, as our
lord does say, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, he
is called a rock for that he first laid the foundation of faith among the
Gentiles, and like unto an immovable stone, does uphold and contain the frame
and weight of the whole christian work. Hilar. in Psalm. 131.

Petrus super quem Ecclesiam aedificaturus erat, adversus quam portae inferorum
nihil praualerent. Idem in can. 16. in Mathaeum. O in nuncupatione novi nominis
faelix ecclesiae fundamentum. Hieronim in 2. Esaiae. Vnde and super vnum
montium Christus fundavit ecclesiam suam, and loquitur ad eum Tu^es Petrus, and
super hanc petram aedific^ho ecclesiam meam. Idem in 16. Matthaei. Simoni, qui
credebat in petram Christum, Petri largitus est nomen, ac secundum Metapho^^m
petrae, recte deitur ei, aedificabo ecclesiam meam superto.


S. Hilary. upon peter our lord was to build his church and in another place; o
happy foundation of the church i^ the imposition of a new name, a rock worthy
that building, that should dissolve the laws of hell. Hierome in 2. Esaiae.
Christ built his church upon one of the mountains, saying to him; Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church. Again according to the
Metaphore of a rock, it was rightly said to Peter, upon thee will I build my
church; which he does confirm expressly in diverse other places. August. in
Psalm. 69.

Petrus qui paulo ante eum confessus erat filium dei, and in ^lla confessione
appellatus est petra, super quam labricaretur ecclesia. Paulinus epistola 4. ad
seuerum. Christus est petra: sed etiam discipulo suo buius vocabuli gratiam non
negauit, dicens illi: super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam: and portae
inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam.


S. Augustine. Peter did confess^ Christ to be the son of God: and in that
confession was called a rock, upon the which Christ was to build his church.
Paulinus. Christ is the rock and yet he denied not the grace of this name to
his disciple (peter) saying to him: upon this rock I will build my church: and
the gates of hell, shall not prevail against it. Petrus Chrisologus. Peter is
the keeper of the faith, Petrus Chrysolog. sermon 107.

Petrus est custos fidei, petra ecclesiae ^anitorque coelorum. Leo hom. de
transfigurat. Tantum in hac fidei sublimitate com^la^rit, vt beatitudinis
faelicitate donatus, sa^rae ^nviolabilis Petrae acciperet firmitatem, supra
quam fundata Ecclesia, portis inferi and ^^ortis legibus pra^ aleret.


the rock of the church, the porter of the heavens. Leo the great. Peter did so
much please ^n the sublimity of this faith, that he being rewarded with the
felicity of blessedness, received the holy ^ou^dnes of an inviolable rock,
upon which the church being founded, does prevail against hell and the laws
of death. Gregor. lib 6. regi^ epist 37.

Quis enim nescit sanctam eccles^am ^n Apostolorum principu solid^tate
firmatam? qui firmitatem mentu traxit in nomine, vt Petrus a ^^tra (...) ^retur.


Gregory the great: who knows not the holy church to be settled in the
soundnes of the prince of the Apostles: because he, in his name has drawn
firmeness of mind, that of a ro^ke was named Peter. S. Isidore, Simon Peter,
the son of John, Isidor. de vita sanctorum. cap. 69.

Simon Petrus filius Ioannis, frater Andreae, Apostolorum princeps est, pastor
humani gregu, petra ecclesiae, Clavicularius regni. etc.

Idem de officijs eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5.

In novo testamento post Christum sacerdotalis ordo a Petro Apostolo caepit:
ipsi enim primus pontificatus datus est in ecclesia Christi. Sic enim loquitur
ad eum dominus: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram adificabo ecclesiam meam,
etc.

Prosper de vocatione gentium. l. 2. cap. 28.

Quis ergo ambigat, quis ignorant, hanc fortissimam petram, Petrum, (qui ab illa
principali petra communionem and virtutis sumpsit and nominis) hoc desiderium
habuisse, etc.


the brother of Andrew, is prince of the Apostles, pastor of the flock of me^,
the rock of the church. Again, in the new testament, priestly order after
Christ began of S. Peter, for to him was given the chiefest byshoprick in the
church of Christ. for thus does our lord speak unto him. Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build my church. Prosper. who can doubt that this most
valiant rock Peter, (who received of that principal rock Christ
participation both of name and virtue) had always a burning desire to die
constantly for Christ. Maximus: this is Peter, Maximus sermon. 51. de Petro
and Paulo.

Hic est Petrus, cui dominus communionem sui nominis libenter indulsit: vt enim
sicut Apostolus Paulus edocuit, Petra erat Christus, ita per Christum Petrus
factus est petra: dicente ei domino: tu es Petrus, and supra hanc petram
aedificabo ecclesiam meam.


to whom our lord favorably gave the fellowship of his own name. for as the
Apostle S. Paul teaches, Christ was the rock: even so by Christ, Peter was
made the rock, our lord saying unto him. thou art Peter, and upon this rock,
will I build my church.

Lower I will not descend. for these Latin fathers do suffice to certify any
reasonable reader, that this was the common opinion of the most approved
writers in the west church. which being linkt unto the other dozen of most
renowned Grecians, all famous Authors, and for the greater part, the most
godly, and best learned prelates of most Christian nations of the world.

These (I say) such excellent qualified personages, the masters and mirrours of
Christian Religion, with one consent agreeing, that our Savior Christ Jesus
did communicate his own name of Rock unto S. Peter, and upon him as upon a
most sound rock built his church: by which (as they understood it) he gave
unto him the Charge over the whole church, to govern and rule it, as chief
pastor thereof; to contain and uphold the whole frame of that heavenly
building, and holy house of God, next unto Christ, the principal foundation,
and head cornerstone. All this and much more they (whom both Catholics and
Protestants hold for the best learned, and most worthy prelates of Christ's
church) teaching so plainly, what Christian heart (that has any spark of
godliness or any care of embracing the truth, when it is showed him) had not
rather believe and follow their Judgment therein, then the new opinions of late
writers, partially pleading for their own fancies? specially if they please to
consider, what weak reasons they allege, to delude that common exposition of
the ancient fa^hers: Among which these as principal M. Abbot has here made
choice of.

that Christ is the rock, upon which he built his church, upon this that thou
have confessed (says saint Austin) and acknowledged, that is, upon my self, I
will build my church. I Answer out of the fathers before rehearsed that both be
true: Christ is the rock, and yet he gave the same name and title to S. Peter,
as both S Hierome, Paulinus, Prosper, and Maximus abouecited do testify. with
whom Ambrosi. l. 6. in Lucam cap. 9. Tertul. l. 4. Co. Marcio. c. 13.

Christus chariss. discipulo nomen communicauit suum.


S. Ambrose does agree, affirming our Savior to have communicated most of his
titles to his disciples, S. Basil. homil. 29. ex varijs ad populum, de
poenitentia.

Licet Petrus sit petra, non tamen sicut Christus, nam Christus vere est
immobilis petra: Petrus vero propter petram, axiomata namque sua, Jesus
largitur alijs, non evacuatus, sed nihilominus habens. lu^e est: vos estis lux
mundi inquit. Sacerdos est, and facit Sacerdotes, petra est, and petram facit.
qua sua sunt largitur seruis suis, argumentum hoc est opulenti.


and in particular to S. Peter, that of a Rock. and so does Tertullian. to whom
S. Basil adds: Christ is the rock, and Peter is the rock, Christ an
immovable rock of himself, But Peter through Christ. Christ (says this great
doctor) imparts his dignities unto others, without depriving himself of them,
he is the light of the world, yet says to his Apostles, ye are the light of
the world; he is the priest, and he makes priests: he is the rock, and he
makes a rock, with whom accords S. Leo saying; I am (says our Savior) a
rock, S. Leo 3. assump suae.

Cum ego sim inuiolabilis Petrae ego lapis angularis qui facio vtraque vnum.
Tamen tu quoque Petra es, quia mea virtute solidaris; vt quae mihi potestate
s^nt propria, sint tibi mecum participatione communia.


yet thou (Peter) art also a rock, because that thou shall be made sound by
my virtue. and these things which are proper to me by power, shall by
participation be comunicated to thee. so that argument of M. Abbots is nothing
worth. for albeit our Savior Christ be the rock in a far more eminent and
excellent manner, (as he that vpholdeth all the church from the beginning of
the world unto the latter end; and is by his own merit and power immovable;
yea he is the builder of the same church; and out of his side the same Church
is builded, as Eve was out of one of Adams ribs;) yet it follows not
thereof, but that S. Peter may be the rock chosen by Christ, to be his
vicegerent, and chief governor of his Church under him; by the soundnes of his
faith, made fit to confirm all others, that shall have any doubt there about.
like as in the state of the old testament, Notwithstanding Christ was the head
corner stone thereof: yet there was one high priest, that had under him supreme
authority over all the rest, and sovereign power to determine all doubts
arising about their law. Albeit our Savior be the rock, upon which the
church is built in a most peereles manner: yet that those words of his (upon
this rock I will build my church) were not meant of himself, but of S. Peter,
is most evident first, by the uniform consent of all the ancient fathers,
both Greek and Latin before rehearsed. true it is that Augustine l 1. retract c.
21. ^arum autem duarum sententiarum, quae sit probabilior, eligat lector.
S. Austin sometimes applies them, both to Christ, and to S. Peter: and leaves
to the readers choice, whether he will take. which choice is easy to be made,
when S. Augustine with all the rest before recited, stand clearly for S. Peter;
and he alone makes some doubt of it. more over, all the circumstances of the
text be on the other fathers side. first, the words next before are plainly
addressed to S. Peter. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, will I build my
church. Again in the language which our Savior spoke, it is so clear, that
there can be no doubt of it: for it is: thou art Cephas, that is a stone, and
upon this stone I will build my church: the very same word without any
alteration, being used in both places. Besides, these words contain a reward
bestowed upon Saint Peter for the sincere confession of that high mystery of
faith; as the ancient fathers do testify with S. Hierom upon that place,
Hieron. in c. 16. Math. Hilarious can. 16. in Math. Confessio Petri praemium
co^secuta est. Theophila. in c. 16. Math. Maximus vbi supra.
Mercedem recepit vera confessio, the true confession of S. Peter received due
reward. but it had been no recompense of Peter's confession, for Christ to have
built his church upon himself. does it not in very common sense seem very
harsh, for our Savior to pretend a great favor to Peter, as to say to him,
Happy art thou Peter etc: And I say to thee, thou art Peter: and in fine, to
fall from Peter to himself, and say; upon my self I will build my church?
Lastly the church being understood to be built upon Peter, the reason is
declared why our Savior changed the name Simon into Peter, as if he had said I
gave thee the name Peter, that does signify a rock. because that upon thee,
as upon a rock, I will build my church. As God said to Abraham, thou shall be
called Abraham (that is say, father of many people) Quia patrem multarum
Gentium constituite, because I have appointed thee the father of many nations:
All this by the way, to show the true literal sense of that text to be the
very same, which the Orthodoxe fathers have uniformly delivered.

M. Abbots second objection against the fathers interpretation is this: Christ
built his church upon the true faith and confession of Peter, therefore not upon
Peter. which does not follow: for the true faith and confession of Christ being
in S. Peter; if Christ built his church upon them, he did withal ioinctly
buile it upon him, in whom they were, for the further explication of this
difficulty, it is to be understood, that the church being a congregation of
men, it is to be ruled by men: who indeed are to be chosen rulers thereof, for
the excellent qualities of faith, constancy, and charity. for example, to rule
the temporal state, te^porall Magistrates are chosen, endued with wisdom,
Justice, fortitude, and other virtues, that make men fit to govern. but to
speak properly, not the virtues, which be accidental qualities, but the men
so qualified, be governors: A Judge is chosen for his sound skill in the
laws, and for his upright conscience in the administration of Justice. A
Bishop for his deep knowledge in Divinity, for his wisdom in governing, and
holiness of life: yet not these virtues, but those persons, be this the Judge;
that the Bishop. S. Peter for the soundnes of his faith, and for the invincible
valor of his mind, as Basil. ad cap. 2. 2. Esa.
S. Basil writes: and for the fervor of his charity and devotion, as Ambr.
sermon. 2. de sanctis
S. Ambrose notes, was by our Savior chosen to be the supreme pastor of his
church, and chief Governor in Ecclesiastical affairs, which is the same in
effect, that Chris. hom. 56. in Matthew.
S. Chrysostom and Theod. in cant. l. 2.
Theodorete by M. Abbot alleged do say, upon this faith and confession, that
is, in respect of those virtues, which were eminent in S. Peter, I build my
church on him. for they both do teach the church to be builded upon S. Peter;
but would have us to know, that that great dignity was not bestowed on him,
upon mere affection to his person, but in regard of those his excellent and
worthy qualities. whence it does not follow, that whosoever has the like
qualities, shall have the same dignity; unless they also be thereunto lawfully
called and chosen, as S. Peter was by our Savior. No more then it does follow,
that all they shall be made Bishops or Judges who have the virtues requisite for
Bishops and Judges. Now to that taken out of Ambr. ad Ephesians. cap. 2.
S. Ambrose; upon this rock will I build my church, that is, in this
confession of the Catholic faith, will I establish the faithful to life. I
answer first that M. Abbot has clipped of the former part of S. Ambrose
words, in which he says, that our Savior did declare S. Peter to be the
foundation of his church, in that he built his church upon him, when he said to
him, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church. these words
would have marred M. Abbots market, therefore he did wisely, to ouerskip them.
now that which follows, may serve rather to confirm our opinion, then make
any whit for theirs, for thus it may be understood: Saint Peter for that his
confession of faith, received power and virtue from Christ to confirm others
in the faith, thereby to establish them to life. And so by that confession of
faith made by Saint Peter, the faithful are established to life. Again Saint
Ambrose (who elsewhere often, and in that very place teaches S. Peter to be
that rock upon which the church was built) might make a secondarie good moral
construction of those words, teaching every man to believe as Saint Peter did,
and to make the like confession of their faith, that they might be settled in
the right way to life everlasting which moralization of Christ's words does not
cross, but suppose the true litterall sense, to be as before you have heard
out of Saint Ambrose with the uniform consent of other fathers. To that which
follows in the same Author: these words of the Apostle, in him all the
building is coopled together etc. are the sense and meaning of that which our
lord said: upon this rock I will build my church. I answer there is a cunning
trick used in cutting of the Apostles words in the midst with an etc: and
making that to be the exposition of the first part of the sentence, which
Saint Ambrose makes the interpretation of the last, as may appear unto him,
that will see the place. for his reason is, fideles enim sunt superficies
templi dei, etc. for the faithful of holy conversation, be the walls or over
parts of that temple of God. which suteth well with the latter end of Saint
Paul's sentence, which is, in whom you also are built together into an
habitation of God in the holy Ghost: in brief S. Ambrose meaning in that place
is no other, then that the Apostle used the same Metaphore of building, which
our Savior did when he said, Thou art Peter and upon this rock, I will build
my Church. Of which spiritual building the faithful are the over parts, the
Apostles the foundations, among whom S. Peter is the rock, and Christ the head
corner stone, that closes all together, and bears up both peoples, as well
those that went before as those that came after his incarnation.

M. Abbots fourth objection: Epla Iuuenalis ^t Epist pal. in Apendice Council:
Cholced:
the whole number of the Bishops of Palaestina in the council of Chalcedon,
understood Christ's words so: upon this confession, the church of God is
confirmed and strengthened.

ANSWER. THat whole number I find to be but two or three, and they not in the
council neither, nor during the time of that council: but after they came
home from the council. and their meaning is plain for us. They having been at
the council of Chalcedon, and there heard and saw, how Discorus patriarch of
Alexandria was for his heresy and obstinacy censured and condemned, by the
sentence of Leo the great Bishop of Rome, did certify all them that were under
their charge, that the church of God was confirmed and strengthened, by the
confession and declaration of the Bishop of Rome S. Peter's successor: and how
in him was verified that sentence of our Savior, upon this rock I will build
my church: and that other also, Thou being converted, confirm and strengthen
thy brethren. which is all as direct for us as can be. besides, what other
pregnant proof there is in that general council for S. Peter's supremacy, and
that the Bishop of Rome is his successor in the same supreme authority,
shall be hereafter declared more at large.

Out of these former arguments M. Abbot makes this inference; that by the
exposition of the ancient fathers it may appear that Christ, eue^ the true
faith of Christ, (for Christ is nothing to v^ but by faith) is the true rock,
whereupon the church is builded. to which S. John accords. This is the
victory, that over comes the world, even our faith; for who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the son of God.
what is this (good Sir) to the present purpose of the popes supremacy? though
faith in some good sense may be called a rock, because it is the foundation
and ground work of all other Christian virtues: yet how does it follow thereof,
that S. Peter is not that rock, upon which it pleased Christ to build his
church? what, because there is an order in the frame of a virtuous life, must it
needs there upon ensue, that there is no order in the government of Christ's
Church? is not this a very strange inference? For the clearer explication of
this doubt, ^^t this distinction be observed: the building of Christ's church
as it is like to a kingdom, differs much from the building of a spiritual
temple unto the holy Ghost in our souls. to the first kind of building belong
subjects and magistrates, Bishops, Archbishops and so forth, the highest whereof
under Christ was S. Peter. To the other inward building concur all such
divine graces and qualities that serve for the reformation of our soul, as
faith, hope, Charity, humility, and such like. among which virtues, faith in
Christ Jesus, is at it were the fundamental stone. to the argument then this
is the answer, that albeit faith in Christ be as it were the rock and
foundation of all Christian virtues: yet that is no let, but that in the order
of Christian magistrates, S. Peter may be the rock, and have the chief
commanding power given to him, and to his successors the Bishops of Rome.
purity of faith, boldness of confession, fervor of Charity (rare gifts of God
bestowed on S. Peter) were the principal dispositions in him to that other
high dignity and authority: but the authority it self of government was not
bestowed on those virtues, but upon the person of Saint Peter: though in regard
of the same divine qualities.

After these arguments M. Abbot infers; that if Christ be the rock
properly and truly, Saint Peter cannot be the rock, but accidently and
improperly, in respect of his doctrine and example of says, uttered in his
confession: As Abraham is the rock from wh^nce we are hewed so is Peter the
rock whereon we are built; not that either of them conferreth any thing to us,
but only for that they stand before us for patterns of imitation.

I answer that he should rather have made this inference: because Christ is the
rock of the Church most properly: therefore S. Peter is the rock thereof also
properly. both for that Christ made him the rock, who makes all things well
and properly: and also because the properties of a rock, do fitly agree to S.
Peter: that is, to be constant and firm in the faith; to strengthen and
uphold others, as has been before declared. To imagine Saint Peter to be
called a rock, because he is a pattern of imitation, is as dull and
blockish, as to call a duske dark stone, a clear looking glass. Abraham was
more properly by the prophet called though in another sense, a rock, out of
which the Jews were hewn and a pit out of which they were dug; because
all the Israelites descended out of his loins, as stones are hewn or dug
out of a rock.

10 M. Abbot not being able to disprove S. Peter to be the rock, because our
Savior Christ alone is the rock, turns himself on the other side and will
needs prove that all the Apostles were rocks, and Peter therein not to have
bee^ alone, but that as he spoke in the person of all the Apostles; so
Christ's words returned in answer to Peter, should appertain to them all.
for says he, Saint Austin affirms, that Peter answe^ed for all, Aug. in
psalm. 8^.
one for unity. And Hierome by the words here spoken to Peter concludes:
Hieron. in Amos l 3 c. 6.
that Christ the rock, gave not to one only Apostle, but to his Apostles, that
they also should be called rocks. And in like sort Origin conceiueth when he
says. Orig in Math. c. 16.
If thou think that the church was built upon Peter only, what will thou say
to John the son of thunder, and to every of the Apostles, etc. we must
rather say that in all and ev^rie one of them is verified, upon this rock I
will build my church. and in a word he reasons thus: because that which
follows after; I will give to th^e the Keys of the knigdome of h^aven, is
co^^on to them all: therefore that going before, is also common to them all. and
this the scripture confirms, in that it says; Ephesians. 2.20.
the household of God are builded not upon the foundation of Peter only, but
upon the foundations of the Apostles and Prophets. Reuel^t. 21.14.
And not Peter only, but the lambs twelve Apostles, have their names written
in the twelve foundations of the City of God. hitherto M. Abbot.

Does not this great inconstancy in answering, argue plainly that there is no
settled soundness in the protestants doctrine, but that they are carried about
with the wind? Before you heard that no other body saving Christ alone, could
be that rock; and to make that good M. Abbot was very earnest there: now the
wind blowing in an other door, not only Peter is the rock, but all the
Apostles as well as he, yea and every Christian man too is a rock, as you
shall hear hereafter. And all this to make men believe, that it is but an
ordinary matter to be that rock, upon which Christ built his Church. we that
hold it to be one of the greatest privileges that could be granted to a
mortal man, do notwithstanding grant, that the Apostles may be called rocks
as they are called foundations, after a certain proportion; that is, as S.
Peter was the fundamental rock, placed next unto our Savior over the whole
Church: So the Apostles were constituted principal pillars or rocks of
certain countries, laying the foundation of Christian religion in them, by
preaching the Gospel, and by ruling the several flocks committed to their
charges. As Metropolitans and primates may be said to be the rocks and
foundations of Christian religion in their provinces, because they do
principally command over all Ecclesiastical persons therein; and do keep all
under them in unity of faith; In like manner to preserve all Christian
countries in the said unity of faith and uniformity of religion; there ought
to be one supreme pastor over all the world; who first was S. Peter, and ever
since have been his lawful Successors, the Bishops of Rome. All this is good
doctrine, but to say that these words in S. Matthew. were spoken as well to the
rest of the Apostles as to S. Peter, which M. Abbot would feign have his reader
believe, is flatt against the evidence of the very text. For S. Peter is there
severed from the rest by all circumstances that can be devised in so few
words. first by his own proper name: for our Savior said to him, happy art
thou Simon. then by the name of his father: the son of Jonas. thirdly by
mention of a special revelation made to him: for flesh and blood has not
revealed this to thee. fourthly by express direction of this speech to him: I
say to thee, (not to all the Apostles) thou art Peter; none of the rest were so
called. Out of which it does ensue most clearly, that the words immediately
following (and upon this rock I will build my church) were particulerly spoken
to S. Peter, and not to any other of the Apostles. To the others afterward was
given the power of binding and loosing, remitting of sins and retayning: yet
with out any mention made of the keys of the kingdom of heaven: which albeit
they do signify there a supreme commanding power: yet they may in a certain
sense be said to be given unto the other Apostles, as is the title of a rock.
though they be not that principal rock upon which Christ built his church,
so they had not the prime use of the keys, which was appropriated to S. Peter.
I do also further grant^, that the name of a rock, may be in a good moral
sense applied unto every constant Christian, that does confess the true faith
with S. Peter, and is constant and immovable in the same confession, like unto
a rock: And this is all which Origin and S. Ambrose cited by M. Abbot do say,
as may be seen by him that pleases to read the circumstances of those
places. for Origin discourses how all may be called rocks, that have this
effect of a rock. And that the gates of hell cannot prevail against them;
that is, all that do persevere constantly to the end in the true faith. S.
Ambrose exhorts all men to endeavor to be ro^kes, that is to have soundnes
in constancy and stedfastnes of faith. Origin adds, that which I before
said, that the Apostles and Prophets may be called rocks in a higher degree;
because they are the foundations of others, that are builded upon them; but
these expositions (as M. Abbot says) be Allegorical, or rather moral
explications of these our Saviors words: that do not destroy the prime
litterall sense thereof, which according unto the general consent of the
ancient fathers is, that Christ built his church upon S. Peter, as the supreme
governor thereof, as has been already proved.

Now to M. Abbots last evasion, that the August. Epist. 165 Idem de verb Domini
ser. 13.
Austin and S. Gregor. expos. in 1. Reg li. 6. cap. 3.
Gregory, yea and S. Gregory speaking of another matter, thus; that which
never was said to them of the old testament, is now said to the universal
church, whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth. which shows some difference
between the old and new testament; but nothing concerns these words of
Christ. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, I will build my church. which is
another kind of matter then that: whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, etc.
Again, is M. Abbot so simple as to think that the power of binding and
loosing is given to every particular member af the church? can women and
Children bind and loose? all a like perhaps in the protestants church, but it
is not so with us. yet that power may be said to be given to the whole
church, because it is given to the benefitt of the whole. though the charge and
administration thereof, be not committed and given to all and every person in
the church. But to return to S. Austin, he says, Aug de ver. Dominiser. 13.
that the name Peter was given to him, that by that figure he might signify
the church. because Christ is (petra) the rock, therefore Peter is the people
of Christ. So M. Abbot. well, let all this be true, what is this allegorical
interpretation of the name of Peter to our present purpose? It cannot be but a
great honor to Saint Peter, to have had a name given him by our Savior derived
out of his own name; and that may represent the people of Christ: and further
(which follows in that place of S. Austin: though M. Abbot thought it policy
to suppress it) Apostolorum principatum tenens. S. Peter held the
principality among the Apostles. all this makes much for S. Peter's
pre-eminence. but does it follow thereupon, that nothing which Christ said to S.
Peter, does properly appertain to him, but all is to be imparted to all
Christian people? how absurd were it to understand so judicious a Doctors words
as S. Austin was, after that childish manner? thou art Peter, that is after
this new gloss, all my people; and upon this rock, which contains also all
Christ's people, I will build my church. so that the sense after M. Abbots
exposition must be: Christ did build all his people, upon all his people. One
might very well be chosen out of the rest, as a foundation upon whom Christ
might lay all the rest: but how all the people, should be built upon all the
people, passes (I think) all understanding. Epistola 165.
But S. Austin elsewhere (says M. Abbot) has these words: to S. Peter, bearing
the figure of the whole church our lord said, upon this rock etc. be it so
that S. Peter bare the person of the church: that does not hinder the words to
be spoken to him effectually: but rather argues him to be the chief
governor of the church, Aug. in Psalm. 108. c^cione 1.
as the same saint in the like places does express, in this manner: Cuius
Ecclesiae ille agnoscitur in figura gestasse personam, propter primatum quem in
discipulis habuit. the person of which church, Peter is acknowledged in figure
to have represented, by reason of the primacie that he had among the
disciples. And yet more plainly in another place thus. Aug. Quaest. ex nouo
testam. quaest. 75

Saluator cum pro se and Petro dari iubet, pro omnibus ^xoluisse videtur, quia
sicut in domino erant omnes causa magisterij: ita and post Saluatorem in Petro
omnes continentur. Ipsum enim constituit esse caput eorum, vt pastor esset
gregis dominici.


when our Savior commanded tribute to be paid for himself, and for Peter,
he seems to have paid for all. for like as in our Savior there were all the
parts of a master; so after him all were contained in Peter. for he
co^stituted Peter head of the rest, that he might be the pastor of our lords
flock. By which words of S. Austin we gather, that S. Peter sometimes did
represent the whole church, because he was head and chief pastor thereof: as a
king does in some cases represent a kingdom. which is so for of from
disproouing S. Peter's supremacy, that hence we may take a strong argument to
prove it, and withal, the propagation thereof to his successors. for we are
taught out of these words of S. Austen to say, that S. Peter may be
considered, either as a private person, or as a public magistrate. that which
pleased our Savior to bestow upon him as a private person, was proper to
himself, and continued no longer then he lived: but that which Christ bestowed
upon S. Peter as a public magistrate; that was granted to the whole church,
and was to continue with the church to the worlds end. like as that which is
granted to a king as a public person, is holden as annexed to the Crown and
to descend always after to all his successors. now to our purpose: S. Austin
when he said that that prerogative was given to S. Peter, as representing the
whole church; does not deny it to be given him truly and actually: but does
signify that it was given him, not for his own proper use, but for the
benefitt of the whole church, and therefore given in remainder for ever unto his
successors, which was in the fullest and best sort that could be.

words, by M. Abbot himself last before cited, thus; whatsoever was said to S.
Peter as representing the person of the church, is taken to be said to all his
successors, as before has been declared: but those words of Christ, upon this
rock I will build my church, were spoken to S. Perer as representing the
person of the church, by the verdit of S. Austin approved by M. Abbot himself:
therefore these very words are to be understood as spoken unto all S. Peter's
successors: who being the Bishops of Rome as in due place shall be proved, it
follows evidentlie, that the Bishops or church of Rome, (for I take both them
for the same thing in this matter) is that rock upon which Christ built his
church. Is not this deduction plain enough? But what will you say, if the same
most Autentike Doctor do in express terms affirm the church of Rome to be
that self same rock, then all the world may see, that to be most apparently
true which I said: And M. Abbot must needs confess that he ouershot himself
very grossly. These be S. Austins own words; come my brethren if you please,
August. in Psalco: partem donati.

Venite fratres si vultis, vt inseramini in vite. dolor est cum vos videmus
praecisos ita iacere. Numerate Sacerdotes ab ipsa Petri sede, and in ordine
illo patrum, qui^ cui successit, videre, ipsa est petra, qua^ non vincunt
superba inferorum porta.


and be graffed in the vine. It grieveth us to behold you lying so cut of.
Reckon the priests even from the seat of Peter: and in that rue of fathers,
regard to whom who succeeded. that (seat) is the rock, which the proud gates
of hell do not overcome. The seat of Peter, and succession of Bishop^ of Rome,
is that rock in S. Austins judgment, against which hell gates shall not
prevail. was not that the very same rock, upon which Christ built his church?

S. Hierom was another most learned Doctor of the ancient church, Hier. Epist.
57. ad Damasum.

Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, beatitudini tua, id est, Cathedra
Petri communione consocior: super illam petram aedificatain ecclesiam scio,


as all the learned know, he testifies the same most plainly in these words
unto Damasus then Bishop of Rome. I following none as chief, but Christ, am in
communion associated unto your holiness, that is, unto the chair of Peter. upon
this rock I know the church of Christ to be builded. Lo S. Hierom knew and
confessed S. Peter's chair, in which Damasus the pope then sat, to be the
same rock upon which Christ built his church. Pope Julius the first was yet a
more ancient, and a very holy and grave father, he teaches the same
plainly in these words. Ex Iulij increpatoria ad Orientales.

Ipsa Romana seeds, omnibus mayor and praelata est ecclesijs. quae non solum
Canonum and sanctorum patrum decretis, sed D. Saluatoris nostri voce,
singularem obtinuit principatum: Tu es, inquit, Petrus, and super hanc petram
adificabo ecclesiam meam.


The sea of Rome is preferred before all churches: which not only by decrees of
Canons, and holy fathers, has obtained that singular principality, but by
the voice of our lord when he said, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my church. If the church of Rome by these words of our Savior (upon this
rock I will build my church) were preferred before all others, as that grave
holy prelate teaches, then must it needs follow, that the church of Rome,
was the rock upon which Christ built his church.

Damasus was also a very ancient, holy, Ex Epistola 4. B Damasi ad Stephanum
Epist. and Concilia Afti^ae.

Scitis fratres dilectiss. firmamentum a deo fixum and immobile, atque titulum
lucidissimum suorum sacerdotum, id est, omnium Episcoporum, Apostolicam sedem
esse constitutam, and verticem Ecclesiarum. Tu es enim (sicut diuinum
pronuntiat verbum) Petrus, and super hanc petram ad^ficabo Ecclesiam meam.


and learned Prelate; he writes in this sort. you know most beloved brethren,
the Apostolik see (of Rome) to be constituted by God a fixed and immovable
firmament, a most bright title of all bishops, and topp of churches, even as
the word of God does pronunce, saying: thou art Peter, and upon this rock, I
will build my church. he then also took and expounded those words of Christ, to
appertain unto the sea of Rome.

The testimony of these few ancient renowned fathers, is more then sufficient
to justify what I said: and to assure the upright readers, that some of the
ancient fathers did interpret the church of Rome to be that rock, upon which
our Savior built his church. whereby they may see how uncivilly M. Abbot dealt
with me, having no other ground for it, then his own ignorance coopled with
audaciousnes.

Because M. Abbot does in this paragraff authority of the Bishop of Rome: I
hold it convenient to fortify the same, with some select testimonies of the
best renowned prelates of the Greek and Eastern churches. for if they (whom
it concerned most to stand for the dignity and prerogatives of their own
churches, being the greatest personages in that part of the world, which was
farthest of from Rome) do nevertheless acknowledge the Bishop of Rome, to have
had in the time of pure antiquity, commanding authority and power over
themselves, and their churches: then no impartial and upright mind can doubt,
but that the church of Rome always has had, or should have had authority of
power, and superiority in government, over all other churches of the world.
Athanasius one of the prime Doctors of the Greek church, both for holiness of
life, greatness of learning, and soundnes of faith; and by his place patriarch
of Alexandria, which was the highest seat in the eastern coasts: This most
reverend Archbishop and renowned Champion of Christ's church, being grievously
persecuted by the Arrian heretics, and very injuriously thrust out of his
Bishoprike by their means, made his recourse unto Julius then pope of Rome,
and besought him to call his adversaries (being also Eastern Bishops) to Rome,
to answer there for those wrongs that they had done him. by which fact of his
he acknowledged most perspicuously the church of Rome to have power and
authority over Eastern Bishops, to determine their ecclesiastical causes.
Thus it stands of record in the Ecclesiastical history.

Athanasius flying from Alexandria, went to Rome. Zozomen. lib. 3. histor. cap.
7.

Athanasius autem fugiens Alexandria, Romam venit: codem tempore Paulus etiam
Constantinopolitanus Episcopus, forte illu^ accessit, and Marcellus quoque
Episcopus Anciroe, and Azelopus Gazae etc. and Lucius Adrianopoli: Quorum
criminationes cum Episcopus Romanus intellexisset, and omnes fidei Concilij
Nicen^ consentientes reperisset, in communionem recepit. Ac cum propter sedu
dignitatem cura omnium ad cum spectaret, singulis suam Ecclesiam restituit:
scripsitque ad Episcopos Orientis, cosque incusavit, quod inconsulto de his
viris iudicassent deditque mandatum vt quidam, illorum nomine, ad diem
constitutum accederent qui etiam minatus est, se de reliquo non passurum eos
invltos, nisi novis rebu^ studere desisterent.


Paulus Bishop of Constantinople (another great sea of the Greek church) was
also fled thither for succor, and diverse other Bishops of the said Eastern
church. whose accusations when the Bishop of Rome had heard, finding these
Bishops conformable to the faith of the Nicene council (of which Athanasius
had been a principal pillar) he admitted them into communion of all
spiritual matters. And whereas by the dignity of his sea, the charge of all
persons did apperteine unto him, he restored them back to their Bishoprics.

And did write unto the Bishops of the east blaming them, for that they had
unadvisedly judged of those personages; and sent them a mandate that some of
them should appear at a certain day, in the name of the rest: who also
threatened, that he would not afterward let them pass unpunished, if they gave
not over to molest others.

Is not here plain proof of the Bishop of Rome his power and commanding
authority, over the greatest Bishops in the east? They appealed unto him for
judgment, he heard their causes, he reversed the sentences given against them
by the Bishops of the east, he finally restored again their Bishoprics unto
them. cited the others to appear before him; and theatned to punish them, if
they continued in their ill doing.

Hosius ad Imperator: Constantium Citatus ab Athanas epist. ad solit. vitam
agentes.

Ne te misceas Ecclesiasticis, neque nobis in hoc genere praecipe, sed potius
ea a nobis disce, tibi Deus imperium co^misit: nobis quae sunt Ecclesiae
concredidit, and quemadmodum qui tuum imperium malignis o^ulis carpit,
contradicit ordinationi divinae: Ita and tu cave, ne quae sunt ecclesiae ad te
trahens, magno crimini obnoxious fia^.


The same is also witnessed by Athanasius himself in his epistle to them that
lead a solitary life, and in his second Apology, where he does relate the
whole business, and teaches expressly that it did not belong to Co^stantius
then Emperor, to determine ecclesiastical causes, but that he ought to learn
them of Bishops.

To Athanasius I will join Cirillus because he was patriarch of the same sea
of Alexandria, Cirillus epist 18 ad Celestinu^.
and as learned and valiant a maintayner of the third general council held at
Ephesus, as Athanasius had been of the first kept at Nice. Extat Tomo 1.
Council. Ephesians. cap 29.
This most learned Archbishop confesses the like commanding power to have been
in Celestinus then pope of Rome, that the other did before in Julius. Quoniam
vero deus hisc^ in rebus prudentiam a nobis exigit, long aque ecclesiarum
consuetudo suadet, vt istiusmodi sanctitati tuae communice^tur, non possum
equidem, quod apertum est, ad pietatem non perscribere. post malefacta
exposita, subiungit. Et quamvis res ita se habeat, non prius tamen illius
communionem confidenter deserere ausi fuimus, quam haec ipsa p^etati tuae
indicaremus. Digneris proinde quid hic sentias decl^rare, quo liquido nobis
constet, communicare ne nos cum illo oporteat, an vero libere eidem denunciare,
neminem cum eo communicar^ qui eiusmodi Erroneam doctrinam fovet and praedicat.
Porro t^a integritatis men's ac super hac re sententia, non modo pijssimis
Macedoniae Epistopis, sed totius quoque Orientis Antistibus perspicue per
literas exponi debet.
Thus he writes to him. Because in business of this nature God requires of us
wisdom, and the long continued custom of the church does admonish us to
communicate them with your holiness, I cannot but give your piety to
understand, what is here discovered of Nestorius Bishop then of Constantinople.
whose foul crimes and pestilent errors when he had laid open; and certified
how he had done his endeavor to move him to repentance, but all in vain, he
afterward adds. Albeit these things be so, yet we durst not forbear
communicating with him, before we had related these things to your piety.
Vouchsafe therefore to declare what you deem to be done therein, that we may
assuredly know, whether we ought to communicate with Nestorius, or else boldl^e
denounce, that no man ought to communicate with him, that does d^fend such
erroneous doctrine. your holiness good pleasure and sentence in this matter is
to be notified not only to the Bishops of Macedonia, but unto all the
prelates of the east. Behold the manner of proceeding in these pure times of
the church: S. Cirill who for learning was perhaps better able then Celestinus
to judge of the error of Nestorius: and being patriarch of Alexandria by his
place, held the highest court of Judgment in the east church: Celestin. Papa
Cyrillo Archiepiscopo habetureodem Tomo 1. Council. Ephesians. cap. 16.
yet would he not take upon himself to determine of Nestorius heresies, or to
excommunicate him: but referred both unto the Bishop of Rome; whose sentence
therein both he and all the Bishops of the east did require and embrace. In
this manner did the same pope Celestinus return answer unto S. Cirill. Most
Reverend brother, do you take unto you our authority, Quamobrem nostra
autoritate ascita nostraque vice and loco cum potestate vsus, eiusmodi non
absque exquisita severitate sententiam exequeru; nempe vt nisi a december dierum
intervallo ab huius nostrae admon^tionis die numerandorum nefariam doctrinam
suam conceptis verbis anathematize^, eamque de Christi dei nostri ^eneratione
fidem in posterum confessurum se spondeat, quam and Romana and tuae sanctitatu
ecclesia and vniuersa denique religio Christiana praedicat, illico sanctitas
tua illi ecclesiae prospiciat
and using our power and place, do you execute against Nestorius the sentence
of excommunication, with exquisite severitie; unless within ten days after he
has been admonished from us, he do recant and recall his errors: and let
your holiness provide a more worthy person for that Bishoprike. which mandate of
his, Cirillus with the whole counsel, following, proceeded to the deposition
of Nestorius in this manner. No man does doubt, Tomo secundo eiusdem Council.
Ephesians. cap. 16.

Nulli dubium, imo seculis omnibus n^tum est, sanctum beatissimumque Petrum
Apostolorum principem and caput, fide^que columnam, ecclesiae Catholicae
fundamentum, a Domino nostro Jesus Christo caelestis regni claues accepisse,
solvendique atque ligandi potestate, quam acceperat vsum fuisse: necnon per
successores suos huc vsque semper vivere, causas decernere, semperque victurum
esse. Huius itaque ordinarius successor and vicarius, sanctus, beatissimusque
papa and Episcopus noster Celestinus, nos suos pro se quasi vicarios misit,
etc. Et hac est praefatio sententia. Nos canonum vi sanctissimi que patris, and
comministri nostri Celestini ecclesia Romanae Antistitis epistola compulsi,
hanc tristem in illam sententia^ tulimus.


naie it has been in all ages notorious, that the most blessed S. Peter
(prince and head of the Apostles, the pillar of faith and foundation of the
Catholic church) did receive of our Savior Jesus Christ (the redeemer of
mankind) the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the power of loosing and
binding. And that also even unto these days, he does in his successors live
and determine causes, and shall always live. To him does Celestinus now Bishop
of Rome, in right order succeed; finally by virtue of power received from the
said Celestinus they proceed to pronounce sentence against Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople.

All which set together, standing of record in the third general council,
does demonstrate that the Eastern church did acknowledge both the Bishop of
Rome to be S. Peter's lawful successor: And that it also did appertain to
him, to excommunicate and depose principal Bishops of the Greek and Eastern
church. which no man can doubt to be principal and most proper acts of
supreme power in government. with this I will link another like example
practiced and recorded in the fourth general council held at Chalcedon.
Dioscorus patriarch of Alexandria, being for his erroneous opinions, and
enormious actions called in question, was convented to answer in that general
council: first, all the actions that are entered against Dioscorus, are styled
thus. Council. Chalced. actio 3.

Libellus Theodoridiaconi ad Leonem Papa^ and ad Chalced co^cilium. Libellus
Iscyronis ad Leonem nem Papa^ and Chalcedon conciliu^.


Unto the most holy and most happy Archbishop of the great and old Rome Leo,
and to the general council assembled at Chalcedon. Setting the Bishop of
Rome, as head, before the general counsel, as his body. which in express
terms the whole counsel acknowledges, writing unto the said pope Leo the
great: That he was President over them, Quibus tu quidem sicut membris caput
prae^ras quam velut auro textam seriem ex vest Christi and praecepto
legislatoris venientem vsque ad nos ipse servasti. vocis beati Petri omnibus
constitutus interpres, eius si lei beatificationem super omnes adduc^ns.
even as the head is to the rest of the members: that the custody of our lords
vineyard, was committed to him; that he was the interpreter of Saint Peter's
sentence. Observe secondly the form of their definitive sentence which is
thus set down. The most holy and most blessed Archbishop of great and old
Rome Leo, Ibidem in exemplari epist. Paschacini.

Vnde sanctissimus, ac beatissimus Papa caput vniuersalis ecclesiae Leo per nos
vt l^gatos suos sancta synodo consentiente, Petri Apostoli praeditus dignitate,
[qui ecclesiae fundamentum, et petra fidei and calestis regni lanitor
nuncupatur] Episcopali eum Dioscorum dignitate nudavit, and ab omni sacerdotali
opere facit exortem.


by us, and this present holy council, together with the most happy and most
worthy Apostle S. Peter, (who is the rock and topp of the Catholic church) he
who is the foundation of the Orthodox and true faith, has deposed Dioscorus
from all Episcopal dignity, and deprived him of all priestlie function and
ministry.

First let it be well observed and borne in mind, that all the parts of this
my discourse be verified, in the sentences of these two general counsels.
First that S. Peter was that rock upon which Christ built his church.
Secondly that the Bishop of Rome succeeded him therein. Thirdly that in the
virtue thereof, is comprehended, power and authority to uphold the Orthodox
says, and to punish and depose the highest patriarchs in the church, as well
of the east, as of the west, if they do obstinatlie trouble the peace of
Christ's church.

This having been by the verdict and practice of the pure Church in ancient
time so clearly testified, in two of those prime general counsels, which the
Protestants themselves do confess to be Orthodox and authentical, what
reasonable Christian can take any exception against it? yet for more full
confirmation of this most important point of our faith, I will pass through
all the patriarchall seas, and out of each of them choose some sufficient
proof, for the popes supremacy in government. Athanasius patriarch of
Alexandria was absolved, and restored by Julius pope of Rome. Dioscorus of the
same sea was excomunicated, and deposed by Leo the great. Nestorius patriarch
of Constantinople, was in like manner censured and deprived by Celestinus pope
of Rome: of whom we have already treated. Now to S. John Chrysostom Bishop of
the same city of Constantinople, who was absolved and restored to his
Bishopric by Innocentius the first pope of Rome. This very learned zealous
and godly prelate and most eloquent preacher, was through the malice of the
Empress Eudoxia, assisted by her husband the emperor Archadius, deposed and
hoised out of his seat, even by the verdict of many Eastern Bishops assembled
in a council, whereof Theophilus patriarch of Alexandria was the head. where
upon he treading in the noble stepps of Athanasius and diverse other good
Bishops, made his appeal to Innoce^tius pope of Rome, craving of him to
reuerse that unjust sentence which had been given against him: Innocentio Papae
Ioannes Chrisost: ex palladio in vita eius.

Quapropter ne confusio haec, omnem quae sub coelo est nationem enuadat,
obsecro vt scribatis, quod baec tam inique facta, and absentibus nobis, and non
declinantibus iudicium, non habeant robur, sicut nec sua natura habent. Illi
autem qui inique egerunt, poena ^cclesiasticarum legum sub^aceant: nobis vero
(qui nec conuicti, nec redarguti, nec habiti vt rei) literis vestris and
charitate vestra aliorumque omnium, quorum scilicet and an^ea societate
fru^bamur, f^ui conc^dite.


these be his words. I beseech thee (holy father) that their sentence, so
unjustly given in my absence, (I not refusing judgment) may be of no
validity: furthermore that they who have done me that wrong, may according to
the laws of the church be punished: And command that I being innocent and
not to be convicted of any crime, may be restored to my church again. See
most evident acknowledgment of the Bishop of Romes power, to repeal the
sentence of a council holden in the greek church, by the greatest patriarch
of those coasts; yea and to inflict punishment upon them: Item to restore Saint
John Chrysostom to his Bishopric again; which Innocentius effected, Ex
epist. 30. Innocent. ad Archadium, ex Nicepho. 10 l. 13. c. 34.

Itaque ego minimus and peccator, cui thronus magni Apostoli Petri creditus
est, segrego to and illam a perceptione immaculatorum mysterioru^ Christi dei
nostri. Episcopum etiam omnem aut clericum ordinis sancta dei ecclesiae qui
administrare aut exhibere ^a vobis ausu^ fuerit ab ea hora qua presente^
vinculi meilegeritis literas, dignitate sua excidisse decerne.


thundering out a most terrible sentence of excomunication against the Emperor
Archadius in these terms.

I the least of Gods servants and a sinner, unto whom the throne of the great
Apostle S. Peter is committed, do excomunicate and exclude thee, and thy wife,
from the communion of the immaculate and sacred mysteries: And do declare that
what Bishop or priests soever, shall presume (after the knowledge had of these
my letters) to minister the same to you, thereby to fall from his dignity and
function.

This learned and holy pope (much co^me^ded by S. Austin) doubted not, but
that the Bishop of Rome had sufficient authority, not only to depose and
restore patriarchs, but also to excommunicate Emperors. Now to the patriarch
of Antioch; though Saint John Chrysostomes testimony (who had been thirteen
years preacher in that city) might suffice, yet we want not others. First
Flauianus patriarch of Antioch was su^moned to appear at Rome, Flauianus apud
Theodoret: l. 5. c. 23.

Cum eo agit Imperator, vt Romam adiret, cui respondit. Si qui me O Imperator,
vt fidem minime sinceram ac sanam profitentes insimulent, dicantve vitam me
traducere indignam sacerdotio, tu^ illis ipsis iudicibus vtar; tum pronunciatam
ab eis sententiam lubens subibo.


there to answer unto matters objected against him. who put not in the
protestants plea, that the Bishop of Rome had no authority over him, being the
highest Bishop in all Asia: but made means unto the said pope by the frindship
of Theophilus patriarch of Alexandria, and S. Chrysostom, and so appeased that
matter, as the Ecclesiastical historyes do testify.

And Theodoret that renowned Hstoriographer, Theodoret Leoni Episcopo Romano.

Post lo^ sudores and labores ne in ius quidem vocatus, sum condemnatus. Ego
autem Apostolicae vestrae sedu expecto sententiam and supplico and obsecro
vestram sanctitatem, vt mihi opem ferat, iustum vestrum and rectum app^llanti
iudicium, and iubeat ad vos accurr^re, and ostendere meam doctrinam vestigia
Apostolica sequentem: and ante omnia rogo vt s^iam a vobis, an in in^^sta hac
depositione me oporteat acqui^scere, an non: vestram enim expecto sententiam,
and si iudicatis s^are me iusserie, stabo, nec vlli deinceps homini molestiam
exhibeb^.


being Bishop of Cirus, under the patriarch of Antioch, did nevertheless fly
by appeal to Leo the great pope of Rome, for redress: Thus he writes unto
him. I attend the sentence of the sea Apostolic, and do humbly beseech your
holiness that you defend and protect me appealing unto your just and upright
judgment seat. If you comaund me to submitt my self to their sentence that
have condemned me, I will yield to it, and never be troublesome to any other.
Let these suffice for the patriarkship of Antioch. There remains only the
patriarch of Jerusalem for whom Anastasius patriarch of the same sea,
Anast^sius p^tri^^cha Hie^osolym^^^l^us epist. ad Foelic^m papam

Fuit se^per ^postolicae sedis v^stre li^^ntia, ^^iust^ damnatos vel
^xcommuni^atos potestatis suae auctoritate restitu^re, and sua omnia eu
r^dder^, and illos qui eos c^^demnarunt aut excommunicav^^unt, Apostolico
punire priuilegio: sicut etiam nostris and anterioribus novimus factum
temp^ribu^. and antiquis regulis sanc^tum est, ^t quicquid, quamuis t^ ^^^otu
prouin^ ^s, super little querduant accusationibus ageretu^, non pr^^s tractandum
vel accipiendum esset, quam ad notitiam alma vestra sedis esset deductum: vt
hu^us auctoritate, iuxta quod fuisset faciendum, infirmaretur aut firmaretur.


about the same time in his letters unto foelix pope of Rome writes in this
manner. It was always the liberty of your Apostolic sea, by the authority
of your power, to acquit them that were unjustly condemned and excommunicated,
and to restore them to all they had lost. eve^ as we have seen done in our
times, and have heard in the days of our predecessors: for (says he a little
after) it is by ancient Canons decreed, that whatsoever be handled about the
affairs of Bishops, yea though in provinces far remote, that the same should
not be fully determined, before it were brought to the notice of your holy
sea, and by the aucthority thereof, be either confirmed or rejected.

This great and ancient Patriarch not only witnesses such sovereign power and
authority to belong unto the Bishop of Rome, but pleads also for the same
out of the former approved Canons of the Church: Among which that of the
council of Sardica I hold to be the chiefest. Ex concilio Sardicense c. 4.

Quod si aliquis episcopus adiudicatus fuerit in aliqua causa, and putat se
bonam causam habere, vt iterum iudicium renouetur, si vobis placet, S. Petri
Apostoli memoriam honoremus, vt scribatur Romano Pontifici, and si iudicauerit
renouandum esse iudicium, renouetur, and det iudicos. si autem probauerit talem
causam, vt ea non refriceutur quae acta sunt. Quae decreuerit Romanus Pontifex,
confirmata erunt. Si ergo omnibus placeat, statuatur. synodus respondit:
placet, etc. 5. Alter episcopus post talem appellationem in eadem cathedra no
admittetur, nisi causa fuerit in iudicio Romani Pontificis determinata.


where it is in express terms decred; that if any Bishop of what country
soever, have his cause judged otherwise then he thinks right, he may
appeal unto the Bishop of Rome: who may appoint new Judges and send them to
hear it again, and finally determine it. Now that they who have less skill
in ancient histories may understand of what creditt that council of Sardica
is, Let the^ know first; that it was called by Julius Bishop of Rome. Secondly
there were present that famous Hosius (who was one of the presidents of the
Nicene council) And Athanasius, with many other renowned Bishops which had
been members of the said first general council of Nice: and above 300.
Bishops came thither both out of the East and west as Athan. Apolog 2 in medio.
Athanasius writes. wherefore he terms it, instar Niceni, such an other as
the first Nicene council was. Sulpit. l. 2. sacra histor.
Sulpitius Severus terms it a council called from all parts of the word,
Socrat. l. 2 hist. c. 16.
Socrates in his history, a general council. Briefly, the Centuriators of
Magdeburg Centur. 4. cap. 99. do approve the same council for Authentical.

These few testimonies for the supreme power and authority of the Bishop and
church of Rome, being taken from very eminent, sincere, and learned
personages, who in the flourishing time of Christianity, governed the
patriarchall seas of the greek and east churches; confirmed also with the acts
and sentences of the general council of Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Sardica,
cannot but give full satisfaction unto all true Christians, that even in the
purest antiquity, the popes commanding power, and superiority in government
was believed, practiced, and approved all Christendom over.

14 After so many plain demonstrations of the Bishops of Romes supremacy in
causes ecclesiastical, I hope the courteous reader will give me leave to
employ one probable presumption, that in my poor opinion does much fortify
the same. It is collected out of those letters which in ancient time were
called, literae formatae, and granted either unto Bishops at their first
creation, or unto priests that were dismissed by license from their ordinary.

This kind of letters was in great use in the primitive church; for no stranger
was admitted into communion among the Catholics without them. The invention of
these leters is referred to the first general council holden at Nice: and the
form of them, is recorded authentically in the end of the Chalcedon council
(immediately before the letters of the Illustrious persons that wrote in or
about that council) under this title. Atticus Episcopus, qualiter formata
Epistola fiat. In this epistle, four letters principally were set for an
assured token, that he in whose favor they were granted, was a sound
Catholic. The three former letters, were the first letters, of the father, of
the son, and of the holy Ghost; to testify that he believed aright in the
blessed Trinity, and therefore was no Arrian, Sabellian, Macedonian or such
like heretic. the fourth letter in that formal Epistle was a the first letter
of S. Peter's name: thereby to signify, that the bearer was received into the
unity of that church, of which S. Peter, as chief governor, kept the keys.
the other letters, of his name that granted that Epistle, Distinct. 73. ca. 1.
and to whom it was granted, I omit as not necessary to this purpose, he that
will may see a copi^ of such an Epistle set down at large in Gratian: where
the mystery also of these letters, is deciphered to be such, as I have
declared; namely that the fourth letter was put for S. Peter's name to make
known that the bearer thereof was a true member of that church, in qua, Petro
datum est ius ligandi atque absoluendi, in which, to S. Peter was given the
right of binding and loosing. Out of which notable monument of antiquity, I
draw this argument. so well assured it was, and a thing so notoriously known
and approved, in those purer days of the primitive church, that S. Peter, and
the popes of Rome his successors, were the chief governors of Christ's church,
and the insoluble band of the unity thereof; that the first letter of S. Peter's
name, was chosen for an undoubted badge and token of being a sound member,
received into the unity of the said Catholic church. for why should the first
letter of S. Peter's name, rather then any other of the Apostles, be taken for
such an infallible mark of society with the catholic church? had it not been
a clear overuled case, that he who like an even squared stone lay upon that
rock, and did adhere unto the head of the church, was undoubtedly a true
member thereof. This argument as it shall serve for a conclusion of that which
goes before, so it will make a convenient passage to that which follows in
M. Abbots text.

15 There was (says he) a church, when there was no Roman church at all; how
then could that church be builded upon the Roman church?

This is a very poor objection: for speaking (as we now do) of the church,
which was since our Saviors time; if he take that season next to Christ's
ascension; S. Peter was head of that church, during his own life: and after
him, the Bishops of Rome his lawful successors. No man ever said that the
church, or Bishop of Rome was head of the church, before S. Peter had placed
his seat there. If M. Abbot will accord us that ever since that time, the
church of Rome has been head of the rest (as in truth it has been) we will
easily grant him, that before it had no such privilege.

Another like slugg M. Abbot thrusts forth thus. If the church of Rome be
that rock, and other churches be builded thereupon; then it would follow, that
the gates of hell should never have prevailed against any other of those
churches: but it has prevayled against them. Ergo. True good Sir, if those
other churches had stuck close to the said rock, the gates of hell had never
prevailed against them: but they foolishly flitting from that firm rock, were
sowsed in the surging seas, and swallowed up by the gulf of hell.

M. Abbot saw this to be so full an answer, that he could not tell what to
say to it: but that we have no assurance that the church of Rome shall
continue always builded upon Christ Jesus. this is M. Abbots last refuge, and
to it as to a safe anchor, he does twenty times fly in this book wherefore it
shall have a full answer in its due place. but let us first see whether the
Bishops of Rome be S. Peter's lawful successors, because that comes next. M.
Abbot does either grant it to be true, or at least he supposes it for true:
for he disproues it not: wherefore I need not stand long about it, and so much
the rather because it is recorded by S. Iraeneus, Iren. l. 3. v. 3. Tertull. de
prescr. 36. Eusebius. l. 2. hist. c. 2. Epiphar. here is. 27. Optat. mi leuit. l. 2.
perm. Hieron. de viris ill. 1. August. Epistola. 1^5.
Tertullian, Eusebius, Optatus mileuitanus, S. Hierom, S. Austin, and briefly
by the full consent of all that have made any Catalogue of S. Peter's
successors. It is evident and confessed by both sides, that our Savior
established such a form of government in his church, that he would have to
continue, as long as the same church continued, that is always to the worlds
end. which was according to our doctrine, that one should be head and supreme
governor over all the rest: to preserve unity in faith, and conformity in rites
of religion. And by name that one was S. Peter for his life time. All which I
have before proved out of holy scriptures, and the ancient fathers. S. Peter
finally making choice of Rome for the seat of his Bishopric, lived there many
years, and in the end, died Bishop of Rome. wherefore they that were chose^
Bishops of Rome, were to succeed him, as in that seat, so in that supreme
government of Christ's church: which daily experience teaches us. for we see
that whosoever is chosen bishop of any place, for example of Canterbury; he
presently upon his installing, enters upon all the privileges of honor, and
government, which the former Bishops, his predecessors, died possessed of. so
that no sooner any man is created Archbishop of Canterbury, but that im^ediatly
he is thereby Metropolitan of England, and has comanding authority over all
the Bishops of that province, with law full Jurisdiction to hear and determyne
all such causes, that by appeal do come to his courts. In like manner Linus
being chosen Bishop of Rome after the death of S. Peter, entered into possession
of full power and authority, not only over the Diocese of Rome, but also over
all the Bishops of Christ's church, in all such cases and causes, that do belong
to the supreme governors court and cognizance, in as large and ample manner as
S. Peter had before enjoyed, and died posessed of. this being a matter
depending upon common equity, and daily practice, does require no other proof,
nor can have any better; then the aknowledgment of all the Orthodox and most
eminent christian prelates of both Latin and Greek; east and west churches;
which I have before ple^tifully produced, and when more need shall be, will yet
produce more.

17 M. Abbot admitting as I said, the pope of Rome to be S. Peter's successor
yet argues that they may fail in faith; because Caiphas did succeed lineally
to Aaron, and yet Caiphas gave sentence against Christ. and further he
alleges that sentence out of the law. All are not the children of Saints,
that hold the places of saints, but they that practice the works of saints. M.
Abbot foreseeing that we would answer, that many successors though not so
holy, just, and wise, as their predecessors were: yet have the same authority
and Jurisdiction over their floc,k which their predecessors had. And albeit
they may comitt some fault, unworthy their calling, yet they do not thereby
leese the dignity of their place. And that namely our Savior had prayed for
S. Peter, that his faith should not fail; but that he not withstanding his
own frailty, should have strength from God through the virtue of Christ's
prayer to confirm his brethren in the true faith: This M. Abbot foreseeing
does acknowledge it to be true, yet that he may not be thought to have
nothing more to say, does ask us with Austin as he speaks. Did he pray
for Peter and did he not pray for James and John, to say nothing of the
rest? it is manifest that in Peter they all are contained, and praying for
Peter, he is known to pray for them all. All this is true, but not against
any thing that we say. for it being granted that our Savior made many good
prayers for all his Disciples, does it follow thereof, that his prayer made for
the preservation of Saint Peter's faith, was not heard? nay rather does it not
thereupon most evidentlie ensue out of M. Abbots own discourse; (which is, that
every one of the elect obtains that without fail, which Christ prayed for,
in their names) that Christ his prayer made for S. Peter, obtained for him that
his faith should never fail? But M. Abbot like an ill Alhymist would feign
distill out of those words of S. Austin; that Peter by that prayer had no
privilege above the rest. which is both contrary to the express words of our
Savior, who does distinguish Peter from the rest, and to him apart did speak
those words. Luca 22.
Behold (says our Savior) Satan has desired to sift you (that was all the
Apostles, to whom those words were spoken) but I have prayed for thee Peter,
see how particularly he comes to him, that thy faith do not fail; and thou
(Peter) once converted, strengthen thy brethren.

M. Abbots collection is also against S. Austin himself. for though S. Austin
do say, that in praying for Peter, he prayed for them all: his meaning is
not, that he prayed, that every one of them in particular might receive the
same gift, which was bestowed on S. Peter: but that Christ, in praying that
Peter's faith might not fail, and that he also might have strength to confirm
his brethren, may be truly said, to have prayed for them all. because they
were to rely upon the stability of Peter's faith, and to receive comfort from
him. wherefore they being assured, that Peter's faith should not fail, they
joining in faith with him, were also assured that they should not fail.
August. quaest. and noui testa q. 75.
And this to be S. Austins meaning the words following in the very same
sentence, (which M. Abbot did guilefully clipp of) do manifestly show: In
praying for Peter, Quid ambigitur? pro Petro rogabat, and ^ro Iacobo and Ioanne
non rogabat, vt caeteros taceam? manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri:
rogans enim pro Petro, pro omnibus rogasse dignoscitur: semper enim in
praeposito populus aut corripitur aut laudatur.
Christ prayed for them all. for that always in the Governor the people are
either corrected or praised. So that he prayed for them not in particular, but
as they were contained in their president, Saint Peter. Out of which so far of
is it, that thence can be gathered as M. Abbot did, that Peter had not any
priuiledg above the rest of the Apostles, that it follows clearly in S.
Austins Judgment, that he was president and head of that college of the
Apostles.

18 M. Abbot being amazed at this point of succession, and not knowing well
what to say to it, makes a stand, and admitting Christ to have meant some
singular favor to Peter does ask, by what art I can derive the effect of
Christ's prayer from Peter to the popes, from an holy Apostle to a rank and
succession of men, amongst whom there have been so many Atheists, Infidels,
Idolaters, Heriticks, and so many incarnate Devils, and hateful monsters of
mankind. This foul troubled flood of his currish eloquence, I omit as
uncivil. To the matter I have already answered, that it very much concerned
the perpetual purity and unity of Christ's church, that the effect of our
Saviors holy prayer, should not be closed up with S. Peter's life, but be
continued to the worlds end: that there might be always in the church one
living, visible, and certain Oracle, to co^sult in all doubtful questions,
which should arise: And one supreme governor to confirm the weak, to correct
the proud, and to hold all in one uniform order of perfect discipline which to
have been S. Peter's successors the Bishops of Rome, Christ's institution, joined
with the ordinary manner of proceeding of the universal church, from the
purest antiquity does testify, as has been declared. And whereas M. Abbot does
demand of me, by what art I can derive the effect of Christ's prayer from
Peter unto a succession of men? I might better ask of him, what ignorance
oppressed him, when he could not understand that that which was granted to one
man, might not as well be granted to another man, and so continued from one
to another to the worlds end. But (says he) Peter was an holy Apostle, and
the others were sinful creatures. Be it so. Did not M. Abbot himself
immediately before confess, that evil men might be lawful successors even
unto Saints? as Caiphas was to Aaron? And here (as though he had clean
forgotten himself) does seem to wonder ar my art, that would make evil
Bishops of Rome, Successors to good S. Peter. how can a man of discretion rely
upon any thing M. Abbot says, when he finds him so contrary to himself
within the compass of so few lines? yet it is well known to all the learned,
that exceeding many Bishops of Rome, were very worthy successors of S. Peter's
fervor in faith, co^sta^cy in suffering, and great learning: above thirty of
them in a rue shedd their blood most valiently, in testimony of the Christian
religion. Many of the^ that lived after, were very great lights of the
world, and Doctors of the church: as Leo the great, Gregory the great,
Damasus, Innocentius, Gelasius, and diverse others. To let pass very many
among them of exceeding religious, holy, and exemplar life. whom if one would
parallel with the protestants chief governors, men, women, and Children; what
odds between them would be found I leave to the discreet readers judgment.
But be it so, that some Bishops of Rome have not lived so godly and virtuously
as they ought to have done (though M. Abbots proof thereof taken up of a
hearsay out of M. watsons Quidlibets, or quodlibets, is too too simple) yet it
has pleased god many times to serve himself of evil Instruments, to do very
good offices. The scribes and Pharisees in Christ's days were very bad men: yet
our Savior himself commanded the common people to hearken unto them, and to
obey them. Because they did sit in the chair of Moses, it pleased god to
assist them in their doctrine, though their lives were naught. Aug co. eras
Petil e. 2. ca. 51.
S. Austin has a passage to Petilianus the Donatist (one of M. Abbots cosens)
so fit for this purpose, that we need seek no further for the clearing
thereof. Thus he greeteth him, and in him M. Abbot. Quare appellas cathedram
pestilen ^^e, cathedram Apostolicam? si propter homines quos putas legem loqui
and non facere, nunquid Jesus Christus propter Pharisaeos, [de quibus ait:
dicunt enim and non faciunt] cathedrae in qua sedebant vllam fecit iniuriam?
nonne illam cathedram Moysi commendauit, and illos seruato cathedra honor,
redarguit? dicens. super cathedram Moysi sedent, quod dicunt facite: secundum
autem opera eorum, nolite facere.
why do thou call the Apostolic chair of Rome, the chair of pestilence? if
for the men's sake that sit in it: what, did our lord Jesus Christ for the
Pharisees sake, any wrong to the chair wherein they sat? Did he not commend
the chair of Moses, and preserving the honor of the chair, reprove the men?
saying, They sit upon the chair of Moses; that which they say do ye, but
do not according to their works. These things if you did well consider, you
would not for the man whom you backbite, blaspheme the sea Apostolic, wherewith
you do not communicate. And in another place. Into that pedigree of Bishops
which is derived from S. Peter unto Anastasius, Aug. Epist. 165.

In illum autem ordinem Episcoporum qui ducitur ab ipso Petro vsque ad
Anastasium, qui nunc eandem cathedram sedet, etiamsi quisquam traditor penilla
tempora surrepsisset, nihil praeiudicaret ecclesiae and innocentibus
Christianis, quibus dominus prouidens ait de praepositis malu. Quae dicunt
facite, quae autem faciunt, facere nolite, dicunt enim and non faciunt vt certa
sit spes fidelibus quae non in hominibus, sed in deo collocata, nunquam
tempestate sacrilegi schismatis dissipetur.


(who now sits in the same chair) albeit some traitor had crept, it should
not have prejudiced or hurt the church, and innocent Christians, for whom our
Lord providing, said of evil prelates, do that which they say, but do not as
they do, for they say, but do not: That the faith full might have assured
confidence, which placed not in man but in our Lord, by no tempest of
sacrilegious schism can be disappointed. Behold out of saint Austin, first
that the Bishops of Rome are the true successors of S. Peter, Then that in
doubts of religion, recourse is to be made unto them for resolution. And
lastly, that our blessed Lord has taken such order for their sure direction of
others in the right way: that though some traitor or evil man should creep
into that chair, yet every good Christian may for ever repose assured
confidence in them. This being the ancient doctrine, and assured persuasion of
all good Christians; M. Abbots stale jest of the popes sitting down in a
chair when he is to define a matter, is to be laughed at, as an idle and
ignorant imagination.

It were indeed very simple to think that the only sitting down of the pope
in a chair, should be a sufficient help to define hard and doubtful
questions. But to define ex Cathedra, as it is termed, has a far other
meaning among Catholic Doctors, which may be thus declared. The pope as a
learned Divine may, write many large discourses in matter of divinity, and
make goodly commentaries upon sundry books of holy scripture, as S. Leo, S.
Gregory, and diverse other of them have done: in which his works, he having
no further assistance of the holy Ghost, then another private Doctor of the
same learning and holiness of life has, may as a man mistake somethings, and
be deceived. But when as chief pastor of Christ's church, he comes to define
any deep question for the instruction of the whole church; then he has
(through the virtue of our blessed Saviors prayer) assistance of the holy
ghost. First to cause that matter to be duly sifted and considered of by
learned Divines, according to the importance and difficulty thereof either by
the assistance only of his own ordinary council in his courto of Rome, if
the question be but ordinary: or if it be of greater consequence, and do
concern a whole nation, or the universal church: then with the aid of a
national or general council; And finally after such mature advise taken, to
give his sentence and to determine it. this is that which we mean, when we
say, that the popes holiness can never err, when he comes for the information
and instruction of the church, to define any doubtful question ex cathedra,
that is, iudicially after due examination. the infallibility of which sentence
we do not attribute to the learning, wisdom, or godliness of the pope, and
much less to the sitting down in his chair (as M. Abbot dreamed) who being a
mortal man may err and do amiss: but unto our Saviors provident foresight,
and unto the most assured verity of his promise made to S. Peter, and his
successors; which prayer and promise of our blessed Savior can never fail.
Against the evidence of which truth M. Abbot having nothing to say in reason,
falls a railing at his own misconceit of it, and calls it a drunken man's dream.
which if he himself will needs have to be so, who ca^ let him to term his
own dream as he list. Many men of a more sober and advised spirit can
easily understand, that there was very great reason why our blessed Savior
(being to establish an ecclesiastical state, which he would have tossed and to
the worlds end, incorrupt in Doctrine, and uniform in holy rites and ma^ners)
should establish some one at the least, to resolve infallibly all the rest in
all doubtful questions, that should arise among them, which he forsaw would be
almost innumerable. And to endow him with sufficient power and authority, to
keep all the rest in order and due obedience. This is that which we maintain
he did for S. Peter, and his successors the Bishops of Rome: having his own
express word for our warrant, being understood according unto the learned
exposition, and prudent practice of the most ancient holy pastors, and prelates
of Christ's church, as has been before declared.

Thus much to show how unsoundly M. Abbot interprets that text of holy
scripture, and how improperly and feebly he seeks to shift from the most
literal and uniform exposition of the ancient Doctors. Now I come to examine
the exceptions that he takes against some sentences that I alleged out of
the said holy fathers to the same purpose.

of Bishops descending down to his days, did confound and put to shame all
wranglers, who either of ignorance, vain glory, or envy, did teach otherwise
then they should have done. And for an vpshott, adds this reason, which I did
before cite, to prove that we must all join in matter of faith with the
church of Rome: to wit. For it is necessary that every church (that is all
the faith full every where) do agree with the church of Rome, Irenaeus lib. 3.
cap. 3.

Sed quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine, omnium ecclesiarum
enumerare successiones, maximae and antiquissima and omnibus cognitae a
gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo Roma fundata and constituta
ecclesiae eam quam habet ab Apostolis traditionem, and annunciatam hominibus
fidem, per successiones Episcoporum pervenientem vsque ad nos, indicantes,
confundimus omnes eos, qui quoqu^ modo vel per sui placentiam malam, vel vanam
gloriam, vel per caecitatem and malam sententiam, praeter quam oportet
colligunt. Ad hanc enim ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse
est omnem convenire ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt vndique fideles, in qua
semper ab his qui sunt vndique, conservata est ea quae est ab Apostolis
traditio.


for her more mighty principality: Because in it the traditions which
descended from the Apostles, has been always preserved round about. Note
first a most clear proof of that for which I cited it, to wit; that every
church, yea every faithful man, must not of courtesy, but of necessity,
accord with the church of Rome, in matter of faith and religion. Because in it
as in a rich treasury, that doctrine which the Apostles taught, is kept whole
and sound. to which M. Abbot says, that if we take the reason added by
Irenaeus, but concealed by me, it will plainly appear why it was necessary
for the other churshes to accord with the church of Rome. for this church
(says he) for the renown of the place, being then the seat of the Empire, was
the most eminent church of the world.

I answer that I concealed nothing. And this reason added by M. Abbot is
wholly mistaken. for there is no mention in Irenaeus of either the Emperors
power or seat, for that mighty principality is proper to the church of Rome,
for her spiritual dignity. And it is most absurd to think that the church of
Rome in those ancient days of S. Irenaeus, (when the Emperors were most
deadly ennemies of the Christian name) got any reputation with other churches,
by the worldly renown of those persecuting Emperors, who reigned there. for
that their wicked glory was rather a whetstone to hatred and contempt, then
any allurement to love and estimation.

This great respect then being borne unto the church of Rome, before the
Emperors of Rome were converted to be Christians, is a most manifest argument
that the principality of the church of Rome, was not gotten by the renown of
that city, nor by the glory of these heathen peesecuting Emperors: but for
that the best learned, and most holy prelates of all countries, were taught by
the Apostles and their scholars, that it was our blessed Saviors pleasure and
ordinance, that such regard and obedience should be yielded unto the church of
Rome: were the Emperors thereof heathens or Christians, good or bad. It was in
deed very convenient, that the prince of the Apostles, and head of Christ's
church, should be there seated, where the Monarch of the temporal estate held
his court: to the intent, that impiety being there crushed as it were in the
head, might the sooner decaie all the body over: And true godliness being
happily planted in the chief place, might with more facility and speed be
spread in all other nations; and also that me^ might be more easily induced to
yield religious obedience to the Bishop of that place, unto whose te^porall
magistrates, the whole world before had obeyed in temporal affairs. But this
is to be attibuted to our Saviors devine wisdom, order, and institution: Not
unto the greatness or worldly policy of any earthly Emperors. M. Abbot seeing
little hold to be taken upon the renown of that place, as the state of things
went then, does acknowledge that in those days the church of Rome was pure and
sound, and therefore fit to be propounded as a pattern for other churches to
imitate: But now the case is altered (as he says) because the church of Rome
it self is now questioned, for swarving from the tradition of the Apostles:
which being so, that cannot be said to be necessary now, which was
necessary then.

This answer has as little solidity in it as the other. For the church of Rome
it self, was as well challenged in those days for swarving from the Apostles
tradition, by the Mo^tanists, Marcionists, and such like Heretics, as now by
the Lutherans, Calvinists and Anabaptists. And nevertheless the renowned
prelates of Christ's church, and most firm pillars of our Christian religion,
did then teach all Christians to make their recourse unto the same church for
resolution of the true faith, wishing them to conform themselves thereto, and
by avouching boldly that doctrine, which they found there maintained, to
confound all them that taught the contrary, as ye have heard out of Irenaeus.
Let us therefore as kind children treading in the right steps of those our most
laudable forfathers, seek with them unto that same church of Rome, for the
verity of that doctrine which descended from the Apostles, embrace it most
willingly, and profess it as constantly: though we hear our holy mother to
be called into question by vntowardlie and degenerous Children, that either
wilfully run out of her house, to follow their own pleasure and fancies; or
are for pure fear, fallen away from her and forsaken her ordinances.

M. Abbot admitting as it were, that other churches should according to S.
Irenaeus rule, conform themselves in matter of doctrine to the church of Rome:
yet to give us a taste of the subtility of his shifting wit, adds, that there
is in that place of Irenaeus nothing for her superiority in government.

well, that being once granted, that all other churches should for matter of
doctrine, accord with the church of Rome; it would thereon necessarily follow,
that the church of England, and consequently his majesty ought to do the same:
which was all that I sued for. yet over and besides, Irenaeus words being well
weighed do import also a superiority in government, to be resident in that
church. which I prove, because he says, that other churches must of necessity
accord with the church of Rome for her more pote^t principality. Now if the
church of Rome have power and principality over other churches; And do impose a
necessity upon them of according unto it: it must needs have superiority in
government over them: or else the other could not be bound of necessity to
follow it. M. Abbot does grammatically descant first upon this word
(principality) and says that it may sign^fie eminency in estimation, though
not superiority in government. And that it may be potent also, to move by
example and persuasion only, not by commandment. Be it so, that these words
may be wrested into some such signification: as what words be there, that may
not be diversely construed? yet every reasonable man will soon see, that
power and principality, do properly import a commanding superiority. And will
as easily grant, that the fathers words are rather to be fairly taken
according to the more usual signification, then in any such forced sense and
construction.

Again, seeing that power and superiority did (even as S. Irenaeus expresses)
impose a necessity upon others of conforming themselves to the church of Rome:
it could not be that imagined superiority of M. Abbots, which imposes no
such necessity. wherefore it remains evident, that M. Abbot is driven to fly
from the usual signification, and true meaning of S. Irenaeus words. In like
manner M. Abbot to cast some better color, upon his new devised principality,
or rather to shift over into another matter, that seems more plausible,
writes thus.

20 That M. Bishop may understand I do not answer him by a devise of mine,
Cypr. l. 1. Epist. 3.
but according to the truth, he shall find that Ciprian calls the church of
Rome, the princ pall church: and yet in the same place, he denies the
authority of the Bishops in Africa, to be inferior unto the Bishops of Rome.

M. Abbot and other Protestants cannot choose but stand in bodily fear, so
often as they appeal unto the ancient fathers for support of their novelties.
for you shall scarce find any one of them, that does not in the very place
alleged by the Protestants, give them such a bob, that every beholder may
plainly see, they do not favor their cause; nor are content to be called in
for their witnesses. Let S. Cyprian now cited by M. Abbot serve for an example.
This is the sentence out of which M. Abbot picked the former words. Cypr. l. 1.
Epist. 3. iuxta pamel Epist 55.

Post ista, adhuc insuper pseudo-Episcopo sibi ab haereticis constituto,
nauigare audent ad Petri cathedram, atque ad Ecclesia^ principalem, vnde vnitas
sacerdotalis ^rta est, a schismaticis and profanis litteras far: nec cogitare
eos esse Romanos (quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est) ad quos
perfidia habere non posset accessum.


After those things, and more also after a false Bishop appointed them by
Heretics, they dare sail to the chair of Peter, and unto the principal
church, whence priestlie unity has its beginning, and carry letters from
schismatikes, and profane fellows: not remembering that such are the Romans
(whose faith is praised by the Apostles voice) unto whom perfidie can have no
access. I set down the whole passage because by and by we must treat of the
later part thereof, as well as now of the former. where is sufficiently
declared, that S. Ciprian took the church of Rome to be principal, not only
in estimation, but in order of government. which I prove First, because he
affirms the church of Rome to be S. Peter's chair, and consequently to be
endued with like authority, that S. Peter enjoyed, upon whom (as S. Ciprian in
twenty places avoucheth) the church of Christ was builded. Secondly, he
describes it to be that principal church, which is the fountain of priestly
and ecclesiastical unity. which could not be, unless it had power and
authority to compel all other churches to stand to her order, and thereby to
hold all in unity of faith, and uniformity of religion. For as all the world
now sees, there neither is, nor can be (in man's judgment) any unity in
faith, or religious rites, among Protestants, because there is no one
sovereign co^mau^der over them all, endued with authority to compel the rest
to agree in one. And in the self same Epistle S. Cip. confirms this very
poi^t in these memorable words. Heresies have not risen, Cyprian. ibidem.

Neque enim aliunde haereses orta sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde,
quod sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, nec vnus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos,
and ad tempus iudex, vico Christi cogitatur.


nor schisms sprung from any other root, then for that obedience is not
yielded to one priest: and for that one priest for the time, and one Iugde is
not accepted of in Christ's steed.

Do you see by S. Cyprians sentence, that the only way to root out heresies and
to accord schisms, is to acknowledge one priest for sovereign Judge in
ecclesiastical cases, and to obey him as Christ's vicegerent on earth. Such a
sovereign Judge is he that sits in S. Peter's chair, and that principal
church of Rome, by S. Ciprians own assertion in the former period; or else
Ecclesiastical Discipline could not draw its original unity thence. Thus
much here to prove that the principal church in that place of S. Ciprian, is
to be taken for the principal in authority and government. Now to the other
part. S. Cipria^ denies not the Bishops in Africa to be inferior unto the
Bishop of Rome, but blames such troublesome fellows, that would not rest
quiet and content, with their own Bishops judgment, but fly abroad to molest
others with their brawles: as though their own Bishops had not sufficient
authority, or wit, to compose and end their quarrels at home. S. Ciprian
supposes, that their churches in Afrike, had no less authority then others
churches to order such matters; but neither names the church of Rome, nor makes
any comparison in matter of higher nature. but all this is devised and thrust
in out of the fecundity of M. Abbots understanding. yet let us grant that S.
Ciprian might mean, that the Bishops in Africa had no loss authority to Judge
of their own subjects faults then any other Bishops; yea then the Bishop of
Rome himself has: It does not thereupon ensue, that he thought the Bishops in
Afric, not inferior unto the Bishop of Rome. For in times past, in our own
country when it was Catholic, and now in France; men cannot appeal to Rome
from the ordinary courts of their own country, without special license: and
yet in far greater matters, they acknowledge the pope to be their supreme
governor in causes Ecclesiastical. But of this point we shall speak more in
the next objection, which is thus propounded by M. Abbot.

R. AB. 21 The African council acknowledged the church of Rome, for the first
and principal sea, Council. Afric. cap. 6.
and the Bishop thereof they term the Bishop of the first and principal sea:
and yet they deny the Bishop of Rome to have any authority over them. yea when
zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus, challenged the same by a forged Canon of
the council of Nice: Ibid. can. 101.
Those African Bishops for the disproving thereof, sent to the patriarchs of
Alexandria and Constantinople, for autenticall copies of the same council,
wherein they found no such matter. And thereupon wrote to Celestinus, that he
should forbear to send his legates to intermeddle in their matters. Ibid can.
105.
And forbad all appeals, saving to their own counsels: excommunicating them
that presumed to appeal to Rome. Ibid. can. 92.
And in this recusancy of subjection, they continued afterward for the space of
an hundredth years, until Eulalius the Bishop of Carthage submitted the same
to Pope Boniface.


w. B. This council of Africa, and fact of the African Bishops there
assembled, is very often in all protestants mouths and writings; therefore I
will more particulerly examine it, and make somewhat a longer stay upon it. M.
Abbot co^mitts two faults in his first allegation out of the sixth canon of that
council. the former of ignorance, in that he does apply that to the Bishop of
Rome, which the council speaks of the Archbishop of Carthage, their own
primate and Metropolitan: whom though they would have to be obeyed, as primats
are in all other countries: yet they desired that he should forbear that
statlie style and title of primacie, and be contented to be called Bishop of
the first sea. his other fault is an audacious averring them to deny that
Bishop to have any authority over them; of which in that canon there is never
a word But the plain contrary is therein implied. For they there speaking of
their own Metropolitan, they must needs be understood (being no Puritanes)
to acknowledge him to have authority over all other Bishops in the same
province. In the 101 Canon (which M. Abbot does allege in the second place) he
over reaches also not a little. For whereas those Bishops do humbly request his
holiness, not to grant deputies to every one that shall come to Rome to demand
them; he says they willed the pope not to intermeddle at all in their matters.
And in the third place cited by them, to wit, Canon 92, there is a notorious
falsification. for whereas that council does forbid only priests and deacons,
and other inferior persons to appeal to Rome: M. Abbot says, they forbid all
appeals: whereas they speak not of Bishops, of whom principally the question
was: but leave that in the state wherein it was before. This by the way, to
show how corruptly M. Abbot cites his authors, and how little conscience he
makes, to deceive his seely reader, that is so simple as to believe what he
says. Now to the maine matter of the 101 Canon, which he cites in the second
place, which well considered, does rather confirm the popes authority over
those Africane Bishopes, then infirm it. For albeit the Bishops of Africa did
not acknowledge any such canon to be in the council of Nice, which by the popes
legate was alleged to prove that appellations might be made out of Africa, or
any other country unto Rome in some cases: yet they did so behave themselves
therein, that any reasonable man may perceive their great affection, and humble
obedience unto the same sea of Rome. For they not finding in their own copies
of the Nicene counsel that which was put into the Legates instructions, desired
respite to make enquiry after the best copies, and in the mean season promised
obedience: These be their words. These things that out of the said instructions
are alleged unto us (concerning the appeals of Bishops, Concilium Carthag.
nomine sextum, ordine 5. n. 4.

Ista nos tamen tantisper seruatioros, (vt antea^ dixi) donec integra
exemplaria veniant, profitem^r. Petendus est autem litteris nostris and
venerabilis Ecclesia Romanae Episcopus Bonifacius, vt ipse quoque dignetur ad
memoratas ecclesias al^quos mittere, qui eadem exemplaria praedicti Niceni
Concilij secundum eius possint scripta proferre. In Epistola Concilij ad
Bonifacium, cap. 101. Quod donec fiant hac quae in commonitorio supradicto
nobis allegata sunt de appellationibus Episcoporum ad Romanae sedis Sacerdotem
and nos vsque ad probationem seruaturos esse, profitemur: and beatitu inem tuam
ad hoc nos adiuturam in dei voluntate confidimus.


unto the Bishop of Rome etc: and of priests causes to be determined, by the
Bishops of their own provinces) we do profess and promise to observe, until
due trial of those canons be made, and trust in the will of God, that your
holiness will help us thereunto. If those Reverend and holy Bishops of Africa,
had been infected with the leaven of the protestants, they would have soon
answered as M. Abbot here untruly reports they did: that the Bishop of Rome
had no authority over them; and have willed him to keep himself within his
own bounds, and not to intermeddle with the matters of Africa: But they
contrariwise promised obedience, until true trial were made. which argues
that the custom before was for bishops to appeal to Rome, and therefore that
to be continued, until proof could be made to the contrary: according to
that axiom of the law. Let him that is in possession keep his possession,
until good proof be brought against him. Quia melior est conditio
possidentis. Secondly, when those reverend fathers had received copies from
Alexandria and Constantinople, wherein were not contained any Canons for
appealing to Rome, they certified the same in these submissiue words. Praefato
debito salutationis officio, impendio deprecamur, etc: Cap. 105. Prafato it
aque debita salutationis officio, impendio deprecamur, vt deinceps ad vestras
aures hinc venientes non facilius admit tatis.
The duty of our bounden salutations premised, we do earnestly request and
pray you, that you will not too easily admit to your audience them that come
from hence. And before their letters they set this title: Dilectissimo Domino,
to their best beloved Lord, and most honorable brother. Do not these humble
words of bounden duty unto their Lord, notify what esteem they made of the
Bishop of Rome? They say indeed, that they found neither in the Canons of the
Nicene council, nor in any other of their fathers, that the Bishop of Rome
should send any legates into their country, to hear and determine their
causes. wherein (by the leave of such worthy personages be it spoken) they show,
that they had not read or well considered the Canons of the council holden at
Sardica, which was both very general, and most autenticall, as I have proved
before. for in that council it is expressly decred, that any Bishop of what
coast or country soever, may appeal unto the Bishop of Rome. Council. Sard.
ca. 4. and 7.
And that the said Bishop of Rome may depute and send others to the place,
where the Bishops appellants do dwell, to hear and determine all such causes.
And most probable it is, that those holy popes Zozimus, Bonifacius, and
Celestinus, meant the same canons of the council of Sardica, which they called
the Canons of the Nicene council: because that council of Sardica was both
holden by some of the same principal persons that were at the Nicene council,
as Hosius, Athanasius, and such like; and did also treat much about the same
matters. wherefore it is said to be joined in the Roman copy with the council
of Nice, and reputed as an appendix or parcel of it. And therein perhaps was
the error committed, that the popes having both these counsels compact into
one, named the canons of both, after the more principal and more renowned
council of Nice: calling them the canons of the Nicene council; which in
rigor were but the canons of the council of Sardica. yet that council of
Sardica being of the same authority and binding power, they in alleging them
under the name of the Nicene, did not offer any wrong unto those Bishops of
Africa, exacting only that that their right might be preserved entire among
them, which by the approved canons of the church, was due unto their seat. And
these reverend prelates of the African church were the more excusable, for that
they had not seen perhaps any true copy of the approved council of Sardica at
that time; the place being very remote from them, and the little space of time,
which was between the two councels of Sardica and Afrike, having been also
most troblesome, by reason of the Arrians manifold violent persecutions. this
much in brief of that great business. whereby it appears clearly that although
these reverend prelates of Africa, held it much more expedient, that all
particular controversies about meu^ and tuum, and concerning misdemeanors and
crimes, should be handled in the place where the parties and witnesses were
known, and where all particulers might be more narowly sifted, and with more
speed and less charges tried, then a far of in a foreign country: yet for
matter of faith, and rites of religion, they never denied the explication or
determination thereof, to appertain to the Bishop of Rome. Appeals to Rome in
matters of law, have been in our own country, (when it was Catholic)
forbidden, without the express leave of the prince; and at this day are in
the Christian country of France, without any denial of the popes supreme
commanding power in cases Ecclesiastical: which is all and more too then the
African council did; Conc. Afri. c. 92. Item placuit, vt presbyteri diaconi,
vel caeteri inferiores clerici, si de iudiciis episcoporu^ suorum questi
fuerint, etc.
for that does only forbid priests and inferior persons to appeal thither:
leaving all Bishops art their liberty. so that in fine if all were granted,
which M. Abbot goes about to prove, yet it is not sufficient to infringe the
supremacy of the pope. for albeit appeals to Rome in matter of law were
prohibited; yet recourse thither for matter of faith and religion being
approved, and standing good, the supremacy is sufficiently maintained.

21 Notwitstanding because the fact of the African council is holde^ by the
Protestants (who for want of greater proof, are feign to make much of a
little) to be very prejudicial unto the supremacy of the sea of Rome: I will
here produce some testimonies of the best learned and most approved Africa^
Doctors, in favor of the pope and church of Romes supreme power over Afrike it
self. The first shall be S. Ciprian, who as in dignity was primate of Afrike, so
for his great wisdom and learning was inferior to few, and in his glorious
martyrdom over went the rest. This right worthy Archbishope declares plainly,
that they were not accustomed to end all their controversies at home: Ciprian.
Epistola 45. ed: Pam.

Sed cum statuissemus collegae complures qui in vnum conueneramus, vt legatis
ad vos Episcopis nostris Caldonio and fortunato, omnia interim integra
suspenderentur, donec ad nos ijdem collegae a nostri venirent.


But he himself with the assent of other Bishops, did send two Bishops, the one
called Calidonius, the other Fortunatus, unto Cornelius then pope of Rome,
recome^ding their causes unto him; And shows, how in the mean season whiles
their causes were before him, the Bishops of Africa would live in suspense,
expecting his judgment. Is not this an evide^t demonstration, that the Bishops
of Africa in S. Ciprians times (which was within 200. years of Christ) held the
court of Rome to be over and above their own. which yet S. Ciprian in the same
epistle does more expressly declare. Ibidem.

Nos etiam singulis nauigantibus, ne cum scandalo vllo nauigarent rationem
reddentes, scimus nos hortatos eos esse, vt ecclesiae Catholicae radicem and
matricem agnoscerent actenerent.


when he does exhort and council the appellants, that went to Rome, to carry
themselves there without sca^dall; and to aknowledg and observe the church of
Rome, as the root or foundation, and mother of the Catholic church. Ex
Epistola Stephani Archiep. and council. Africae ad Damasum Papam habetur: Tomo
1. Council. inter Epistolas damasi.

Notum vestrae facimus beatitudini, quod quidam fratres in confinio nobis
positi, quosdam fatres nostros, venerabiles videlicet Episcopos, vobis
inconsultis, a proprio deijciunt gradu, vel deiicere moliuntur: cum vestrae
sedi, Episcoporum iudicia, and summorum finem ecclesiasticorum negotiorum, in
honor beatissimi Petri, patrum decreta omnium, cunctam reseruauere sententiam,
etc.


Stephen a reverend Bishop of Mauritania in Afrike, who lived before that
African council, thus writes to pope Damasus. we make known unto your
holiness, that some Bishops our neighbors have gone about to depose other
reverend Bishops, not acquainting you with that matter: whereas the judgment of
Bishops, and final determination of their principal causes, by the decrees of
our fathers does in honor of blessed S. Peter, belong unto your sea. Is not
this a most plain aknowledgment of the Bishop of Romes commanding authority
over the churches of Afrike? And because no exception can be justly taken,
either against pope Damasus learning and integrity, or against his writings
(whose secretary sometimes was S. Hierome) I will set down his answer unto the
said African Bishop. These be his words. Ex Epistola 4. damasi ad eundem
Stephanum and ad concilia Africae.

Nos qui supra domum eius, hoc est, vniuersalem ecclesiam Catholicam,
Episcopale suscepimus ministerium, solicit vigilare de bemus, etc scitis
fatres dilectissimi firmamentum a deo fixum and immobile, atque titulum
lucidissimum suorum sacerdotum id est, omnium episcorum, Apostolicam sedem esse
constitutam, and verticem ecclesiarum. Tu es enim [sicut diuinum pronunciat
verbum veraciter] Petrus, etc cuius vice dei gratia hodie fungimur ideo omnia
quae innotuistis non licere mandarem, nisi vos tam plene instructos scirem,
quod cuncta super quibus consuluistis, illicita esse non dubitetis discutere
namque episcopos, and summas ecclesiasticorum negotiorum causas, metrapolitano
vna cum comprouincialibus licet: sed definire ecclesiasticarum summas querelas
causarum, vel damnare episcopos, absque huius sanctae sedis auctoritate minime
licet, ad quam omnes appellare, si necesse fuerit, and eius fulcire auxilio
oportet.


It behooves us that have received Episcopal charge over the house of our
lord, that is, the universal church to watch carfully, that nothing which
belonges to that function be wanting, etc. you (most beloved brother) do know
the sea Apostolic constituted of God an immovable fortress, and the head of
all churches. which he proves by our Saviors words (Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock I will build my church) averring the Bishops of Rome to be S. Peter's
successors and Christ's vicars. and at length says; That it is lawful for
Metropolitans to hear and discuss the causes of Bishops their suffragans; but
unlawful to determine them finally, without the authority of the sea of Rome.
unto which it was lawful for all Bishops to appeal, when need required, and
there to find relief. I come now to some other counsels, that were held in
Africa, immediately before that African, in which were present most of the same
prelates. The council holden at Mileuitan writes to Innocentius the first
(who was pope next before Zozimus, to whom succeeded Bonifacius, and
Celestinus, in this manner. Because our lord of his special grace, has placed
you in the sea Apostolic, and has afforded you such a one in our times, Ex
Epist 92. inter ep. D. Aug.

Quia te Dominus gratiae suae precipuo munere in sede Apostolica collocauit,
talemque nostris te^poribus praestitit, vt nobis potius ad culpam negligentia
valeat, si apud tuam venerationem, quae pro Ecclesia suggerenda sunt,
tac^erimus; quam ea tu pos? is vel fastidiose vel negligenter accipere, magnis
periculis infirmorum membrorum Christi pastoralem diligentiam quaesvmus
a^hibere digneris etc. Multo plures qui eius sensuo diligentius indagare
potuerunt, aduersus eu^ progratia Christi, et Catholicae fidei veritate
confligu^t, praecipue sanctus filius tuus, frater and compresbiter noster
Hieronimus. Sed arbitramur, adiuuante misericordia Domini Dei nostri Jesus
Christi, qui te and regere consulentem, and orantem exaudire dignatur,
autoritati sanctitatis tuae, de sanctorum scripturarum autoritate de promptae,
facilius eos qui tam peruersa and perniciosa sentiunt esse cessuros.


that it may be rather imputed to the blame of our negligence, if we conceal
from your holiness those things that are to be referred to the church; then that
you can either disdainfully, or carlesly hear us. we therefore beseech you
that you will vouchsafe to apply your pastoral diligence unto the weak
members of Christ, etc. Many others that could trace out the errors of
Pelagius, have entered the combat with him, in defense of the grace of Christ,
and of the truth of the Catholic faith, namely your holy son, our brother
and fellow priest Hierome: but through the mercies of Christ (who will
vouchsafe to hear you praying, and direct you giving counsel) we be of
opinion, that they will sooner yield unto the authority of your holiness being
derived from the authority of holy scriptures. This epistle is recorded among
S. Austins. so is another of that council held at Carthage about the same
time, wherein the Bishop of Africa wrote thus to the same pope. Holy Lord and
brother, we have thought good to relate to you what we have done, Ex epist. xc.
inter D. Aug. epistolas.

Hoc itaque gestum Domine frater sancte charitati tuae intimandum duximus, vt
statutis nostra mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur autoritas pro
tuenda salute multorum, and quorundam peruersitate etiam corrigenda.


that unto the decrees of our mediocrity, may be adjoined the authority of the
sea Apostolic, as well for the preserving of many men's salvation, as for the
correcting of some persons deprauation. By both which Epistles we may easily
perceive, how the African Bishops esteemed the church of Rome to be the sea
Apostolic, to be that head church, unto which the affairs of higher nature,
are to be referred; That it had pastoral charge over the Churches of Afric;
that it had authority (warranted by the word of God) for the defining of matter
of faith; unto which even heretics would yield sooner, then unto any other
though esteemed never so learned. And therefore they sent the decrees of their
council up to Rome, to be confirmed by the pope. All this being of record in
approved African councels holden about the same time, and by the same persons,
that were at that other African council; what reason has any man to think,
that therein the Bishop of Rome was forbidden to intermeddle in their affairs
of Afrike.

Ex Epist. D. Aug. JOB.

Missae sunt itaque de hac re ex duobus conciliis Carthaginensi et Mileuitano
relationes ad Apostolicam sedem, etc. scripsimus etiam ad beatae memoria papam
Innocentium, etc. Ad omnia nobis ipse rescripsit eodem modo quofas erat atque
oportebat Apostolica sedis Antistitem.


S. Austin himself relates both that these two counsels, to wit, of Carthage
and of Mileuitane, had written unto pope Innocentius, and further does assure
us, that the popes answer to them was sound, and such as did well beseem the
sea Apostolic. I will therefore be bold to acquaint the Reader with the same
his answer. These be his words.

You do diligently, Ex epistola 93.

Diligenter ergo and congrue Apostolico consulitis honori, honori (inquam)
illius, quem praeter illa quae sunt extrinsecus, solicitudo manet omnium
Ecclesiarum, super anxijs rebus, quae sit tenenda sententia: antiqua scilicet
regulae formam sequuti, quam toto semper ab orb mecum nostis esse seruatam,
verum haec missa facio, neque enim hoc vestram credo latere prudentiam. Qui id
etiam action firmastis, scientes quod per omnes prouincias ab Apostolico
font, potentibus responsa semper emanant? praesertim quoties fidei ratio
ventilatur, arbitror omnes fratres and coepiscopos nostros, non nisi ad Petrum,
id est sui nominis and honoris autorem refer debere, velut nunc retulit
vestra dilectio, quod per totum mundum possit omnibus Ecclesiis in commune
prodesse.


and as it becomes you respect the honor of the sea Apostolik: the honor (I
say) of it, that besides her own particular, has a great care of all churches
to declare unto them, what is to be holden of controversies that do arise;
wherein you do follow the form of the old Canons, which (as you know) have been
observed all the world over. This I let pass, because your wisdoms be not
ignorant of it, but have by your own deed confirmed it: knowing that answers
do flow from the sea Apostolic, as from a fountain, into all countries that
demand the same, and specially where the substance of faith is sifted out,
then I think that all our brethren and fellow bishops, ought to referr the
decision and determination thereof unto no other then unto S. Peter, the author
of their own name and order, as your charity has now done. This I hope is
plain enough, to demonstrate that in pure antiquity, the Bishops of Africa
and other countries for the decision of controversies in matters of doctrine
specially, were bound to seek unto the Bishop of Rome.

S. Austin (as all men know) was one of the greatest lights, not only of the
Africa^ church but of the whole world since his days, He was also present at
the same African council: let us hear whether he thought that the Bishop of
Rome, had nothing to do with the affairs of Africa, or that the African
Bishops might not appeal to Rome. First he with the other Bishops present at
the councels of Carthage, and Mileuitan, did send the decrees of the same
council to be confirmed of the pope, of which I have already spoken.

Ex epistola D. August. 261. ad papam Celestinum.

Collabora obsecro nobiscum pietate venerabilis domine beatissime papa, and
iube tibi qua directa sunt omnia recitari, vide Episcopatum qualiter gesserit,
etc. existat exemplo, ipsa sede Apostolica iudicata firmante. and subueni
hominibus, opem tuam in Christi misericordia multo auidius quam ille
poscentibus.


2 He writes unto pope Celestinus about the cause of an African Bishop
requesting him to pervse all that had passed about him in Africa, and to
confirm their former judgments. wherein he acknowledges the court of Rome, to
be above the highest courts in Africa.

3 He testifies that pope Zozimus had authority to establish Bishops in
Africa, and to call a council there. showing how he himself was by him
sommoned to assist at the same council in these words. Aug. epistola 157.

Litera quas ad Mantoniam Caesariensem misisti, me apud Caesaream present
venerunt, quo nos, iniuncta nobis a venerabili papa Zozimo Apostolica sedis
Episcopo, Ecclesiastica Necessitas traxerat.


Ecclesiastical necessity being enjoined us, by the venerable pope Zozimus
bishop of the sea Apostolic, we were drawn unto Cesarea in Mauritania.

4 In the same Epistle he declares how two notable heretics Pelagius and his
disciple Celestius were condemned (unless they did repent) all the world over,
Ibidem.

Cuius (haeresis) vel auctores vel certi acerrimi suasores cum Pelagius and
Calestinus extitissent, conciliorum Episcopalium vigilantia, in adiutorio
saluatoris qui suam tuetur Ecclesiam, etiam a duobus venerabilibus Antistitibus
Apostolicae sedis, papa Innocentio and papa Zozimo, nisi correcti etiam egerint
paenitentiam, toto Christiano Orb damnati sunt.


by two renowned popes Innocentiu, and Zozimus. wherefore he took their power
to stretch all the world over. where also having cited the decree of Zozimus in
his own words, adioyneth this high commendation to it: in these words of the
sea Apostolic, is comprehended so authentike, so well grounded, so certain
and clear a definition of the Catholic faith, that it were an impiety for
any christian man to doubt of it.

5 So does he commend the sentence of Melchiades pope of Rome given for
Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage against Donatus in these words. The final
sentence pronounced by Melchiadis, Qualis ipsius beati Melchiadis vltima est
probata sententia, quam innocens, quam integra, quam prouida atque pacifica?
and paulo post. O virum optimum, o filium Christianae pacis, and patrem
Christianae plebis.
how innocent was it, how sound, how provident, and peaceable? and a little
after. O most excellent man, the son of Christian peace, and the father of
Christian people. And of the same good Archbishop Cecilianus, Ibidem.

Episcopus Carthaginis Cecilianus potuit non curare conspirantem multitudinem
inimicorum, cum se videret and Romana Ecclesiae (in qua semper Apostolica
cathedrae viguit principatus,) and cateris vnde Euangelium ad Africam venit,
per communicatorias literas esse coniunctum.


S. Austin says in the same place; that he needed not care for the multitude
of his enemies conspiring against him; so long as he saw himself by
comunicatory letters joined with the church of Rome, in which always the
principality of the Apostolic chair did flourish, etc.

Saint Austin then, directing with others the decrees of their council to be
confirmed by the pope, teaching also that it were an impiety to doubt of his
sentence; further affirming, that he could condemn heretics all the world
over; does plainly signify that he held the definition of the sea of Rome, for
matter of faith to be inviolable. Again, walking himself with other Bishops of
Africa, to a council at the popes commandment, and holding the popes sentence
for a final determination of the African bishops Ecclesiastical affairs; yea
avouching in plain words, that the primacy of the Apostolic sea had always
flourished at Rome; All these specialties considered, who can doubt, but that
Saint Austin both in that African council, and ever after was of opinion, that
the pope of Rome might intermeddle with the Ecclesiastical causes of Africa:
and that the African Bishops, and their causes and councels, might be very
well, and ought in some cases to be referred unto the judgment of the Bishop of
Rome.

23 Not long after Saint Augustine lived, pope Leo the great, who directed a
most grave and learned letter unto the Bishops of Africa, wherein he decreed
some Bishops there to be deposed, Leo episcopus vniuersis Episcopis per
Caesariensem Mauritaniam in Africa constitutis Epistola: 87.

Cum de ordinationibus sacerdotum quaedam apud vos illicite vsurpata, crebrior
ad nos sermo perferret, ratio pietatis exegit, vt pro solicitudine quam
vniuersae ecclesiae exdiuina institutione dependimus, rerum fidem studeremus
agnoscere, etc.

Ibidem. c 2.

Causam quoque Lupicini episcopi illic iubemus audiri cui multum ac saepe
postulenti co^munione^ hac rai^one redd^mus, quoniam ad nostrum iudicium
prouocass^, immerito cum, pendente negotio a comunion^ videbamus fuisse
suspensum.


others to be continued in their office: and restored one Lupicinus by name to
his Bishopric, who being deposed by the Bishops of that province of Africa,
had appealed from their sentence unto the same Leo Bishop of Rome. which is a
manifest evidence that the Bishops of Africa did aclwaies aknowledg the Bishop
of Rome his superiority, and commanding power over the Bishops of their
country. victor vticensis lived also very shortly after S. Austin, and
before Eulalius: he writing in that interim, in which M. Abbot does bear us in
hand that the church of Africa was fallen out with the Church of Rome, he (I
say) a very godly Bishop, a grave, and learned Historiographer, rehearses:
How Eugenius Archbishop of Carthage, for conferring with the vandale Honoricus
(then by invasion king of the greatest part of Africa and an Arrian heretic)
said unto his deputy. If the kingly power desire to know our faith, Victor
vticens: de persecut. vand: l: 2.

Si nostram fidem (quae vna and vera est) potestas Regis cognoscere desiderat,
mittat ad amicos suos: scribam and ego fatribus meis vt veniant coepiscopi, qui
co^mune^ fidem nostram valiant demonstrare, and praecipue Romana ecclesia, quae
caput est omnium ecclesiarum, etc.


which is the only true faith, you may consult with your council; And I will
write unto my brethren, and especially unto the church of Rome (which is the
head of all churches) and we together will declare unto your Majesty, that
faith which is common to us all.

Behold how even immediately after that council of Africa, when M. Abbot
dreamed the Bishops of Africa to be fallen away from the sea of Rome, The
primate of Carthage (the chief city in all Africa) acknowledged the church of
Rome to be the head of all the churches, and that for the resolution of matter
of faith, that sea of Rome was principally to be consulted. I need not
descend any Lower because M. Abbot himself does relate how Eulalius Archbishop
of Carthage, (who lived the next age after) acknowledged the popes supremacy,
and made that country of Africa subject unto it.

Seeing then that cleaven hundredth years ago (when Eulalius lived) by M. Abbots
own confession, the popes had soueraign command over the churches of Africa,
and before: even up to Saint Cyprian and Tertullians time (which was within
200. years after Christ) the same church of Rome was by the principal pillars
and lights of Africa, esteemed the mother church of the world, and root of
Christian unity, unto which some of their Bishops in all ages did appeal for
succor, some others did referr the decrees of their councels to be confirmed,
acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to have power to assemble councels in Africa.
and to condemn heretics all the world over: was not M. Abbot fowly over seen,
and did he not ouer-reach most grievously when he said, that the Bishops of
Afric denied the Bishop of Rome to have any authority over them, and forbad
him to intermeddle with matters of their country.

I have staid the longer upon this fact of the African Bishops, because the
Protestants make such reckening of it: I will with more speed dispatch that
which follows. M. Abbot obi^cteth, that Anicetus the pope could not persuade
Policarpus to keep the feast of Easter, after the manner of Rome. thereby
intimating, that Policarpus was not acquainted with that potent principality of
the church of Rome. I answer that not withstanding the confessed acknowledgment
of the popes supremacy, no man is bound to follow all his opinions, or to
embrace his aduises or persuasions: only he is of duty to obey his express
commandments. wherefore Anicetus not binding Policarpus by any mandate to
alter his opinion: thence cannot be gathered any disobedience of Policarpus;
though it be most certain, that Anicetus was in the truth, and the other in
error. for that the feast of Easter, should have been kept of all churches,
according unto the manner of Rome, And so it was afterward defined in the first
general council of Nice. As do witness, Athanas: epistola de Ariminensi
concilio.
Athanasius, Eusebius, Eusebius. de vita constant: l. 3. v. 17.
Epiphanius, here is. 69. Socrates histor. lib. 1. cap. 6. Theodoret. histor. 1.
cap. 10. Nicephorus histor. lib. 8. cap. 19. Nevertheles Anicetus out of the
spirit of lenity, was content to bear with Policarpus, being a holy, reverend,
and Apostolical man. Pope victor afterward seeing the same error creeping
further abroad, and beginning to infect even the western church, thought it
fitter to use his authority to drive the churches of Asia from the custom of
the Jews, unto conformity with the church of Rome. Neither is it apparent, nor
so certain as M. Abbot would have it seem, that Policrates did disobey his
sentence of excommunication. for those his words cited by M. Abbot, are set
down in Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 5. histor. c. 22. and 23.
when the question was yet in examination, and before the sentence pronounced.
So that he might very well (as his duty required) after he saw the popes
definitive sentence, conform himself thereunto, though before he was of
another mind. And he being otherwise a very godly and a learned prelate, is to
be presumed and taken to have done that which he ought to do. the contrary not
being able to be proved. S. Ciprian (whom M. Abbot cites next) as all the
learned know, erred in that point of rebaptizing them, that were before
baptized by heretics; and therein out of humane frailty offended, by not
conforming his opinion unto Stephen Bishop of Rome; forgetting his own
judgment given, and often repeted when he was out of that distempered mood, to
wit, that heresies and schisms do Cypr. Epistola 55. Neque al^unde haereses
ortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde, quod Sacerdoti Dei non
obtemperatur, etc.
grow out of no other root, then that the voice of one priest, and judge for
the time, in Christ's steed is not harkened unto. and many such like. M. Abbot
to testify to the world that he is a blind guide, and willi^g to lead his
feollowers into the ditch, is not ashamed to propound unto them for imitation,
the known and confessed faults and blemishes of men otherwise good. How much
more sincerly deal we, who desire all men to follow S. Ciprian in all other
matters, saving in that one, wherein he failed, and not to lay hold of words
then spoken in passion by him to make good his error, specially when they be
contrary even unto himself, when he was his own man, and out of that
distemper? whence also we do gather this Christian observation worthy to be
deeply printed in every Christian man's heart. If such great learned personages
as were S. Ciprian and Policrates, when they would not harken unto the sentence
of the Popes of Rome, did fall into error: what a warning is that unto men of
meaner wits, and much lesser learning, to take heed, that they swarne not one
hairs breadth from the popes definitions in matter of doctrine; lest withal
they decline from the truth, as their betters by many degrees have done before
them, when they would not be ruled?

25 Out of Afric M. Abbot sails into Asia, taking over great pains to
search out some poor relief for his bad cause, and says: they did not imagine
any such principality to appertain unto the church of Rome; And for proof
thereof brings in that which rather proves the contrary, to wit, that Leo the
great for the love of peace yielded to them in a faulty definition of theirs,
about the observation of Easter. If that worthy pope should have condescended
unto those Asians rather then to have contended with them, does not that rather
argue, that he was their superior, and might have dealt more severly with them,
if he had taken it for the better course? Leo Epistola 93. n. 4.
But I reading over all that Epistle cited by M. Abbot, do not find it so as he
reports: but that these Asians were rather Priscilian heretics, whom that
holy pope much blames and condemns for their evil observation of Easter,
without any yielding unto them. wherefore I cannot see to what other purpose
that can serve, than to show that the bishope of Rome had commanding power in
Asia. M. Abbot recuils back to Hierome, affirming him not to have believed any
such matter of the popes principality, who of purpose as (he faineth) did
write in the derogation of the church of Rome, saying: Hieron. Epist ad
Evagriu^.
that if authority be required, the whole world is greater then one City. why
do thou bring me the custom of one City? why do thou uphold a few, who
being proud, usurp upon the laws of the church?

Saint Hierom was always a most valiant Champion of the church of Romes
authority, Epist. 57.
and of her infallible definitions in matter of faith, as every one may plainly
see in his epistle to Pope Damasus and elsewhere. Epist 57.
yet for matter of fact, neither he nor any other (I think) will go about to
excuse the church, or rather the court of Rome wholly. In the place that M.
Abbot does allege, Hieron. Epist. 77.
he find^ fault with some Deacons of the court of Rome, that did take place
before priests, which seemed in that humble Doctors eye a great moate, growing
out of the presumption of some few, usurping against ^he laws and common
custom of the church. And in such a case as that, the custom of all the world
besides, was (no doubt) to be preferred before the custom of that city only,
or rather (as Saint Hierom himself interprets it) of some few proud deacons
of that city. But heerhence to infer that S. Hierom did not acknowledge the
primacy of that sea, is too too simple, and rather to be laughed at, the^
otherwise answered. That which follows out of S. Ambrose is of the same soary
suit: for that most grave holy father says, I desire in all things to follow
the church of Rome, Ambros. de Sacramentis lib. 3. ca. 10.

Cupio in^ omnibus sequi Romanam^ Ecclesiam^, sed tamen and nos homines sensum
habemus, ideo quod alibi rectius seruatur, and nos recte custodimus.


but we also are men that have understanding, and therefore what is more rightly
observed elsewhere, we justly observe the same. S. Ambrose speaks there of
rites and ceremonies used in the administration of the sacraments: in which it
was lawful then for so excellent a prelate as saint Ambrose was, to make his
choice of the best. Yea S. Gregory the great would not so strictly tie S.
Austin our English Apostle (brought up at Rome) unto the ceremonies of the
church of Rome: but willed him if he saw any ceremonies in the church of
France, Ex Bedae Histo: l. 10. c. 27.

Mihi placet vt sieve in Romana, sieve in Galliarum, sieve in qu ilibet ecclesia
aliquid inuenisti quod plus omnipotenti Deo possit placere, solicit eligas etc.


that might better please God or more move those new converted Christians unto
greater devotio^, to make his choice of them, rather then to retain the rites
of Rome. whereupon if any man should be so simple as to collect, that S. Gregory
did not aknowledg the pope or church of Romes principality; were he not to be
begged for an innocent? In the like terms stands M. Abbot, that would out of
Saint Ambrose choice of some ceremonies, different from the church of Rome,
Infer that S. Ambrose did not acknowledge the pope of Romes supremacy. Let it
be noted by the way, that S. Ambro^e (who was so grave and judicious a Doctor,
and S. Austins father in Christ) desired in all things to follow the church of
Rome. That their spirit and disposition who desire in all things to depart from
the same church, may be discovered and taken to be quite contrary to the holy
spirit, of the most approved ancient fathers.

26 M. Abbot like unto a man that is shooting at Rovers observing no certain
method, returns back to the council of Chalcedon, avouching that it did not
acknowledge that principality of the church of Rome: Council. Chalced. Act. 15.
can. 28.
These be his words drawn out of that council. The privileges of the church
of Rome, were g^ven to it by the fathers before, because that city was the
seat of the Empire; and upon the same consideration does give the church of
Constantinople equal privilege with the church of Rome, it being then the seat
of the Empire.


W. B. HEre are two or three gross faults: First, whereas this council is
cited, as not acknowledging the principality of the church of Rome; It does
clean contrary in the first words cited by M. Abbot, acknowledge that
privilege to belong unto the same church of Rome. whether it had that by the
institution of Christ, or for that it was the seat of the Empire, is not now
material: of it I have said something before, and have much more to say, when
occasion shall serve. But to M. Abbots condemnation, his own witness does
depose, that the church of Rome had that priuiledg of principality, and that in
government, as by many circumstances of that council, I have once already
proved: to wit, All the Ibid. Act 3
bills preferred to that council, were directed to pope Leo, and to the
council. The Ibid. Act. 16. in Epist. Pascasini.
sentence was pronounced in the name of Pope Leo; The council is sent to In
epist. Concilij ad Leone^.
pope Leo to be confirmed. And all the Bishops there assembled, in their
Epistle to pope Leo, do declare that he was over them, as the head is to the
rest of the members. And much more is there said to testify the church of Romes
principality. so that M. Abbot could not have. directed us, unto a more sound
and evident witness against this his position. Thus much of the first fault.

Secondly, he puts the sentence of 150. Bishops, that were of the
Constantinople council, for them of Chalcedon. yet I am content to let that
pass, because it makes no great matter. But I may not conceal how he, to
serve his own purpose, has cut of the councels words in the midst. For
those fathers do say; that the Bishop of Constantinople, Council. Chalced.
cost. 15. can. 28.
was to have the like privileges, yet, secundam post eam existentem, to be
second after the Bishop of Rome. And as it is in the council of
Constantinople, which they follow: vt obtineret secundum gradum d^gnitatis post
antiquam Romam. Council. Constantin^p. 1. Can. 3.
That the sea of Constantinople should obtain the second degree of dignity
after old Rome. Did he not warely pare of those words? would they not have
displaid and laid open his cosenage? what is like to become of this honest man's
credit, that durst cite this sentence to disprove the church of Romes
principality, which does so plainly approve it?

But what meant the council then to say, that the sea of Constantinople,
should have like, or equal privileges with Rome? Marie they were equal or
like in some privileges, not in all. They desired that the Bishopric of
Constantinople might be erected unto the title and dignity of a patriarchall
sea, as Rome was: secondly to have spiritual Jurisdiction over all Thracia,
Asia minor, and Pontica: Further also that it might be placed immediately after
Rome, and honored before the other Patriarchall seas of Alexandria, Antioch,
and Jerusalem, even as Rome was. Therefore in those two points specially, of
being a Patriarchall sea, and of being preferred before the other patriarchs,
they desired it should be like to Rome: yet not Equal to Rome it self in
dignity or principality, but to obtain the next place after it. this was the
highest point of their ambition then, and the uttermost that was requested. To
wit: That old Rome should enjoy the primacie, and that Constantinople should
have the next place of dignity after Rome, and be invested with patriarchall
Jurisdiction, over the Metropolitans of Pontica, Asia, and Thracia. Against
which grant made by many of the council, Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
in the absence of the popes legates, being presidents, public exception was
made by the same presidents, in the behalf of the other patriarchall seas: who
were in the council of Nice declared to have next after Rome the highest seats
of dignity. Ex Epistola 54. Leonis ad Martian Augustum:

Privilogia enim ecclesiarum, sanctorum Patrum canonibus instituta, and
venerabilis Nicenae synodi fixa decretis, nulla possunt improbitate conuelli,
nulla nouitate mutari. Hanc impij desiderij conceptionem, nunquam debuit intra
cordis sui recipere secretum.

Abstineat ergo ab ecclesiasticarum iniuria regularum, and illicitos declinet
excessus, ne se ab universally ecclesia, dum inimica pacis tentat, abscindat.


And Leo the great when he came to confirm that general counsel, approving
all the rest, protested against that ambition of the Bishop of Constantinople,
as both derogatorie to the Decrees of the Nicene counsel, and injurious unto
the right honorable patriarchall seas of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem.

well howsoever it were for the rest, certain it is to M. Abbots great
confusion, that the Bishop of Constantinople did not in those days so much as
pretend any higher preeminence, then to be next after the Bishop of Rome, and
therefore it remains evident that he as well as all others did acknowledge the
principality of the sea of Rome. Thus much touching the testimony of S.
Irenaeus, my first auctor, who averreth all churches to be bound to accord with
the church of Rome for her more potent principality.

27 Now I come to examine what M. Abbot can say against the evidence which I
produced out of S. Ciprian, Cyprian. Epist. 55. iuxta Pameli.
my second witnesses de position, in favor of the same church of Rome, his
words be these (which we touched before upon another occasion) After these
things, yea they having furthermore a false Bishop set over them by heretics,
yet they presumed to sail unto S. Peter's chair, (whence priestly unity does
spring) and carry with them letters from schismatikes, and profane persons: not
remembering the Romans (whose faith is by the Apostle praised) to be such men,
as perfidie can have no access to them. Ad quos perfidia non potest habere
accessum. Because perfidia is the contrary to fides, and here by S. Cyprian
opposed to the faith of Romans commended by S. Paul, I with perfidiousnes
(which has also another signification) did for explications sake, join
falsehood in matter of faith. Against which M. Abbot excepteth, as that which
turns S. Ciprians words, from his true meaning. for he says, that it made
nothing for S. Ciprians purpose to say, that error in faith could have no
entry to the Romans. because the question then was not about any point of
faith, but about matter of Jurisdiction, and the bad demeanors of some
perfidious Africans: who having been justly punished at home, fled to Rome for
relief, and were like to abuse the pope with false tales, if he took not the
better heed unto their reports. It was therefore impertinent, (says M. Abbot)
to say in such a case, that error in faith could have no access to Rome. Yet
he was not so blind, but did see that on the other side it were much more
impertinent, yea incredible that such a grave wise prelate as S. Ciprian was,
should affirm that perfidious and untrue informations in matter of fact could
find no entry in the court of Rome. He (I say) considering this absurdity is
driven to a great exigent, and hardly can with all his skill excuse that
glorious martyr from colloging, and glosing (which no man did more abhor then
he) and from too excessive commendation of the Roman courts integrity, in
ordering matters brought unto it by appeal, out of other countries. For never
any man of experience yet held (as I ween) that the court of Rome could not
give ear to false informations in matter of law, if they looked not the better
about them. well to come to the answer, there we have first the ancient custom
of appealing out of Africa to Rome confirmed by saint Ciprians authority, and
that by M. Abbots own confession.

Secondly, that the word (perfidia) is to be taken rather for error in faith,
then for perfidious reports, appears, for that it is there by S. Ciprian
opposed as the contrary to the true faith of the Romans which was by saint
Paul commended: and in the same Epistle saint Ciprian says: nulla societas
fidei and perfidiae potest esse: still opposiing persidiousnes to faith. So is
it in the 57. Epistle, where he affirms, that if a novatian heretic should
be put to death by the heathen persecutor for the Christian faith: that death
to him that dies out of the church, should be, non corona fidei, sed paena
perfidiae, not a crown of faith, but a punishment of his misbelief and heresy.

Again, that you may perceive there to have been good cause for S. Ciprian to
commend the faith of the Romans, you must observe that there is mention made
in the same sentence, of false Bishops chosen by heretics, who sailed toward
Rome: were not they fit instruments to prepare the way to heresy and
misbelief? and toward the end of the same Epistle he plainly intimates, that
they were to be assaulted by heretics, when he says: albeit I knew you could
not be taken with the venime of haeretikes etc. It was then not besides the
purpose to intimate, that such fellows should find cold entertainment of the
Romans, unto whom misbelief could have no access. besides in the next period
going before, speaking of the same sailers to Rome, he cast this imputation
upon them: quibus satis non fuit ab Evangelio recedere. who thought it not
enough for them to depart from the gospel. And was it then from the purpose,
to give them that caveat, that they were like to lose their labor in sailing
to Rome for relief? Because misbelief could not be welcome to the Romans,
whose faith the Apostle had commended. In a word, was it not just as much to S.
Cipria^s purpose, to say that falsehood in faith, could have no access to the
Romans, as to speak of the Romans faith, commended by the Apostle? where faith
being (as every man sees) to be taken properly, it must needs argue, that
that perfidiousnes in the next line lincked with the other must be taken for
the flatr contrary. Seeing then that the nature of the word does allow that
signification, which I gave it, and saint Ciprian did so use it often in that
sense, namely when he opposes it against faith; the circumstances also of the
place, and Authors intention better agreing with the same: it is evident that
M. Abbot does but cavil against the true sense of the word which I gave; And
would very absurdly have it so taken, that you must either plainly say, that
S. Ciprian spoke glosingly and untruly; or else did stra^gely mistake his words:
putting (could) for (should.) Ad quos perfidia non potest habere accessum: for,
non debuit habere accessum. unto whom (says S. Cyprian) perfidiousnes can have
no access. unto whom (says his corrector, or rather corruptor M. Abbot)
perfidiousnes ought to have no access. Betwixt which two propositions there is
very broad difference, as each man knows. Now that in some rare case, non
potest, is taken for non debet, it cannot, for it ought not: does not enforce
that it must be so taken, when it pleases M. Abbot; but he must give men
leave to prefer, and to follow the natural and usual signification of the
word, before such a strange interpretation and wresting thereof.

To that which in the end of his needles discourse (of it cannot, for, it ought
not) He adds; that S. Ciprian with a council of African Bishops did teach
the rebaptising of them that were before baptized of heretics, against the
known sentence of pope Stephen. whence it follows (says M. Abbot) that they
thought they might in matter of doctrine dissent from the Bishop of Rome, or
else they would have submitted their opinion unto his verdict. To which I
answer: That either they took that doctrine which the pope of Rome delivered
unto them in his letters, to be delivered as his own private opinion, to which
they were not bound to conform themselves: Or else that in the heat of
upholding their errors, as they declined from the true doctrine, so they forgot
their duty to the sea of Rome. Because the obstinate maintaining of one error,
does oftentimes push on hot disputers into another: But when S. Ciprian was
out of that humain passion, Cypria^. Epist. 55.
he wrote as plainly as any man could; That schisms and heresies do not spring
from any other fountain, then for that the sentence of one priest and Judge in
Christ's steed, is not harkened unto. That Epistola 45.
the church of Rome is to be stuck unto, as to the root of unity; and as the
mother church to be observed and obeyed. And elsewhere. De vnitate Ecclesiae.

Qui Ecclesiae renititur and resistit, qui cathedram Petri, (super quam fundata
est ecclesia) deserit, in ecclesia se esse confidit?


Can he that forsakes the chair of Peter (upon which the church was built)
have any confidence that he is himself in the church? This and much more wrote
Saint Ciprian to the very high commendation of the church of Rome, when he was
out of that humor of rebaptization. which fault of his, was afterward by his
constant martyrdom purged, As S. Austin testifies. who also says, Aug.
epist. 48. item l. 1. de baptis. co. donatistas, ca. 18.
that there wanted not some who held those writings which M. Abbot cites for
S. Ciprians, either to be none of his; or that he repented himself or them
before he died. And therefore should not now be cited for his. But such
ouersights of the fathers, are the fittest food for heretics to feed upon;
in them they find the best relish, and therefore this taint of S. Ciprian is
twice or thrice served in as a dainty dish: and dross though it be, yet is it
often set up as a bright starr to give light and luster to their goodly cause.
Now to that which follows in his text, he says, that my proofs hitherto
were vain, yet those which follow are more vain. But god be thanked, that the
bare word of a vain man, is but mere vanity.

28 You have already heard how frivolous and idle his exceptions were against
the sentences, that I took out of those golden pair of most ancient Doctors,
and very glorious Martirs, S. Irenaeus and S. Ciprian. Now attend how simply
he behaueth himself in answering to that, which I cited out of S. Ambrose, S.
Austen, and S. Hierome. No man can deny, but that these holy learned fathers
are for their persons without all exceptions: but M. Abbot sai^th over lauishly
and as it were dotingly, that I do report them falsely. for he himself (as you
shall presently see) cannot deny but that I allege them truly. Let us examine
the particulers. Ambros. in oratione de obitu satyri fratris.
S. Ambrose (say I) took it to be all one to say, the Catholic or the Roman
church, yea he puts the Roman church as an explication of the Catholic
church. His good brother satyrus after a shipwreck arrived in Sardinia (which
was infected with the Luciferia^ heresy) and being careful not to communicate
with any heretics demanded of that Bishop whom he had sent for to baptize him,
Aduocauit ad se Episcopum, nec vllam veram putauit nisi vera fidei gratiam,
percontatusque ex eo est, vtrumnam cum Episcopis Catholicis, hoc est, cum
Romana Ecclesia conueniret, and sort ad id locorum in schismate, regionis
illius ecclesiae erat.
whether he did accord with the Catholic Bishops, that is, with the church of
Rome. He feared lest the name Catholic was not sufficient to describe true
believers, in an heretical country, (because heretics do oftentimes call
themselves Catholics) and therefore asked whether they were such Catholics, as
accorded with the church of Rome: that is, whether he was a Roman Catholic or
no? giving us to understand that they only were true Catholics, and only to
be communicated withal in holy rites, who accorded with the church of Rome in
faith and religion. All this is so true and evident, that M. Abbot cannot deny
any one word of it. Did he not then spitefully overreach when he said, that I
reported my authors falsely? He has no other shift, then to say; that in those
days the church of Rome, as the most famous and chief church, was most fit to
be named in such a case. But now the case is altered, because the church of
Rome is fallen from that eminent perfection, and is it self now called into
question. This answer is nothing else then in plain terms, petere
principium; that is, to give that for the solution as a confessed truth, which
is the maine question. is he so destitute of common sense, as to think that we
will, or ought to take that for current coin and good payment, which we hold
for very refuse and dross? All the world knows that we believe the church of
Rome, not to be changed in any one article of faith. wherefore he ought not to
return to us for a known truth, that the church of Rome is changed. yet the
poor man's feeble forces being quite spent, he is constrained to give the same
unreasonable answer again and again, for he makes the same answer unto the
like testimony taken out of S. Hierom who dema^deth of Ruffinus (speaking of
his faith) which he calls his faith? Hieron. Apol. 1. c. Ruff.

Fidem suam quam vocat? eamne qua Romana pollet Ecclesia? an illam quae in
Originis voluminibus continetur? si Romanam responderit? ergo Catholici sumus,
qui nihil de Originis errore transtulimus.


either that which the church of Rome professes, or that which is contained in
the books of Origin? If he answer the Roman, faith; then are we Catholics,
etc. which does implie, that it was all one with S. Hierom to say the Roman
faith, and the true Catholic faith. All which M. Abbot confesses to be true,
and thereby cleereth me from that imputation of misreporting my authors.
Afterward he asks what is here said of the Roman church, that might not
likewise have been said of any other church, professing the true faith? well,
let us admit that the same might have been said of any other church under that
condition that they had professed the true faith: yet because the ancient
Fathers were not so well assured of the perpetual infallibility of any other
church, as they were of the church of Rome, therefore they preferred the
communion of the Roman Church before all other, and therein ordinarily made
their instances. And for that M. Abbot does ever and anon come in with this
answer, that the church of Rome was then the true Church, but now it is clean
changed, and takes this to be as sharp as the sword at Delphos, and as fit to
cut all knotts asonder that can not otherwise be loosed: I will here set down
some reasons which did induce these holy Doctors, and much more ought to
persuade us to believe that the church of Rome shall ever continue firm in the
faith. The ancients made no doubt, but that Christ's Church should continue to
the worlds end, and retain the same form of government, which he him self
had established in it. which most Protestants now are also come to confess.
but as I have before proved, the same most learned and blessed fathers both
believed and taught the Bishops and Church of Rome to be as it were the rock
and foundation of Christ's church. wherefore like as the house must needs fall
to the ground, whose foundation fails: so the catholic church could not
stand inviolable to the later day, if the Roman church which is the chiefest
member and support thereof, should perish. It were needelesse to repeat here
those sentences of the ancient Doctors once before produced in confirmation of
this argument. I will be content with one text of S. Austin, that does both
directly cross M. Abbots supposition, and manifestly prove this my assertion.
These be his words.

If the Pedigree of Bishops succeding one another be to be considered, August.
epistola 165.

Si enim ordo episcoporum sibi inuicem succedentium considerandus est, quanto
rectius and vere salubriterab ipso Petro numeramus, cui totius Ecclesiae
figuram gerenti Dominus ait, super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.


how much more rightly and assuredly, do we reckon from S. Peter him self, unto
whom (bearing the figure of the whole church) our Lord said upon this Rock I
will build my church. To Peter succeeded Linus, etc. Behold how fully S. Austin
had 1200. years before hand confuted M. Abbots proposition: M. Abbot says
that the fathers might as well have alleged their communion with any other
church as with the church of Rome. Not so says S. Austin; but if the
succession of Bishops be to be regarded (as it is very highly to be esteemed,)
and the communion in faith and Religion with the^, then that of the Bishops and
church of Rome is more right and better assured then any other. Observe also
the same reason given by that most renowned Doctor which I before delivered.
because upon S. Peter (who was the root and stock of the Roman Pedigree) as
upon a Rock, Christ built his church, against which the gates of Hell shall not
prevail. wherefore in another place he is bold to tell the donatistes, that the sea or church of Rome is that rock, against which the proud gates of hell shall
not prevail. Again does not our Savior comparing it to a Rock, intimate that
it should never decay? Besides had not the gates of Hell mightily prevailed
against the church of Christ, if it had overcome the church of Rome, and thereby
overthrown as it were the foundation of it? finally,

August. ibid.

Vt certa sit spes fidelibus qui faciunt ea quae Romani Pontifices cis facienda
praecipiunt) quae non in homine sed in Domino (quidixit, qua dicunt facite,)
collocata, nu^quam tempestate sacrilegi schismatu dissipetur.


S. Austin in the same place holds him self so well assured of the perpetual
stabilitie of the Bishops of Rome in the true faith that he doubts not, even
from our saviors own mouth, to assure all them that cleave fast unto it, and
do believe, and do that, which the Bishops of Rome teach them, that they shall
never be carried away into any sacrilegious schism. if they shall never fall
into schism, that stik fast unto the Roman church then without all doubt, the
Roman faith should never after be changed. The second text of holy scripture
out of which it may be proved that the Bishop and church of Rome shall never
err in matter of faith, is this. I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith
fail not and thou being converted, confirm thy brethren. Our blessed Savior
by the virtue of his holy and effectual prayer obtained, that S. Peter's faith
should not at any time fail, that he might be always able to confirm all
Christians that staggered in any point of faith. And because our soueraign Lord
did not establish a church that should endure no longer then S. Peter Lived,
but would have it continue for ever: in like manner he would have one sure
pillar at the least in the same, to uphold all in the true faith, that should
become members of it at any time after. This to have been S. Peter's successor
the Bishop of Rome, I have before proved by the consent of the ancient holy
fathers. I will here repeat one sentence of S. Ciprian, because it seems to
be grounded upon these very words of our Savior. The Romans faith is such,
Cip. epist. 55.
that perfidy or misbeliefe can have no access unto them. which is the very
same in effect, that S. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome his successors faith,
cannot fail. for if misbeliefe could seize or take any hold upon their faith,
it should suerly fail: because belief and misbeliefe cannot dwell together.
but the Roman faith being by the efficacy of our Saviors prayer warranted
from failing, it remains most assured, that misbeliefe can have no access
unto it. which could not be true if M. Abbots exception might take place; that
forsooth for three or four hundredth years it should not fail; but for a
1000. years after it should mightily be corrupted. which if it were admitted,
it had been truer to have said that their faith should fail, then that it
should not fail. because for longer time according to their fantasicit had
failed, then continued without fail. wherefore, that their new gloss (being
directly opposite to our blessed Saviors own words, which are without any
limitatio^ of time) is to be abhorred, as that which does corrupt the text:
and the old doctors most literal interpretation to be embraced. unto S.
Ciprian I will here only join the Zealous and most holy Father S. Bernard,
who writing unto Pope Innocentius the third, does take for most certain out of
this text of holy scripture, that the faith of the Roman Bishops had not
failed for a thousand years after Christ's days, nor should ever afterward
fail. These be his words. we must referr unto your Apostleship the dangers and
scandales that arise in the kingdom of God, but especially those that
appertain to the faith. Bernardus epist. 190.

Oportet ad vestrum referri Apostolatum, pericula quaeque and scandala
emergentia in regno Dei, ea praesertim quae de fide contingunt. Dignum namque
arbitror, ibi potissimum resarciri damna fides, vbi non possit fides sentire
defectum. Hac quippe huius praerogatiua sedis. Cui enim alteri aliquando dictum
est. Ego pro te rogaui Petre vt non deficiat fides tua? Ergo quod sequitur, de
Petri successore exigitur, and tu aliquando conuersus, confirma fratres tuos.
Id quidem modo necessarium est. Tempus est vt vestrum agnoscatis principatum,
probetis Zelum, Ministerium honoretis, in eo plane Petri impletis vicem cuius
tenetis and sedem, si vestra admonitione corda in fide fluctantia confirmetis,
si vestra auctoritate co^teritis fidei corruptores.


for I esteem it fit that the defect^ of faith should be there principally
repaired, where faith cannot fail: which is the prerogative of this seat. For
to what other was it ever said, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith
may not fail? therefore that which follows, is to be exacted of S. Peter's
successor: And thou once converted, confirm thy brethren. which truly is at
this present needful. for it is high time most beloved Father, that you
acknowledge your principality, show your zeal, and honor your Ministry. you
shall therein rightly supply the office of S. Peter in whose seat you sit, if
you do by our admonition confirm their hearts that waver in the faith; and by
your authority do suppress the corrupters of the same.

Ca^ any thing be more perspicuous the^ that the holy, learned, and religious
Abbot S. Bernard (whose testimony the Protestants do often use) did acknowledge
that which our Savior said to S. Peter, to belong unto the Bishops of Rome?
and that they had, and should ever have by virtue of our said Redeemers prayer,
power and grace to strengthen good Christians in the right faith, and to beat
down all enemies of the same. If M. Abbot were not an Abbot in name only, but
had in deed some of that holy Abbots heavenly light in him, he would soon
see and confess the same. Albeit those two texts of holy scriptures be more
then sufficient to confound M. Abbots bare supposition, nakedly put down, and
very often repeated without any kind of proof; yet for more complet
confirmation thereof, I will cite a third sentence out of S. Paul, which rightly
understood, does greatly fortify the same. Romans 16.
These be the Apostles words. The God of peace crush satan under your feet
quickly. Chris. in illum locu^
Or as it is in the Protestants translation out of the Greek. The God of peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. These words of the Apostle (are as
Saint Chrysostom witnesses) both a prayer, and a prophecy: a prayer as they
stand in our text. a prophecy, as they are in Greek, which Calvin upon the same
text does grant. the true purport thereof is, that God should in short space
so bruise and crush Satan in the head, and as it were beat him into powder
under the feate of the Romans, that he should never afterward be able to lift
up his head against them in any matter of faith. wherein S. Hierom seems to be
so confident, that he doubts not to write to Ruffinus, that which M. Abbot may
take as spoken to himself. Notwithstanding know you that the Roman faith by
the Apostles mouth praised, S. Hieron. Apol. 3. con. Ruffinum.

Attamen scito Romanam fidem Apostolico ore laudatam eiusmodi praestigias non
recipere. Etiam si Angelus aliter annunciet quam semel praedicatum est, Pauli
auctoritate munitam non posse m^tari.


does not admit any such deceites and tromperies. yea if an Angel should
preach any other thing besides that which has been already preached, yet that
faith, being by the Apostles authority fortified, could never be changed.

will M. Abbot yet be so shameless as to stand up, and to give this grave holy
doctor the lie? as he must needs do, if he will yet sing his old song and
say, that the Roman faith notwithstanding all the Apostles prayer and
prophecy, is foulie changed, and that in very many great points. with the
forsaid testimonies may be linked for the antiquity of it, this that stands
on record in the third general council holden at Ephesus. S. Peter the head
of the Apostles and pillar of faith, etc. did receive from Christ the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, etc. and does unto this day live in his successors and
determine causes, And shall always live. Behold S. Peter always lives in the
Bishops of Rome his successors, to determine causes, and govern the church,
what then shall become of M. Abbots change? will he make S. Peter also a
changeling? This point I will close up with this memorable sentence of S. Leo.
The soundnes of that faith praised in the prince of the Apostles is
everlasting. Leo in sermon. 2. Assumptionis suae ad sumum Pontificem.

Soliditas enim illius fidei quae in Apostolorum Principe est laudata, perpetua
est. Et sicut permanet, quod in Christo Petrus credidit: ita permanet quod in
Petro Christus instituit, etc. Manet ergo dispositio veritatis and beatus
Petrus in accepta fortitudine petra perseuerans, suscepta ecclesiae g^bernacula
non reliquit.


and like as that which Peter believed of Christ, continues for ever: so does
that which Christ did institute in Peter, etc. Therefore the ordinance of the
truth stands fast, and blessed Peter perseuering by his successors in that
strength of a rock, has not forsaken the government of the church. Seeing the
faith and fortitude of Saint Peter shall continue for ever in his successors
the bishops of Rome, that cuckoes song of M. Abbots, that the now church of
Rome is in matter of faith degenerated from the old, must needs be false. And
what more manifest sign can one demand thereof, then that all the wits of the
protestants, having travailed after nothing more for this fifty years, cannot
yet find out any one error in matter in faith, wherein the church of Rome has
at any time dissented from her self in former ages? I know right well that they
avouch boldly that it has changed many articles of faith: but let him that
will have credit given to him so saying, name the error it self in particular,
and the time when it was first received, and by what pope it was approved.
which if no learned Protestant be able to perform, let them be well assured
that repeat it never so often over and over, that the church of Rome is not the
same now as it was in S. Austins time; they deserve not to be believed. Neither
am I ignorant that some more hardy then their fellows, have gone about to
design the time, when the church of Rome began her Apostasy. But therein they
agree no better then the false Elders (that accused Susanna of adultery) did
of the tree, under which the fained fact was pretended to be done. And
therefore be no more worthy of credit, then they were.

30 M. Abbot goes on to prove, that I racked and wronged my authors and says;
that Tertullian who^ I alleged, as sending to the church of Rome to learn the
true doctrine, does send also to other churches as well as to the church of
Rome. Be it so, but if he appealed unto the church of Rome, as well as to
others; did I him any wrong in saying that he appealed unto the church of Rome?
I did not say, that he excluded all, or ane any other. Does not M. Abbot
rather rack my words, and wrong himself in imposing that upon me, which I said
not? Besides M. Abbot does offer great wrong to Tertullian, not so much by
racking his words as by chopping them quite of in the midst: for where
Tertullian says, If thou border on Italy, thou have the church of Rome, vnde
nobis authoritas presto est. whence authority comes to us. M. Abbot cuts of the
latter part of the sentence, which imports that men in Africa (for that was
Tertullians country) did acknowledge the church of Rome to have authority over
them; M. Abbot then having so cunningly conveyed the matter, by cutting of that
which made for us, does afterward ask me what was there left to serve my
turn? if his conueiance be no cleanlier then so, it were better for him to
leave those tricks to them that have more nimbles fingers. The Cathalogue of
the Bishops of Rome set down by Epiphanius does serve to show, that the
Bishops of Rome are S. Peter's true successors: which M. Abbot and the
protestants sometimes, when they are at a stand, do not stick to deny.

Optatus Bishop of Milevitane S. Austins ancient did prove (as M. Abbot cannot
deny) his part to be Catholic, in that it comunicated with the church of Rome:
yet M. Abbot to detract some what from the sea of Rome adds, that Optatus did
not prove his part Catholic by communicating simply with the church of Rome,
but for that communicating with the church of Rome, it communicated with the
church of the whole world. which words of Optatus are so far of from
detracting any thing from the church of Rome, that they do much magnify the
comodity of her communion: for he says not, that he communicated with the
church of Rome, and with all other churches, making them several parts: but
that in communicating with the church of Rome, he communicated with the
churches of the whole world. thereby declaring the comunion with the church of
Rome, to be the means of communicating with all others; which is the very same
that we do now go about to prove. His words (which contain many memorable
instructions) are these, spoken unto Parmenianus a Donatist. Thou can not
deny, but that thou know an Episcopal chair to have been placed in the
city of Rome, Optatus mileuit. l. 2. co. parmenianum.

Igitur negare non potes scire te in vrbe Roma Petro primo Cathedram
Episcopalem esse collatam in qua sederit omnium Apostolorum caput Petrus: in
qua vna cathedra vnitas ab omnibus seruaretur, ne caeteri Apostoli singulas
sibi quisque defenderent: vtiam schismaticus and peccator esset, qui contra
singularem cathedram, alteram collocaret. ergo cathedra vnica quae est prima de
dotibus sedit prior Petrus: cui successit linus, etc. damaso Siricius hodie qui
noster est socius. Cum quo nobis totus orbis commercio formatarum in vna
communionis societate concordat. vestrae cathedrae vos originem reddite, qui
vobis vultis sanctam Ecclesiam vindicare.


wherein Peter (the head of all the Apostles) sat first; in which one chair
unity is preserved amongst all, etc. That he is now to be taken for a sinner
and a schismatike, that would against that singular or only chair oppose
another. Therefore in that one chair, (which is the first in dowry) sat Peter,
unto whom succeeded Linus, (and so in ^ew down unto Siricius that then lived)
who is (says Optatus) our companion, with whom the whole world by intercourse
of formed letters, does concord with us in the same society of communion.
Hitherto Optatus. where you see by the judgment of so great a Prelate (who
lived in the time of pure antiquity) that the chair of Rome is the only chair
of unity: with which if you join, you are in the unity of Christ's church.
against which if you oppose your self you become a sinner and a schismatike.
further, that by communicating in faith with it, you do enter into the society
of all Catholics dispersed over the whole world. I do now stand more
particulerly upon those holy fathers words, because M. Abbot was so shamles as
to write, that I did before of set purpose omit their words: because if I had
set them down, every one might have seen (as he says) that they said
nothing for our purpose. when as for breuities sake, I was then content only to
point at these testimonies, not thinking that any man would have been so
careless of his credit, as to have denied them to be most effectual to our
purpose. Now that Optatus did prove the Donatists, to be a particular straggling
congregation like the Protestants, not only for that they did not comunicate
with the church of Rome, but also for want of comunication with the churches of
Asia, that makes nothing against the singular esteem he had of the church of
Rome. for learned writers do use diverse sorts of arguments to make their party
the more strong and probable. One argument not destroying, but fortifying the
other. The Donatists were schismatikes (says that noble Author) because they
opposed themselves against the church of Rome. They were also astraying
company, for that they held no communion with the churches of Asia, or any
other part of the world besides Africa.

From Optatus M. Abbot coms to answer that place I quoted out of S. Austin,
(which I have before set down at large) and confesses, August. epist. 165.
That Austin sets down the succession of the Bishops of Rome, and
vpbraideth the Donatists, that no Donatist, euersate in that chair. But M.
Abbot does add, that as well does he object to them, that whereas they read the
Epistles of the Apostles, they divided themselves from the peace and fellowship
of those churches, to which the Apostles wrote the same Epistles.

Is not this a worthy answer trow you? because S. Austin used as a second
argument to confute the Donatists, their separation from the known fellowship
of the world: Therefore his former argument taken from the communion of the sea
of Rome was nothing worth? whereas contrary wise acute disputantes, (like to
wise warriors,) do commonly range the strongest arguments in the forefront. Or
is there nothing to our purpose in the former place of S. Austin, as here M.
Abbot (having put on a brazen forhead) does avouch? Turn to it good Reader,
and see. First that profound Doctor teaches, that among all the successions of
Bishops, that of Rome is most to be regarded: because the gats of hell shall
never prevail against it. Secondly, that there had sitten from Peter unto
Anastasius then pope; about forty popes, and that not so much as one of them
had been a Donatist, wherefore the Donatists were to be rejected of all men. He
thirdly teaches in the same place, that if any traitor should by chance creep
into that chair of Rome yet the wickedness of that man should not be
prejudicial unto the innocent faithful, that do rely upon Christ's promise
made to that chair: because our Saviors singular care thereof is and will be
always such, that they who put their trust therein, shall never be confounded.
Is all this nothing to our purpose, that the gats of hell cannot prevail
against the chair of Rome? That they who rely upon it, cannot fail, no not if
there should be a naughty Bishop sitting in that chair? besides as S. Austin
did then argue, because not one of the Bishops of Rome had been a Donatist,
therefore the Donatists religion was to be rejected: why may not we in like
manner make a stronger argument against the Protestants and conclude; that
seeing among all the Bishops of Rome (that have been from Saint Peter unto Paul
the fifth which are in number not 40. only, but more then 200) yet not one of
them has been a protestant: therefore the protestants religion must needs be
stark naught, and of all men to te utterly rejected. This I hope will serve to
discover M. Abbots over hardy audacitie, who notes here that the cause why I
did set down my authors names without their words, was for that their names
might get some credit to my cause; but their words would have showed, that they
had said nothing for me: when as now every man may see, that their words truly
set down, do make much more for me, then a very good frind would have
imagined, unless he had seen them himself.

M. Abbot proceeds to another great priuiledg, which I related in honor of
the church of Rome, to wit, that there has not been any general council of
undoubted and sound authority, unless it were by the same sea confirmed. which
is a point of such importance, that whosoever does maturely ponder it, it is
alone sufficient to persuade him in all controversies of religion, to make his
recourse unto the church of Rome, and to follow that full and wholly, which he
shall find to be resolved by it. For if the wisest and most learned heads of
the world, assembled together in a general council, after all their own
advises upon long examination of all particulers given, do yet hold it
expedient, to send to the pope of Rome, to have his approbation and
confirmation thereof: how much more ought any particular person (be he of never
so exquisite gifts for judgment and literature) to referr himself unto the
determination of the same seat? whereunto what does M. Abbot answer? first as
it were he grants that it is in deed a thing greatly to be observed. yet that
he may not seem thereby to be driven to a dumb blank, he says: That it is as
greatly to be noted, that the sentence of no bishop of Rome, was anciently
holden sufficient for the deciding of a question of faith, except the same were
confirmed by a general council. which his assertion is not true, as I will
presently prove, after I have disproued his seely proof thereof; which is, Leo
epist. 61. Idem Epist. 61.
that Leo the great does make mention of an Epistle of his, against the heresy
of Eutiches sent to be confirmed by the universal assent of the whole Synod.
Item, he names certain other writings of his, as having the confirmation of
the general council added thereunto. And that he sent Deputies unto the
general council of Ephesus, by sentence in common to decree with the rest,
what should be pleasing to god.

Is not this a poor proof, out of the fact of one pope to gather a common law
for all popes? one pope (forsooth) had some sentences of his confirmed by a
general counsel; therefore neither he, nor any other could give any se^te^ce
availeable, unless it were confirmed by a general council. what an absurd
paralogisme is this? true it is, that popes do commonly, when there is any
general council called, send their legates thither, to be the presidents of
the council; and use to deliver to them their own opinions also in manner of
instructions: partly to direct the council, and in part also that they may be
more maturely and thoroughly discussed and ratified, by the same council. not
that they could not many times sufficiently otherwise with the assistance of
their own learned council at home, or of some one province, define what were
to be believed and holden: but for that matters so fully sifted and debated,
as they are in a general council, may with more facility and fuller applause,
be received of all persons through the whole world; And namely of them that
have been deceived by heretics: who do generally seek to make the sea of Rome
so odious to their followers, that they will not like of any thing that comes
from Rome alone, be it never so true and clear. For the sake of such abused
souls specially, there needs the Assembly of general counsels, though the
Popes sentence without them were never so well assured. To that alleged here
by M. Abbot out of the councels of Chalcedon and Africa, answer was made before.

Now that many heresies have been extinguished by the popes of Rome with the
aid of provincial councels, without the help of any general, is most
manifest to them that are conversant in the ancient histories of the church.
and therefore M. Abbot who affirms the contrary, does nothing else than bewray
his great ignorance in antiquity. Their error, that thaught those who were
baptized of heretics to be rebaptised by Catholics, August. l. 5 de baptismo
co. donat c. 23.
was by Pope Stephen the first condemned, and without any general council
repressed. So was the novatian heresy by pope Cornelius, as may be gathered
out of Eusebius. Eusebius li. 6. hist. ca. 35.
The heretic Iovinianus with his adherents were condemned by Siritius and the
Clergy of Rome in these words. we following the Apostles commandment (who
holds them accursed that preach otherwise then we had received) by common
consent Siricius apud Ambrosium Epistola 6.

Vnde Apostoli secuti praeceptum, quia aliter quam accepimus annunciabant
Iouinianus, Auxentius etc. diuinae sententia and nostro iudicio in perpetuum
damnati, extra Ecclesiam remaneant.


have condemned, and cast out of the church Iovinianus and his companions: And
writing unto S. Ambrose, and the church of Millan does say; that we doubt not
but your holiness will observe our decree. To which S. Ambrose assembled in
council with diverse other Bishops does give this answer. Ibidem Epistola 7.

Recognouimus literis sanctitatis tuae, boni Pastoris excubias, qui fideliter
commissam tibi ianuam serves, and pia solicitudine Christi ouile custodias,
dignus quem oues domini audiant and sequantur, et versus finem. Itaque
Iouinianum Auxentium etc. quos sanctitas tua damnauit, scias apud nos quoque
secundum iudicium tuum esse damnatos.


That Siricius as a good pastor of Christ's fold had done worthily. and desired
him to assure himself that Iovinianus, with his co^plices (whom his holiness had
condemned) stood also according to his judgment condemned with them. which S.
Austin also intimates in his second book of retractation, the 22. chapter,
when he says, Aug. lib. 2. retract. ca 22.

Huic monstro (Iouiniano) sancta Ecclesia quae ibi est (scilicet Romana)
fidelissime ac fortissime restitit.


That monster Iovinianus was by the church of Rome withstood most faithfully,
and most valiantly. The Pelagian heresy was spread all the world over, and yet
by the Popes of Rome Innocentius the first, and Zozimus, with the assistance of
some provincial counsels, without calling any general council, it was
condemned all the world over: Aug. epist. 157.
as witnesses the most faithful Register of Antiquity Saint Austin in these
words. That new heresy against the grace of Christ, Cuius haeresis, vel
auctores, vel certe acerrimi notissimique suasores cum Pelagius and Celestius
extitissent, Conciliorum Episcopalium vigilantia in adiutorio Saluatoris (qui
suam tuetur Ecclesiam) etiam a duobus venerabilibus Antistitibus Apostolica
sedis, Papa Innocentio and Papa Zozimo nisi correcti etiam egerint
poenitentiam, toto Christiano orb damnati sunt. De quibus exempla recentium
literarum. sieve quae specialiter ad Asros, sieve qua vniuersaliter ad omnes
Episcopos de memorata sede manarunt, vobis curauimus mitti.
where of Pelagius and Celestius were the Authors, or most sharp defenders, by
the vigilancie of Episcopal councels, in the help of our Savior (who does
preserve his church) and by two most revere^d prelates of the Apostolical sea,
Pope Innocentius, and Pope Zozimus, are condemned all the Christian world over,
unless they amend and do penance.

The Donatists in Africa were finally repressed by Gregory the great, Pope of
Rome, as it is recorded in his life. The instances of these heresies of the
Donatists, Pelagians, Iovinians, Novatians, and old Anabaptists, to omit many
others, who have been condemned by the sentence of the Bishops of Rome for
heretics, and so taken at length all the world over, without any decree of
general council, are more then sufficient to co^front and confound M. Abbots
bare annotation, as naked and destitute of truth, as it is of proof, to wit,
That it was greatly to be observed, that the sentence of no Bishop of Rome was
anciently holden sufficient for deciding of a question of faith, except the
same were confirmed by a general council. which if he would have any man to
believe, let him but prove, that any one of the before rehearsed heresies were
condemned in general council: or that those popes of Rome by me named, did
not condemn them.

32 It is to small purpose which M. Abbot says (that notwithstanding the
opposition of the legates of the Bishop of Rome and the popes own reclayming
also, yet it was decreed in the council of Chalcedon, that the Bishop of
Constantinople, should have equal privileges with the Bishop of Rome, save
only that the Bishop of Rome had the precedence) because the opposition of the
popes Legates, with some others in that council, and the popes disclayming from
that point, when the council was sent to him to be confirmed, as most opposite
unto the first general council of Nice, was sufficient to reverse and
annihilate that decree, which needs no other proof, then one argument, which
the same Legates used then and there to suppress that ambition of the Bishops
of Constantinople. For the like decree had been made once before in the second
general council holden at Constantinople: and yet the pope not condescending
thereunto, it took no effect. whereupon the presidents made this witty dilemma.
If the Bishops of Constantinople having the like Canon made in their favor
fowrscore years before that time, had ever sithence enjoyed that prerogative
and preeminence, why did they now again seek after it? And if
notwithstanding that decree made in their favor, they could then not obtain
it; why did they now seek to have the like Canon again made for them? which
would no more prevail for them, then the other given before by the same
authority. For that this would be as well withstood by Leo the great, as the
other was rejected by Pope Damasus.

33 M. Abbot following his accustomed humor of excepting against whatsoever I
write, does say that an another note of mine is fond and a vain presumption: I
would have it to be noted, that all heresies lightly which sprung up ever since
the Apostles days, even to our time, have opposed themselves against the
church of Rome, and have been by the same sea overcome. which argues most
clearly, that the church of Rome is the seat of Christ, and fortress of
verity; against which all of the band of Antichrist do continually and daily
wage battle, but all in vain and with very ill success: for they all
vanishing away like smoke, it continues still, and shall do for ever, because
it is an invincible rock which the gates of hell shall never over come.

M. Abbot cries out against this as a fond presumption, but does not bring any
one instance to the contrary; so that his exception being without reason, may
well be passed over without answer.

whereas I countenanced my assertion with the authority S. Austin, who writes,
Aug. de vtili. credendi ca. 17.

Dubitabimus nos eius Ecclesiae condere gremio, quae vsque ad conf^ssionem
generis humani ab Apostolica sede per successiones Episcoporum frustra
haereticis circum latrantibus and culmen auctoritatis obtiuuit?


that the sea Apostolic obtained the top of authority, heretics barking round
about in vain. which did prove that all heretics, how soever they snarle one
at another, yet do commonly join all in one to bark against the church of
Rome. And (which is most to be noted) all in vain.

M. Abbot to show the profundity of his skill, does say that I take there
seeds Apostolica wrong, for the sea Apostolic of Rome; when as it signifies
(says he) the Apostles time. And albeit the native signification of the words
be plain for me, yet he avoucheth S. Austin to use these words to signify
the time of the Apostles. And for proof thereof, he cites two places out of S.
Austin; Aug. co^t. saustum mam. li. 11. ca. 2.
in neither of which Apostolica seeds is used at all in the singular number,
nor in the plural neither, to signify any other thing then the seats and
chaires of the Apostles. Take one of those places of his own alleging for
example. Ibidem l, 29. ca. 2.
Vniuersa Ecclesia ab Apostolicis sedibus, vsque ad presents Episcopos certa
successione perducta. The universal church derived from the Apostolical seats
by certain succession unto the Bishops that now are. where mention being made
of lineall descent of Bishops from the Apostles seats, Great injury should be
done to those Bishops by him that would say they descended indeed from the
Apostles times, but not from the chaires of the Apostles.

For if they had descended from Simon Magus, or some other Archheretike of the
Apostles time, they might be said to have descended ab Apostolicis sedibus,
from the Apostles times, according to M. Abbots interpretation: because their
descent was from the time of the Apostles: yet could not be said to have
descended from the Apostles chaires, as their lawful Successors, according
unto S. Austins, or any other approved ancient Authors true meaning. therefore
M. Abbots deprauation, rather then interpretation of those words is too too
absurd.

That S. Austin did commonly take seeds Apostolica for the Bishop or church of
Rome, is most evident to all that have read his works: let them that are not so
conversant in him, take these few places for a taste thereof. in his 106.
Epistle. Missae sunt literae, ad Apostolicam sedem, Letters were sent to the
sea Apostolic, that is to the Bishop of Rome. And in the 157. Epistle. Zozimus
Apostolicae sedis Episcopus. Zozimus Bishop of the Apostolic sea, and Pope
Innocent, Bishop of the Apostolic sea. And in his book, De peccato originali,
the sixth chapter: to make profession before the sea Apostolic, and the
seventh, the letters of the sea Apostolic. And that you may be well assured,
that in Africa at those days seeds Apostolica was the common title of the
church of Rome, both that African council cited by M. Abbot in the 35. Canon,
and the fore alleged epistles of the councels of Carthage and Milevitan unto
Pope Innocentius, do by it ordinarily design the Bishop of Rome. which may
suffice for a proof, that seeds Apostolica in that place of saint Austin, is to
be taken for the sea of Rome. And whereas M. Abbot says, that in all that book
of S. Austin, there is no mention made of any particular church, and therefore
unlike, that those words should bear any special appli^ation to the church of
Rome.

I in answer do say that sides Apostolica used there by S. Austin in the
singular number, is sufficient to give us bi^h to understand that he spoke of
a particular church, and also to lead us to apply these his words unto the
church of Rome, which he commonly through all his works does describe by those
very words: which may also be much confirmed, by the like sentence used by S.
Austin to the same purpose in another place. where he says. Aug. co. Epist.
fundam. ca. 4.

In Ecclesia gremio me tenet ab ipsa sede Petri Apostoli [cui pascendas ones
suas dontinus commendauit] vsque ad praesentem Episcopatum successio Sacerdotum.


The succession of Bishops from the seat of S. Peter even to this present
Bishop, does hold me in the bosom of the Catholic church. Are not these
words plain enough to expound the other? Let us repose our selves in the bosom
of that church, which by succession of Bishops from the Apostolic sea (to wit,
of S. Peter) has obtained the top of authority. Compare the bosom with the
bosom: the succession of Bishops of the one, with the other, and they will
easily lead us to take the chair of S. Peter, to be the exposition of the
Apostolic sea. This is so sensible, that M. Abbot himself after he had a
little wrangled against it, comes to admit of it. how little care, then had he
of his own honesty, that before charged me with dishonest falsifying of those
words of S. Austin, and yet in the end, is forced to take them even so as I
did? And that you may in him behold the picture of one that will never yield to
any truth that we say, be it never so apparent: He admitting that we ought to
repose our selves in the bosom of that sea Apostolic wherein S. Peter sat:
yet he says that it does not heerby follow, that we ought rather to repose
our selves in the bosom of the church of Rome, the^ in the church of Antioch;
where Peter sat as well as he did at Rome, and where there had been Bishops
succeedi^g him until that time. how now good sir, had you leifer send your
reader to Antioch, to rely on some schismatik under the Turk, then to Rome?

But this is a mere cavil, for though S. Peter was for a season Bishop of
Antioch, and of some other cities also, which he first converted to the
Christian faith, until he had provided them of some others: Yet he finally
making choice of the city of Rome for his residence, and dying there,
co^secrating that place to God by the shedding of his blood for the Christian
faith; The Bishops of Rome, and not of Antioch, have by consent of all
antiquity been ever taken for S. Peter's successors. I have before produced
sufficient testimony for this matter, so that it were needles here again to
repeat the same; when it will serve for this turn to prove that S. Austin (of
whose words we now treat) took the Bishops of Rome for S. Peter's successors,
and never the Bishop of Antioch. Let M. Abbot if he can, give me^ thereof one
instance; but because I know he cannot do that, I will give him some to the
contrary.

S. Austin taught the church of Rome to be S. Peter's chair, Aug. co. literas
Peril. l. 2. ca. 51.
and the Bishops of Rome his successors in these words: what has the church of
Rome done to thee, in which S. Peter sat, and now sits Anastasius? who was
then Bishop of Rome. Again, Idem epist. 1^5.
where he expressly enquireth after S. Peter's Successors, and by name affirms
Linus Bishop of Rome to have been his successor, and consequently, all other
Bishops of Rome to his own time. He does in like manner declare Rome to be S.
Peter's chair, and the Bishops of Rome his successors In the Psalm he made
against the part of Donate, In Psalm. co. partem don.
and writing against the Donatists fundamental Epistle. Finally in the tenth
question of the old and new testament, Con. Epist. fundamenti cap. 4.
to omit many other places of his works, out of the which the same may be
evidently deduced.

well, it being manifest by the verdict of S. Austin, that we must repose our
selves in the bosom of the sea Apostolic, and further that the same sea is
the church of Rome; M. Abbot will now surely at the length to his own eternal
rest repose himself in the same holy bosom of the church of Rome: beware of
that in any case. He has yet bethought himself of another sorry shift. Let
(says he) M. Bishop take those words, as he will: yet there is nothing therein
concerning the church of Rome, but that as the principal church, and specially
in the western parts, it served most conveniently for instance of the
succession. But as for the height and top of authority there spoken of, it
belongs to the Catholic or universal church. And mere impudency it is, by
those or any other words of Austin, to challenge to that church any superiority
in government over other churches, when (as we see) both Austin, and the rest
of the Bishops of Africa did with one consent utterly disclaim the same.

Turtull. co. Vale^t. c. 2. vinci possunt, suaderi non possunt.
O how true is that ancient saying of Turtullian? heretics may be overcome, but
they will never be persuaded to yield and acknowledge it. M. Abbot granting
that S. Austin having first resolved us to repose our selves in the bosom of
the sea Apostolic, that is, to embrace what that church should teach us, and
wholly rely upon her definitions. Secondly, that the church of Rome was that sea
Apostolic, which had obtained the top of authority, heretics in vain barking
round about it: yet presently, as if he had wholly forgotten that which stood
before his eyes, ot else not caring what he said to avoid a dumb blanck; he
falls to his old byas, and flies back to that which he said in the
beginning, albeit it had been so often before confuted: That forsooth, the
church of Rome is only the principal church, and fittest to be taken for
instance in succession in western churches, but it has not (says he) any
superiority in government. when as S. Austin plainly teaches, that we must
repose our selves in that churches bosom, and set up our rest upon her
decrees, that is, be sure to join in faith and religion with the Bishops of
the same; and that because that church has obtained the top of Authority, and
highest degree in government. M. Abbot confessing the former part of the
sentence to belong to the church of Rome, has left himself no shadow of reason
to dismember from it, that which S. Austin does so expressly join and link
with it. Hear once again his words. shall we doubt to repose our selves in
the bosom of that church, which ever by the confession of mankind etc: has
obtained the top of authority, heretics barking round about it? Do you not see
even by the clear words of S. Austin, that he must confess himself not to be
a member of mankind, that will deny that church (which he there spoke of) to
have the top of authority? what then shall become of M. Abbot, that grants
the church there spoken of to be the church of Rome, yet will not confess it
to have that top of authority? Either he must be rased out of the number of
men, or at the least be ranked in the rue of those heretical men, that did so
vainly bark against that so apparent truth, which the sound corpse of all true
believing men, do most constantly and gloriously confess. I having before
showed at large, how neither S. Austin, nor the African Bishops did deny any
one branch of the Bishop of Romes primacy, no not so much as forbid their own
Bishops to appeal unto the court of Rome: And did otherwise in sundry sorts
declare their dutiful obedience unto the same sea of Rome: M. Abbots inference
out of his own mistaking and error, is wholly disappointed. To conclude then
this paragraff it does remain most assured and clear, that our blessed
Savior made S. Peter and his successors, that rock upon which he built his
church, thereby giving them supreme power and authority, to govern his whole
church, not for any limited nunber of years, but for so long as his church
should continue a church, that is, to the worlds end, for against it the gats
of hell shall never prevail. Secondly, it is as certain that the Bishops of
Rome be in that charge of government over all the church, S. Peter's lawful
successors: with whom therefore whosoever joins in matter of faith and
religion shall never be deceived nor fall in to schism. and against who^
whosoever barketh and opposes himself, he not only barketh and laboreth in
vain, (as S. Austin speaks) but if he do obstinatly persever therein, he
thereby (to use Optatus words before rehearsed) becomes both a sinner and a
schismatike. From which most heinous crimes our sweet Savior of his infinite
mercy and goodness deliver all my most dear frinds and best beloved countrymen.


THE SVMME OF THE third paragraff or section.
W. B. ALBEIT the church of Rome strictly taken, does comprehend those
Christians only, that dwell within the city and Diocese of Rome: yet it is
used by men of both sides, to design the faithful of all countries, that in
religion do fully agree with the same: and that specially because they do
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be under Christ, the supreme governor thereof:
As in times past the Roman Empire did not contain the territory of Rome alone
or country of Italy, but all lands and nations, that professed obedience to
the Emperor of Rome. And like as in the primitive church, the title Catholic
was added to Christian, to distinguish true Christians from heretics: Even so
now a days when heretics are grown so audacious as to arrogate unto
themselves the name of Catholics (though their religion be nothing less the^
Catholic) the word Roman is joined to Catholic; to separate true Catholics
from counterfeit; the Roman Catholic signifying those Catholics, that in faith
and religion do perfectly agree with the church of Rome.


R. AB. I Do confess my self to be one of those Doctors, that know not this
new found distinction of the Roman church: to wit that it may be taken either
for the Diocese of Rome, or for all churches that in faith fully agree with
the Roman. M. Bishop can bring neither scripture nor any ancient writer for the
warrant of it.

Secondly, it being admitted that the church of Rome may be taken for all
churches agreing in faith with it: yet it remains still a particular church;
because there be many other churches in Europe and Asia, that do not agree with
it in faith, nor acknowledge her chiefty over their churches. For example, the
churches of Luther, Calvin, and such like in Europe; and certain other
schismatic churches in other parts of the world. And as in the time of the
Roman Empire, there were many other kingdoms in the world: so now besides the
Roman church, there be many other churches. Moreover the fathers have told us
of the Latin and Greek, of the East and west churches: Pighius. Eccl. Hier. l
6. c. 3.
but never specify the Roman, to signify the whole church. And Pighius
asks, who did ever by the Roman church, understand the universal church?
Albeit the Bishops of Rome, wrote themselves Bishops of the Catholic church:
Yet they meant of that part of the Catholic church, which was in Rome. when
the Catholic french man does say; we be of the Catholic Roman church. we
understand them thereby to take part with the church of Rome; but the church of
Rome, is that of Rome only and is factiously called the Catholic church, which
is the whole; and the Roman put to it, is a term of diminution, and abridgeth
the whole to a part. To them therfoee may be applied that of Optatus against
the Donatists, you would have your selves. Optat. l. 2. con. Po rin.
only to be the whole, who are not in all the whole. And if in ancient times,
when there were so many heresies, it was thought a sufficient distinction to
join Catholic to Christian; why is it not sufficient now a ^^ies? It is the
Invention of Antichrist and his badge, to challenge to himself and his only, to
be the whole Catholic church. That name Roman is a name of sect and schism.
This is the sum of all which M. Abbot says in this paragraff or section.


W. B. IN this section is discovered a second falacy of that false argument,
which they so often use. No particular church can be the Catholic church; but
the Roman is a particular church, Ergo it cannot be the Catholic church. In
the precedent section, I have laid open the manifold faults of this their
argument; showing first the conclusion (if it were granted) not to be to the
purpose. for the point in question was not whether the Roman church were the
whole Catholic church or no: but whether the word Roman in style might be
couched with the Catholic church, that is, whether one might sensybly and
truly say and write; The Catholic Roman church: they say yea, we say no, to
make good their assertion, they a vouch the church of Rome not to be the whole
church: we answer that the proof is not to the purpose, albeit that were true,
for though it were not the whole church, yet it might be called by the name of
the whole: not only because every part of that kind may be called by the name
of the whole; but also for that it is such a part as shall never be separated
from the whole: and consequently as in existence it is always close coupled
with the whole, so may it very well in style be interlaced with it.

Secondly I affirmed that taking the church of Rome for a part, yet it being
the most eminent part, it might very justly give name to the whole, according
to that axiom approved by all the learned; A part principaliore denominatur
totum. the whole is named after some principal part. the whole land of Israel
was called Jury, of the principal tribe thereof Judah. And our own country
wherein dwelt both Saxons and Vites as well as English men, was named England,
when one of the English attained to the monarchy. in like manner the church of
Rome being the head of the rest (as before I have proved) though it be not the
whole yet may very well denominate the whole. And so it has done by the
consent of both friends and foes. for as we term all of our religion, Roman
Catholics. so the protestants do nickname them Papists or Romanistes, both
taking the name from Rome or the bishop of Rome. wherefore it is manifest that
that common hackney of the protestants does not conclude the point that was in
question: which no man doubts to be one of the fowlest faults, that ca^ be in
arguing. I laid in a second exception against the second proposition of that
argument which is, But the Roman church is a particular church. For that the
Roman church may be either taken precisely for the Diocese of Rome; or more
largly for the faithful dispersed through the whole world, that do embrace the
same faith, which they of Rome do profess. The Roman church so taken (say I)
is no particular church, but extends it self unto the utmost bounds of the
whole Catholic church. to which M. Abbot does make answer in this section:
And in the beginning confesses very strangley, that he is one of those
Doctors, that do not understand this new found distinction.

He might perhaps have said truly, that he liked it not: but for a Doctor to
say, that he could not reach to that, which a meanewitted scholar would make
no difficulty to conceive, cannot be but a great disparagement either to his
wit, or to his will, or to both. About the first acception of the Roman church
there is no manner of doubt; And touching the 2. what difficutie is it to
understand all those to be members of the Roman church, who take the Bishop of
Rome to be their chief pastor, and besides are in all articles of faith, and
form of government united with the Roman. Do not the protestants themselves in
every country, by nicknaming us Romanists, and Papists give all men to
understand, that they take all such to be members of the Roman church? If then
both in England, France, Germany, and other countries, by the testimony as well
of protestants as Catholics, all they that in faith and religion agree with
the church of Rome, be taken for members of the same church: would any man
master of his own wits make any difficulty to grant that all such may be said
to be of the church of Rome? And that therefore the church of Rome may be
taken to comprehend all them of what nation soever they be? what warrant I can
bring for this out of the ancient writers shall be shorrly after showed; though
this matter be in it self so sensible and almost palpable, that he must needs
confess himself to be little better then a very blockhead that cannot
understand it. yea M. Abbot presently after shows himself to perceive that
well enough, for better advised he admits it for true, and disputs against it
in this manner. Be it so, that the church of Rome is usually taken to signify
other churches submitting themselves to the church of Rome; yet it does not
comprehend other churches that do not submit themselves to the same, nor
acknowledge her chiefty As the protestant churches in Europe, and some
schismatic churches in Asia. Ah sir, you show clearly enough that you
understood before that distinction of mine, why then did you that wrong to your
own reputation, as to confess your self to be one of those Doctors that could
not conceive it? You meant then (belike,) to make some simple fool believe,
that I to uphold my part was forced to coin a new found distinction never
heard of before: but the wind being presently changed, it is but an ordinary
and usual distinstion, and may be answered in the manner that you have
endeavored to answer it. To which I reply briefly and roundly, that those
churches which acknowledge not the chiefty of the church of Rome, or do
obstinatlie deny any other article of the christian faith professed by the
same church, be no Orthodox nor true churches at all; but either heretical or
schismatic congregations, members only of the malignant church. And
therefore though the church of Rome do not comprehend them, yet it does
nevertheless comprehend all Orthodox and Catholic churches. That all those
malignant churches, and every member of them that either err in matter of
faith defined, or are by schism divided from the church of Rome be no true
churches at all, To omit diverse other arguments, (because this is not a place
to handle at large that question) let these few testimonies suffice. Saint
Austin says. He that believes any false thing of God, or of any part of the
doctrine that appertains unto the edification of faith, Aug. l. quest. in Math.
q. 11.

Si enim falsa de deo credit, vel de aliqua part doctrinae quae ad fidei
pertinet aedificationem, ita vt non quaerentis cunctatione tentatus sit, sed
inconcusse credentis, nec omnino scientis opinione atque errore discordans,
Haereticus est, and foris est animo, quamuis corporaliter intus videatur.


and that not doubtingly, with a mind to be better enstructed, but resolutely
and obstinately; he is an heretic, and in soul out of the church; though in
body he seem to live in it. which elsewhere he repeats coupling schismatiks
and heretics together, and declaring both their congregations to be no part of
the Catholic church in these words. we believe the holy church, that surely
which is Catholic. Idem de fide and Simbolo ca: 10.

Credimus and sanctam Ecclesiam, vtique Catholicam: nam and haeretici and
schismatici, congregationes suas Ecclesias vocant. Sed Haeretici de deo falsa
sentiendo ipsam fidem violant: schismatici autem discissionibus iniquis a
fraterna Charitate dissiliunt quamuis ea credunt quae credimus. Quapropter nec
haereticus pertinet ad ecclesiam Catholicam, quae diligit deum; nec
schismatitus, quoniam diligit proximum.


for heretics and schismatikes do call their congregations churches: but
heretics believing false things of God do break their faith; and schismatiks
by wilful divisions do leap from brotherly charity: wherefore neither does
the heretic belong to the Catholic church, because she loves god: nor the
schismatike, for that she loves heir neighbor. which doctrine he might have
drawn out of Saint Ciprian, who under the name of the Novatians does teach:
That heretics be like unto Apes; who though they be no men, Ciprian. epistola
73. ad Iubaianum.

Nouatianus simiarum more (quae cum homines non sint, homines tamen imitantur)
vult ecclesiae Catholicae auctoritatem sibi and veritatem vindicare, quando
ipse in Ecclesia non sit, imo, etc.


yet do counterfeit men: so heretics, albeit they be out of the church, yet
do challenge to themselves the truth and authority of the church. with them
accords Saint Hierom saying. when you shall hear of any Christians that take
not their name from Jesus Christ, Hieron. co. lucif in fine.

Sicubi audieru eos qui dicuntur Christi, non a Jesus Christo sed a quoquam alio
nuncupari, vtputa Marcionistas, valentinianos, montenses: scito non Ecclesiam
Christi sed Antichristi esse synagogam.


but from other men, as Marcionists, valentinians, (or such like as are now a
days, Lutherans, Zuinglians, etc.) be you well assured, that they belong not
to the church of Christ, but to the Sinagogue of Antichrist. Out of this sound
doctrine of the ancient fathers, and approved doctors, M. Abbots objection is
easily solued. For albeit there be many erring congregations, which would
gladly be called churches, and do challenge to themselves the name and
authority of the church, which the church of Rome does not comprehend: yet
those congregations being no more true churches, then Apes be men: the church
of Rome may be truly said to comprehe^d all the Catholic church, though it
do not contain any of the^: they being for their ertors in faith, and disvnio^
in matter of religion, by the verdict of the ancient fathers esteemed rather
schismatikes and parts of satha^s sinagogue, then any members of Christ's
Catholic church.

I am not ignorant that there be certain good fellow Libertins, who more
willing to please men with plausible doctrine, then to acquaint them with Gods
just judgments, And to make some show that their church has been always a
member of the visible Catholic church do teach, that even schismatikes and
heretics (so they err not in some fundamental points of religion) be
notwithstanding real and true members of the Catholic church. Against whose
error I mean god willing to make a chapter in this book, wherefore I will not
here stand to confute it: But admitting it here for passable, I do not see any
reason why in the way of that opinion, the Roman church may not comprehend
even those vnpure churches too. For albeit they do not acknowledge the chiefty
of the Roman church, nor agree with it in all articles of faith yet they
acknowledging the Roman to hold all those fundamental articles of faith, must
needs grant that they do agree with it in all points that are of necessity to
be believed. On the other side they cannot deny but that they are all
descended out of the same Roman church; not being able to show any other stock
or pedigree, out of which their church is issued and sprung. why then should
they not yield that honor unto the same, as to acknowledge themselves members of
her from whom they derive their descent and pedigree? and with whom they do
agree in all fundame^tall points of doctrine, though in some other (not
necessary in their opinion to be believed) they do dissent from her? Neither
is that example of the Roman Empire well applied by M. Abbot: For albeit there
were and be many kingdoms in the world besides the Roman Empire, not subject
thereto, nor any members thereof: yet there be not, nor cannot be many christian
churches, whereof the one is not a member of the other. For all Christian creeds
do teach us to believe, that there is but one only church, not many: Ephesians. 4.
Cant. 6.8
One spouse of Christ one body of Christ, vna est columba mea, etc. which is
the common doctrine of the ancient fathers, after S. Ciprian and Saint Austin,
who have made whole treatises of the unity of the church. So that though there
be many distinct kingdoms independent one of the other; yet there cannot be
many such churches; but all and every particular true church is a true member
of the one only Catholic church. All of them perfectly agreeing together in
society of faith, in unity of sacraments and in form of government.
Consequently, the head and mother church, (such as before I have proved the
Roman church to be) may convenientlie be used to signify all the rest. No
man denies the more proper signification of the church of Rome to be the city
or Diocese of Rome it self; in which sense Albertus Pighius does truly say of
it, That it is a particular church, and not to be taken for the universal
church: Notwithstanding it is in more large signification often taken for the
whole Catholic church, not only of modern writers, but also of the most
ancient and holy fathers. to witness whereof I take these few following. Saint
Ciprian sent the copy of Antonianus letter to Cornelius bishop of Rome, Cipr.
epistola 52.
to assure him that the said Antonian did comunicate with him, that is, with
the Catholic church. vt scires illum tecum, hoc est, cum Catholica ecclesia
comunicare. where that most learned prelate, and glorious Martyr put as a thing
by it self well known, that to comunicate with the pope of Rome, is to
communicate with the Catholic church with him accords Saint Ambrose, Ambros.
oratione defratic Satyro.
relating how his brother Satyrus was cast on shore in Sardinia or therabout,
where Catholics and heretics were blended and mixed together: and being desirous
to be baptized by a Catholic Bishop, when one was presented to him to do that
good office, he to try whither he were Catholic or no, demanded of him. Si
cum Catholicis, hoc est, cum Romany consentiret. If he did agree with the
Catholics, that is to say, with the Romans. Putting as we do now Roman for a
certain mark, and as it were an explication of a true Catholic. The like
does Saint Hierom, when he asked of Ruffinus, what faith he professed, Hic
oni. Apol (...) c^^ Ruffinum.
whether that that flourished in the church of Rome, or that which was contained
in the books of Origin? Si Romanam responderit, ergo Catholici sumus. If he
answer the Roman faith, then bewe Catholics, and free from the errors of
Origin. where he sets the Roman faith, to signify the Catholic faith, yea
shows that of the Roman faith, Christians are denominated Catholics. The
same does the ancient christian poet Prudentius chaunt in these verses.

Fugite (o miseri) execranda Nouati
Schismata, Catholicis vos reddite populis, Prudent. in hymno de Hipolito.

Vnasedes vigeat, prisco quae condita seclo est,
Quam Paulus tenuit, qua^que cathedra Petri.
O poor souls from Nouatus cursed schism do you fly,
And with speed yield your selves unto the Catholic party.
That only seat flourish, which in ancient time founded,
S. Paul vpheld, and where the chair of Peter was grounded.
This godly and holy man esteemed it all one to yield your self to the
Catholic party, and to unite your self to the sea of Rome. So did that
puissant Christian Emperor Theodosius the younger, when he exhorted the Bishop
of Berca and his followers, to declare themselves approved priests of the Roman
religion; imploing the Roman for the Catholic religion, which was with all
persons so usual and current in those better times, Council: Ephesin. Tom. 1.
c. 10.
that even the old rotten Arrian heretics did by the same name of Roman,
design all true believers, as may be gathered by that godly Historiographer
Victor Bishop of vtica in Afric: who relates, how locundus, to diswade the
cruel Arrian Theodoricus, Victor vti: de pers: vand: l. 1.
the kings son, from putting a Christian to death used these words. If you
put him to the sword, the Romans will honor him for a Martyr. By the word
Romans, signifying the true Catholics. And another worthy witness heerof is
Gregory that learned and Zealous Bishop of Toures, who citing these words of
the Arrians, Greg de gloria Martyru^ l. 1. c. 25.
Quia ingenium est Romanorum, does enterlace this explication, Romanos enim
vocitant, nostrae religionis homines) they do commonly call men of our religion
(to wit, the true Catholics, by the name of Romans. These ancient grave and
renowned authors may serve to convince any reasonable man, that the name Roman
both anciently did, and now very well may comprehend all the true believers
of the universal world. what shall we then say to M. Abbot, that in all his
reading (as he confesses to the reproach of his ignorance) could never light
upon any one that by the Roman church, did signify the whole Catholic church?
He must acknowledge either that there remains very much in antiquity, which
he has not yet read; or that passing over much in post, was not at leisure to
mark that which made against himself. He found the East and the west, the
Greek and Latin churches: but he could never find, that by the Roman church
was signified the universal church. Be it so good Sir, because you will needs
have it to be so, that you through the dimnes of your sight could not discern
that which stands on record in Saint Ciprian, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome, and
diverse others well known and approved Authors: does it there upon follow, that
no man else could do it? or that I upon the acknowledgment of your want of
reading the fathers, was presently blanked, and had not a word to say? Alas
seely man have you never heard of this trivial Adage? Bernardus non vidit
omnia. If that enlightened and Eagle eied Abbot did not see all; what marvel
though a poor purrblind Abbot ouersee and mistake many things? Learn gentle
sir by this little, not to bear your self to confidently upon your own
reading; be you well assured that there be many worthy things in antiquity,
that you have not read; many also that you do not understand: and not a few
(if I do not greatly mistake) that you having both read and understood, yet
will not acknowledge, for fear of hurting your own cause. Out of the premises
it follows most manifestly, that the word Roman (taken in that larger
signification) is no term of diminution, nor abridgeth) the whole unto a
part, but is of as large extent, and has the same latitude, with the whole
Catholic and Orthodox church. So that whosoever is of the Roman church, is a
true member of the Catholic church. And on the other side, whosoever will be
esteemed a member of the Catholic church must not refuse to be made a member
of the Roman church. It only seperateth Catholics from heretics, Epist. 73.
who like Apes (to use S. Ciprians term) counterfeit the Catholic, and would
very feign be so saluted: but because they will not acknowledge, Epist. 45.
radicem and matricem, (as the said Doctor speaks elsewhere) the original and
mother church of Rome, they cannot be lively branches and true children of the
same.

Optatus l. 2. co. parmen.
The Donatists (as Optatus wisely notes) because they separated themselves
from the communion of the church of Rome, avouching their particular sect to
be the whole church, were no part of the whole: but lay like rotten boughs
cut of from the body of the Catholic church. In the same terms stand
protestants and all other sectaries of what sort soever they be, that after the
fashion of Donatists divide themselves from the same church of Rome, and make
peculier seperations. And if the particular church of Rome would and could
forsake their Ancestors faith, and divide it self from other Catholic churches
as protestants do, And nevertheless avouch it self alone to be the whole church:
then in deed it might well incurr that censure of Optatus. But because it
cannot so do, being by the virtue of our Saviors prayer, and continual
assistance of the holy Ghost, always preserved from all error in matter of
faith: therefore it cannot be separated from the rest of the Catholic church,
as the Donatists were, but be perpetually so closely united, and inseparably
associated with it, that whosoever joins himself with the church of Rome,
does even thereby enter in to society of the whole catholic church. which the
same ancient prelate Optatus does teach in these most express words which I
have cited before. Si^icius, [that now sits S. Peter's success^r in the
chair of Rome] is our companion, with who^ the whole world by enter course of
formed letters, agrees with us in one uniform society of comunion. Behold
how by society with the Bishop and church of Rome, the Bishops of Afrike
entered into communion, and kept correspo^de^ce with the universal church
dispersed ouerall the whole world.

4 M. Abbot would gladly learn, seeing that in ancient time when there were
very many heresies, the addition of Catholic was taken for sufficient to
distinguish the Orthodox from all kind of sectaries; why it will not now serve
the turn, but that Roman must be added thereunto. The answer is ready,
because sectaries be waxen more audacious now, the^ they were of old: for in
S. Austins days, Aug (...) til. cred c. 7.
albeit the heretics c ueted to be called Catholics, and so did call
themselves, putting names of reproach upon the true believers, as Protestants
use to do now: yet as the same most trusty Doctor witnesses: when any
stranger came to demand of them, which was the Catholic congregation, Idem de
vera rel. c. 7.
they always directed and sent them to the true Catholic, and not to their
own, well knowing that he who enquired after the Catholics, meant not their
sect. neither could they otherwise be well understood, unless they called the
true church by the same name, as it was called all the world over.

But the heretics of our times having put on more brazen faces then their
predecessors, though there be no universality neither of time, place, or people
in their congregations; yet forsooth will needs be called Catholics, by
Antiphrasis or contraries (belike,) vt Lucus dicitur a Lucendo, quia minime
lucet, lucus that is Latin for a wood is derived of lumen, light, because in it
is little light; so Protestants may be named vniuersalists, because there is
among them little or no kind of universality. To the purpose then, to declare
what manner of Catholics we mean, we add Roman: to signify that we
understand not a counterfeit, or corner catholic that lay lurking in obscurity
for a thousand years together, and whose faith was never spread one quarter of
the world over. But such Catholics as join with the church of Rome, whose
faith and religion was first commended in the Apostles days, and has
continued ever since immovable, and besides has florishedd in all christian
nations of the world, and therefore is indeed truly Catholic. Our conjunction
therefore with the Roman church associateth us with the faithful not only of
all Europe, Afrike, and Asia; but also with the faithful of the East and west
Indies and of all the world besides.

wherefore M. Abbot was fowly deceived, when he said that the word Roman, was a
term of diminution, or that it abridgeth the whole unto a part; whereas the
Roman is fully as large and ample, and has the very same, and no narrower
limits and borders then the Catholic faith and religion: excluding none of any
nation of the world out of that communion, but heretics only and schismatiks,
and such like counterfeit Catholics. And let him and his companions that blush
not to lay that imputation of sect and schism upon the Roman church declare if
they can, from what church the Roman divided it self? in what popes days it
became schismatike? And in what country was the unity of the true church then
preserved? None of all which if they be able to declare, we must needs take
their words for wind, if not for passionat and womanish scolding without any
color of reason.

I marvel where M. Abbot has read, that it is the peculiar badg of
Antichrist, to challenge to him and his alone to be the whole church of Christ.
May not Christ's lieutenant on earth challenge that truly, which Antichrist by
intrusion will presume to do unjustly? Or is there no whole church of Christ in
the world out of Antichrists tents? And may he not rather be thought to rove at
random, then to speak in his right senses, that averreth Antichrist to be
willing to stand for Christ, and to profess to fight under Christ's banner?
against whom as the holy scripture and ancient fathers most manifestly teach,
he will proclayme open war, and do the uttermost of his most wicked endeavor
to compel all Christians openly to forsake and forswear Christ too, and that
not covertly and by consequencies, but in plain and formal terms, and to
acknowledge no other sovereign lord besides himself. wherefore to conclude this
section, let the indifferent reader duly consider whether I have delivered in
sufficient premises to prove, that the church of Rome may be used to signify
any church of the world, that in faith and religion does agree with it. My
promises are, not the practice only of Catholics but also of Protestants, who
in all countries give us a name taken from the church of Rome, as Romanists or
Papists; to signify that we all be members of the same church in what country
soever we dwell; And not only men of our d^^es do so commonly speak, but in
ancient times also it is as well recorded of the Orthodox fathers as by
heretics; that men of all countries who embraced the true faith were called
Romans, as I have once before proved at large. wherefore it is no novelty to
avouch the church of Rome to comprehend all the true Christians of the world.
Against which it makes nothing that heretics and schismatiks be no members of
the church of Rome: for they be no better then rotten boughs cut of from the
vine, and like scattered sheep out of Christ's fold, wherefore no part nor
parcel of Christ's church.


THE FOVRTH Paragraffe.
w. B. NOw to M. Abbots second sophistication. The Roman church by your rule is
the head, and all other churches are members to it: but the Catholic
comprehends all. Ergo, to say the Roman is the Catholic church, is to say,
the head is the whole body.

To which I say first, as I said to the former argument, that it is
missshapen, and by the like it may be proved, that their English church is
not the Catholic church, which M. Abbot is content to grant. Se^ondly I say,
that it is a fault in arguing when a word is used Metaphorically, to take hold
upon any other property of the Metaphore, besides that wherein the resemblance
lies. I gave for example, that our blessed Savior is called a Lion for his
invincible fortitude. Now if any man would out of that metaphore argue, that
our Savior had four feet, because a Lion has so, he should be not only
ridiculous, but also blasphemous. In like manner though the church of Rome be
by us called the head church, because of her superiority: Yet does it not
follow, that any other properties belonging to a head, be of necessity
attributed to the same church. And to our present purpose, though a head cannot
be called by the name of the whole, it being but one part of the whole, called
dissimilare, that consists of diverse parts, one unlike to the other; yet
might the church of Rome, not withstanding that it is the head, be called by
the name of the whole Catholic church. For that the Catholic church is, totum
similare, a whole consisting of parts, that be all a like as the air is:
every part whereof is called by the name of the whole, as every part of the
air, is called the air, every part of water, is called water: so every
particular church, that is part of the Catholic church, may truly be called
the Catholic church: though it be not the whole Catholic church. To which M.
Abbot after much idle speech mingled with scornful scoffing, answers nothing
else in effect, but that he had said before, these be his words.


R. AB. TAke a head in what sense you will, it must needs be a distinct part
from the rest of the body, and then repeats his goodly argument in these
terms. The church of Rome is by their learning the head of all other
churches, and all other churches are as the members and body of this head. But
the Catholic church comprehends all both head and body. To say then that the
Roman church is the Catholic church is all one, as if a man should say, the
head is the whole body. After which he adds, who can speak more clearly
then I have done? where if you will be his favorable and fast frind, you must
applaud him and say, that no man is able to do better, nor to set it out more
clearly then he has done. A high conceit of his own writing, uttered with
vanity enough. Now of me his poor Antagonist he says, who can answer more
absurdly then he has done? I have put him to his trumps I warrant him etc: to
omit much such trumpery which follows, without any fortification of reason,
or temper of modesty.


W. B. I am so far of from being troubled with his trumpes, which are nothing
else indeed then very frumpes (besides that one old halting spurgald Jade of an
argument so confusedly set down by him, even there where he crakes most of
cleernes) that I will do that for him, which he blinded with self love
imagined impossible for any man to do, to wit; I will put down his argument
more clearly and formerly, then he has done himself, as every scholar that
can Judge of the form of an argument may easily perceive, in this manner. No
part can be the whole, but the church of Rome is but a part (to wit the head of
the church) Ergo it cannot be the whole. This his so often repeated argument,
without any new fortificatio^, needs no other refutatio^, than that which has
been once or twice given before.

Thus at length we come to the end of M. Abbots first chapter, which was
divided into four sections or parts; and have by the help of Gods good grace
both defended and proved that supreme commanding power of Jurisdiction, which
consists in the chief government of Christ's church upon earth, to have been
by our blessed Savior first established and placed upon the person of S. Peter
Prince of the Apostles; that there should be perfect unity in his
Ecclesiastical kingdom: then that the same might endure not for term of S.
Peter's life only, but always continue unto the worlds end, He ordained that S.
Peter's successors the Bishops of Rome should enjoy the same sovereign
authority, over the whole Catholic church until the worlds end. which I made
good specially by the confession and acknowledgment of the greatest Patriarks,
most learned and best approved Prelates of the East churches; because the better
learned Protestants do after a manner grant unto the Bishop and pope of Rome,
Of this read more in the note at the end of this chapter.
as patriarch of the west, supreme authority and Jurisdiction over all the
west churches. Moreover, because the protestants do all and some object that
fact of the African Bishops, wherein they seemed to deny appeals of all under
the degree of Bishops unto the court of Rome, as an argument of great moment
against the said supreme commanding power of the sea of Rome, I have produced
testimonies of the most ancient, and best learned Bishops and Doctors of the
African church, averring the Jurisdiction of the church of Rome over themselves
and their country. So that there can remain no scruple in the upright and
judicious Readers understanding, but that the Bishop of Romes supremacy has
been acknowledged, witnessed and obeyed all the world over, even in the pure
times of most flourishing Christianity. And consequently, that all they who
desire to be sound and perfect Catholics, must embrace and profess the faith
and religion of the same Roman church, or else be content to be reckened in the
rue of heretical or schismatic Congregations. And as in this life they
willingly take part with them in their schism and errors: so they may assure
themselves (unless God give them grace to repent) to be against their wills,
sorted with them in the final separation at the last day, and to have their
unlucky lot with them in the lake ever burning with fire and brimstone. from
which our most merciful Lord and sweet Savior Christ Jesus deliver all them
that profess his truth and holy name. Amen.


M. Richard field Doctor of divinity in his fifth book of the church printed at
london 1610. of the bishop and church of Rome has these positions.
FIrst in the 32. chapter: that the Bishop of Rome does succeed S. Peter in the
Bishoprique of the City, and in the honor of being one of the prime Bishops of
the world.

Secondly in the 34. chapter: that the church of Rome was head of all churches,
that is first in order and honor among them, but not in absolute supreme
commanding power.

3 That the same church was in more special sort head of such churches as were
within the Patriarchship of Rome, as was all the west church.

To which effect his majesty of England (our sovereign lord) writes to all
Christian Monarchs: Page 46.
If there were yet question among the Patriarchs for the first place, I would
with all my heart give my consent that the Bishop of Rome should have the first
seat. I being a western king would go for the patriarch of the west.

4 That the Bishop of Rome had the care of all churches, not as absolute
supreme commander, but as most honorable among the Bishops: who were first to
be sought unto in matters requiring a common deliberation, and from whom all
things generally concerning the state of the whole church were either to take
beginning, or at the least to seek confirmation, before they were generally
imposed and prescribed.

The same Doctor in his preface to the reader teaches, that to compose
variances rising between Patriarchs and their Bishops, or among themselves, he
that was in order and honor before the rest might lawfully interpose himself,
and in his synod judge of such differences. And in such cases as could not be
so ended, or that concerned the faith, and the state of the whole universal
church, there remained the judgment and resolution of a general council,
wherein the Bishop of the first sea (that is the Bishop of Rome) was to sit as
President and moderatour.

Observe how easily that which we teach of popes the supremacy may be gathered
out of these principles. for if it appertain unto the Bishop of Rome as prime
Patriarch, to compose the differences rising betwixt other Patriarchs and
their Bishops; if he must be principally sought unto for final resolutions in
matter of faith; if care of all churches belong to him and from him all things
generally concerning the state of the whole church, were either to take
beginning or else to seek confirmation: let any understanding man exercised in
government tell me, how Patriarchs and Bishops may be conuented to appear
without commanding authority; and how without compelling power, the popes
final determinations would be of all parties obeyed.



THE SECOND CHAPTER.
M. ABBOT. The comparisons between the Donatists and Papists justified and
enlarged, page 51.


R. AB. IT is a mere usurpation whereby the Papists call the Roman church the
Catholic church, and the same that the Donatists of old did. They held the
Catholic church to be art Cartenna in Africa, and the Papists hold it to be at
Rome in Italy.


W. B. THis comparison is a fond new devise of M. Abbot, wherein there is skarce
one spark either of wit or learning; wherefore it deserved rather to be abridged
or wholly ca^celd, then to have been enlarged. Justified it can never be,
because it has not many true words in it. Take a taste of this first branch
which is false on both sides. for neither was Cartenna in Africa, but in
Mauritania: nor did the Donatists hold their pretended Catholic church to be
at Cartenna, but esteemed the Rogatists (who so much magnified Cartenna) to be
wicked Schismatiks, altogether unworthy the name or communion of their supposed
Catholic church; as S. Austin (M. Abbots own author) does testify, Aug.
Epist. 48.
in the place cited by himself. was he not then fowly mistaken to father such
a strange untruth upon S. Augustine? And on the other side, is it not a
prodigious impudent assertion to avouch, that we Catholics do maintain the
Catholic church to be enclosed within the walls of Rome, or confined in those
quartiers, as the Rogatists did their church to be concluded within the Coasts
of Cartenna? whereas we teach it to be dispersed all the world over.


R. AB. I Confess I committed some oversight by understanding that generally
of the Donatists, which belonged only to the Rogatists. Let this be amended
thus. The Donatists did set up a particular church, all of them first in the
south of Africa, some afterward (as the Rogatists) at Cartenna in Mauritania.
And so have the Papists done at Rome in Italy. Against which M. Bishop gives
two exceptions: First, that they do not hold the Catholic church to be
enclosed within the walls of Rome, as the Rogatists did theirs within Cartenna:
but do say that it was dispersed all the world over; whereas the Rogatists
congregation was holden to be confined within the bounds of Cartenna. The first
part of which answer on their behalf is false; and the second part concerning
the Rogatists is vain: for it is false that the Romish church is dispersed
over all the world: because the Greek and Eastern churches disclaim
subjection to the church of Rome; and although the communion of the church of
Rome be far larger then that was of the Rogatists at Cartenna; yet does
neither of them contain any more then a part. And we cannot doubt but that the
Rogatists would as w^llingly have had the whole world to join with their
church, as the Romans: And so it was not by position of doctrine that their
church was not of larger extent; but forwant of better success. And the
exprobration of the same mad fancy lies upon the church of Rome, to wit, that
whosoever in the further parts of the world shall be desirous of salvation, unless
he come to Rome, or into some place where he may meet with a Popish priest,
he cannot be baptized or reconciled to God. As touching the second exception
though it be not generally true, that the Donatists placed the Catholic
church at Cartenna, yet it is not altogether untrue. because the Rogatists were
a kind of Donatists, albeit divided from them by schism. Again although the
Donatists did not place the Catholic church at Cartenna, yet they designed the
place thereof to be Africa; for albeit they acknowledged the church by the
Apostles preaching to have been spread over all the world; yet they held that it
was perished in all other parts of the world, and only remained with their
part in Africa: they did not exclude the rest of the world out of their
communion, so they would be of their opinion. The foundation of their church
was laid in Africa, and from thence they would have it dispersed all the world
over. In the same sort stands the mattr with the Papists, they tell us that
the other patriarchall seas are all either extinguished or fallen into Schism,
and the Roman church only remaining: whence all other churches of the world are
to be reduced to the Pope.

They tell us of strange wonders done amongst the Indians, whither they know it
unlikely for us to come to search out the truth: but those nations pretended to
be converted by them, are either colonies of their own, or some Infidels
forced to accept of Baptism without religion, or such as by wiles they have
surprised. Thus is M. Bishop by avoiding to be a Donatist by putting the matter
over to the Rogatists, become both a Donatist and Rogatist, by tying the seat
of the Catholic church to one only particular place.


W. B. M. Abbot perceiving well that he had behaved himself exceeding drowsily
in that comparison between the Donatists and Catholics, yet being (as it
seems) over far in love with his own conceit simple though it were, would
not so give it over: but to make up the full measure of his folly, will needs
go forwards with it; and endevoreth not only to justify that which he had
before written, but does also make some new additions. If I could persuade my
self that my time should be fruitfully spent in answering him at le^ght, I
would not desire greater advantage to be given me, to display and lay open to
the view of the world his lack of Judgment, lack of learning, and l^cke of
honesty: but considering that this comparison can be no great matter of
edification to the Reader, I hold it not worthy any amplification, but will
abridg it as much as I may: yet so, that no substantial point of it be left
unanswered. M. Abbot not finding any poor means to underprop his palpable
absurdities, is driven to confess them in the very first branch, and does
therefore post that over to the latter place, and preposterously makes answer
before unto the second part of the comparison; which was, that we Roman
Catholics do not tie the Catholic church to the City of Rome, as the Rogatists
did theirs to Cartenna. For we hold that men may be baptized and saved in any
part of the world, without repayring to the City of Rome, or to the coasts
adjoining near thereunto; whereas the Rogatists did hold, that in what part
soever of the world any person were co^verted, he must of necessity go unto
Carte^na, or therabouts to be baptized and obtain salvation. To which M.
Abbot replies that the former part on our behalf is false. because our church
is not spread over all the world, and therefore salvation cannot be gotten all
the world over. for that to obtain salvation as he says, a popish priest must
needs be found out. This reply is not to the purpose. For whether our church
be spread over all the world or no, of which more shall be said presently: yet it
is certainly known to be in diverse great monarchies besides Italy: in all which
if any person be to be baptized or reconciled, we send them not to Rome to
receive those sacraments, but administer them in the place where the person is
by the inspiration of God converted, which is clean contrary to the doctrine
of the Rogatists, that exacted the personal repair of all such convertites to
Cartenna, or to her confines which does most clearly overthrow M. Abbots
answer. Yet to bolster out his flaggy resemblance he adds, that it was not
by position of doctrine, that the Rogatists forced all convertits to come into
that country; but because they had not any Bishops of their sect else where,
which if they had had (as no doubt they desired to have) then they who were
touched with the preaching of the Gospel, might have been baptized by them in
any other country where these godly prelates were. To which I reioyne, that had
there been Rogatists all the world over as they desired to be, the^ there had
bee^ no place for this bra^ch of the comparison, which likeneth the Roman
Catholics to the Rogatists, in that they be both of them private and confined
within the compass of some particular places. M. Abbot therefore full wisely
goes about to uphold his former resemblance by the quite overthrow of it. for
herein (said he before) stands the resemblance between the Papists and
Rogatists, that both of them do restrain the universality of the Catholic
church to one particular place or country. And now confessing the Papists
communion and fellowship to be far larger the^ the Rogatists, he flies to
this silly shift, that the Rogatists desire to have their church as largly
extended as the Romanists, that is both of them all the world over. So that the
wind being come round about and sitting now in the clean contrary corner, the
resemblance is to be turned the other way; to wit, that as the Roman church
desires to be spread all the world over, so did the Rogatists. But good Sir
tell me I pray you, is it sufficient to make a church Catholic to desire to be
dilated all the world over? Then without doubt not only Rogatists, but all
other sectaries too, were also Catholics; for none of them suerly wanted that
desire. yet being bastard slips, and destitute of that virtue, which proceeds
by the trunck of true succession from the right root, they could never be
generally received all the world over, and therefore could not be called
Catholics. whereas the Roman church ingraffed by the Apostles in to the true
Olive Christ Jesus through the force of his blessed passion, and by power of
the holy Ghost, has not only desired to spread her branches into all nations,
but has actually performed that her holy desire. for truth is strong, and does
prevail. wherefore it alone has worthily archieued the name of Catholic,
which all other congregations have in vain gaped after and desired.

Observe by the way M. Abbots gross ignorance in two points of our doctrine:
the former, when he imagines us to hold that no man can be baptized to
salvation without he meet with one of our priests. whereas we teach the
Baptism even of Protestants, be they men, be they women, to be availeable to
salvation. The latter, in that he affirms us to hold the same of
reconciliatio^; we teaching that any person of discretion may by true
contrition and repentance obtain salvation, albeit they cannot meet with any
priest. Let therefore these his assertions be scored up for an after reckening.

Now to the second exception, albeit the Rogatists were a Cantell or fragment
broken out of the Donatists, yet they by their division from them forsook the
name of Donatists, and took their own proper name of Rogatists, and in that
question of the true church were at open war with the Donatists. so that it
was a gross oversight in M. Abbot to say the Donatists held the Catholic
church to be at Cartenna: Because they esteemed no better of that church at
Cartennna then of a den of thieves. In like manner they of Cartenna reputed the
Donatists for damned creatures. wherefore albeit the Rogatists in some other
matter, wherein they did agree with the Donatists, might have passed under that
general name: yet they could not in that point, wherein they were at so great
square. It is then clear that M. Abbots error therein cannot be excused.

well if he has hitherto behaved himself like one that being half a sleep
knew not well what he said; yet now being awaked by his adversary he will (no
doubt) spitt on his fingers, and take better hold, secundae enim cogitationes
sunt prudentiores. To it then Iollie Sir, touch the Papists home, and if you
cannot force the Rogatists upon them, yet drive them at the least to be
Donatists, and you shall do somewhat. That (says M. Abbot) I will easily
perform by this new framed resemblance. like as the Donatists held the
Catholic church to have perished in all other countries, and to have remained
only with their part in Africa, and desired that from thence it might be spread
into all other nations: Even so the papists tell us that the churches in all
the far parts of the world have failed, that the patriarchall seas are all
fallen away, and only the Roman remains, whence the rest are to be reduced to
the obedience of the pope.

This lo seems to be something. True it is that the Donatists did in many
things things counterfeit the true Catholics, and among the rest pretended (as
all other heretics commonly do) that their congregation was the only true
reformed church, and that the ready way to salvation was to enter into their
society. But this is so trivial and common as well to the true Catholic, as to
all manner of disse^bling co^gregatio^s that he who delights to enlarge himself
therein, shall but loose his time, abuse his reader, and purchase to himself the
reputation of a trifler. yet let us desce^d to the particulars of this new
coined comparison, and see whether it will abide the touch ar noe. The Roman
church and the Donatists did not agree in the first point of that resemblance.
for whereas the Donatists held the church to have perished all the world over,
saving in some part of Africa: the Roman Catholic does not hold the true
church to have perished all the world over, saving in Italy, or in some parts
of Europe: but teaches that it has always continued, and even in this last
hundredth years, to have gained more both in the East and west Indies, then it
has lost in these parts of the world. Secondly, it is not long sithence all
the patriarchall seas did openly agree with the church of Rome, to wit, in the
year of our Lord god 1439. as may be seen in the council of Florence, and by
the profession of faith which Joseph patriarch of Constantinople, Council.
florent. sess. 25.
then and there made in these words. whatsoever the Catholic church of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is of old Rome does believe and worship; Joseph
miseratione diuina Constan. Patriarcha.

Quoniam ad extremum vitae mea perueni, idcirco pro meo munere dilectis filijs
benignitate dei meam sententiam his literis palam facio. Nam quae Jesus Christi
catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia Roma veteris sentiat ac celebrec, omnia me
quoque sentire credereque profiteor, at ipsis plurimum acqui^sco. Beatissimum
autem Patrum Patrem ac Summum Pontificem Romaque veteris Papam, domini nostri
Jesus Christi vicarium esse concedo, etc. datum Florentiae 8. Iulij, anno 1439.


all the same do I confess my self to believe and think, and thereunto do
yield my perfect consent. And I do further confess, the most blessed father of
fathers, the chief Bishop and pope of Rome, to be the vicar of our lord Jesus
Christ. To these points of doctrine, and to all other of the church of Rome,
did at the same time subscribe the legates and deputies of the other three
patriarchall seas, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem; as is recorded in the
same council. In which faith continued the said three patriarchall seas, till
the year of our lord 1517, (when Luther began his tragedy) as stands of record
in the general council of Latera^ held under Leo the tenth. where the
obedience also of Peter Patriarch of the Armenians unto the church of Rome was
presented by his orators since which time (as sometimes also before) albeit
those churches for the greater part fell often away into schism and heresy;
yet there remained always, and do to this time continue still among them, many
good souls that do constantly retain and keep the true doctrine of the
church of Rome in all points. And the Greek church has in Rome it self a
Seminary (as many other nations have) at this day, to breed and train up
their young students, as in all other virtues and piety, so principally in the
true faith of the church of Rome. wherefore albeit the public face of religion
be now in those churches as it is in our country, yet there want not true
Roman Catholics in those parts no more then there do (God be thanked) in our
country to baptize, reconcile, and to perfome all other christian duties
appertayning to the rites of the Roman church. whence it follows, that there
are two untruths in the former part of M. Abbots new resemblance; for we are
so far of from saying the Catholic church to be perished over all the world,
that we affirm it rather to be at this present day much increased and
multiplied, which does controwle the former part of M. Abbots position: we say
more over that in those very patriarchall seas, though the outward face of
religion be disfigured and corrupted, yet does the Roman religion remain there
entire and sound, though not openly countenanced by the state, yet by the godly
practiced in secret.

Let us now proceed to the second particularity, to wit that the Donatists
laid the foundation of their church in Africa, and from thence would have had
all other churches to have been restored to their former integrity: when did
they begin to lay that foundation? about 300 years after Christ in
constantine the great his reign. who was he that laid that foundation? One
Maiorinus or Donatus, of whom the rest took their name, does it not herehence
(that I go no further) presently appear a great difference between the church
of Rome, and the church of the Donatists? The church of Rome began in the
Apostles days, and had for her chief Architects the princes of the Apostles S.
Peter, and S. Paul; whereas the Donatists began their revolt from the said
church of Rome 300 years after, under the before said blind guides. wherefore
there is no comparison to be made between either the foundation or founders of
the one with the other. But says M. Abbot. The Donatists gave their church as
gallant and brave a title as the church of Rome had, for they called it the
Catholic church: and desired as earnestly as the Romanistes do, to have had it
spread all the world over. True for the title of Catholic; true also that they
had a fervent desire to have had it spread far and near. But their doctrine
being the vain leasings of feeble mortal men, had too small force and virtue
in it, to disperse it self so far abroad; and not being planted by the
heavenly father, it did not take any deep root. so that albeit those busy
fellows labored tooth and nail to in large the limits of their doctrine into
the out most coasts of the earth, that it might have wonn the name of
Catholic, yet they could never obtain it, nor come within tenthousand mile of
it. whereas the doctrine and religion of the church of Rome, as a fruitful tree
pla^ited by the watet side, did spread her branches nto all nations, and has
even since the Apostles days even to our time continued a true part of the
Catholic church by M. Abbots own confession, as you shall see hereafter in
this chapter. so that in fine there is left no resemblance at all in this
reformed part of the comparison, saving that the Donatists had a vain desire
to have their sect dilated as amply as was the Catholic Roman faith. But it
began 300. years after the Roman, and has not by 1300 continued so long, nor
yet could for any short space of time dilate it self so largely. wherefore it
could not come near unto a shadow of the title of Catholic. Touching the
conversion of the Indies, it must needs grieve any good christian heart to hear
how conte^ptuously and prophaneliet his unsanctified Abbot does speak of it:
first he writes that we may say of their conversion what we list, because
those countries are so far of, that they are not like to travail so far to
search whether we say true or no. They are peradventure more like to make some
iournay thitherward to search out some of the India^ gold, then to seek after
the conversion of the poor Indian souls: yet if they will not of themselves
take the pains nor undergo the hazard to win souls, let the^at least afford
others their good word that will refuse no pains nor peril in so blessed an
enterprise. If there were any spark of Christian Charity in the^, would they
not rather rejoice then repine, that the faith of Christ is so universally
embraced, so religiously observed in those most ample and rich dominions? If M.
Abbot has not (as he here pretends) inquired after the manner of their
conversion, how knows he that there be so few, and they so bad Christians?
should not an even mind out of common christian charity in cases unknown,
judge the best and give his sentence rather in favor of the Christian Religion
then against it? but M. Abbot making out of his own mind that bad
construction, may not that of the poet be justly cast upon him? mala men's,
malus animus. for unless he did carry a wicked affection toward the enlargeme^t
of Christ's ki^gdome, not knowing how the case there stands, he would never
have chosen, to make the worst report thereof that can be imagined. well, he
that does not desire to remain wilfully blind, and altogether ignorant in
those happy tidings of the reducing of so many millions of souls from Idolatry
to the knowledge of the true and living God, and unto the participation of the
merits of our most blessed Savior Jesus Christ, may read the histories of
their co^versio^, composed by men almost of all nations (of whom many were eye
witnesses of that they writ.) There shall they find many notable monuments
as well of the holiness of their preachers testified by miracles, as of the
devotion of the people newly converted, and of their great sincerity. If among
the soldiers and merchants, which went with the religious priests and
preachers, th^re were more covetousnes, cruelty and disagrement then was
convenient, let not the disorders of those worldly and unruly creatures be
brought to disgrace the good meaning and godly endevors of others most godly
and religious persons, who in true Apostolical manner, have through Gods
inestimable mercy, converted infinite multitudes of those heathe^s unto the
Christian religion. I have staid the longer in this paragraff (because M. Abbot
by the way touched many great matters in it) rather to give the Reader
reasonable satisfaction therein; then that his resemblance deserved half the
pains: which holds no proportion at all in the main point. The reader shall
do well to note by the way, how many untruths M. Abbot lets slip in this
section, because he does in the end of this chapter bragg, that he has not
once lied in all this discourse, h^re we have these. I. that we teach the
Catholic church to be in closed within the walls of Rome, and do tie the seat
thereof to one part^culer place. secondly, that we hold no man can be baptized
to salvation unless he meet with a priest. 3. That no man can obtain salvation
unless he repair to Rome, or meet with a Roman Priest. whereas we hold
millio^^ to be saved, that never saw Rome, Again that any true repentant
soul, that cannot meet^ with a Roman priest to make his confession, may
nevertheles by true contrition obtey^e pardon of his sins and eternal
salvation. I omit as fleabitings those other his peccadilia of taking
Donatists for Rogatists, and Cartenna for Africa, because M. Abbot by
confessing that oversight has made satisfaction.


THE SECOND SECTION of the second chapter.
W. B. THE second branch of M. Abbots comparison between the Roman church and
the Donatists, is as faulty as the first. Thus he proposes it. The Donatists
would have the church to be called Catholic, Aug. in bre: collat^ diei. 3. c.
2.
not by reason of the communion thereof throughout the whole world, but for the
perfection of doctrine and Sacraments, which they falsely challenged to
themselves. The same perfection does the church of Rome arrogate to her self.
This halteth on both sides, as the former did: for the Donatists (as S. Austin
M. Abbots Author relates) did not call their church Catholic for perfection
of doctrine or Sacraments, as M. Abbot fableth: Epist. 48.
but for the fulness of Sacraments and for observation of all gods
commandments: they were not so dull and blockish (as S. Austin notes) to
argue an universality out of perfection, which is seldom universal, but aimed
always at some kind of universality. On the other side there is no Roman
Catholic that would have the church be called Catholic, rather for her
perfection in doctrine and Sacraments, then for her communion over all the
world.


R. ABBOT.. 2. IT is true, that S. Austin challenged vnicentius the Donatist for
interpreting the word Catholic, Aug. epistola 48. Idem in Breuic: collat die
3. cap. 2.
not for the communion of the whole church, but for the observation of all Gods
commandments, or for the fulness of Sacraments. yet I did not amiss to put
perfection for fulness; because they do both signify the same thing. for is not
fulness of Sacraments, the same with perfection of Sacraments? and observation
of all gods commandments, with perfection of observing them? Collat 3. cu^
donat. cap. 102.
like as perfection of doctrine is to teach all truth. Besides Gaudentius a
Donatist does tell us, that by Catholic they understood perfect, when he said:
the word Catholic imports, Replito fulc. c. 10. them. 6.
that which is full in Sacraments, which is perfect, and which is unspotted. To
the second member I say, that Bristow a great Romanist, grants the church to
be called Catholic, because she is universally perfect, halteth in nothing,
and is spread over all the world: and Austin himself in his younger days did so
expound the same word, though in his further experience and Judgment, he
abhorred from it, and left it wholly to the Donatists. So did Ciril of Jerusalem
and also Pacianus. wherefore M. Bishop shows himself scarce wise in denial of
it,


W. B. I have M. Abbot guilty and confessing that he changed his Authors
words, yet never without one idle excuse or other; he has (forsooth) given
another word, but which signifies the same in effect. If the words had been of
the same signification, yet it had been plainer dealing to have kept the
authors own words; but if there be great diversity between them, then there
was little show of honest dealing to shift from the one to the other. who but M.
Abbot will say, that perfection of Sacraments, and fulness of Sacraments be all
one? where fulness is referred to the complete number of Sacraments: and
perfection may be attributed to the right use of them, or to the virtue and
efficacy of them. For they be two distinct controversies between the
Protestants and us. The one, how many sacraments there be; the other, of what
perfection and efficacy they are. That is, whether they confer grace or no.
wherefore it was not well done to thrust in perfection for fulness, there being
such ods between the nature and use of those two words. Again, between the
observation of all Gods commandments, and perfection, there is a notable
difference in the way of our religion; for it appertains to all the faithful
to observe all Gods commandments; but the counsels of perfection are left to
the free choice of them, whose hearts it shall please God to dispose that way.
wherefore if M. Abbot had had an honest good meaning he would not have so
changed his authors words, but he more like a Ioly wise politic protestant,
that believes neither the full number of the sacraments, nor thinks it
possible to keep all Gods commandments, flies from those terms of fulness
of sacraments and observation of all the commandments as from checks and
reproues of their new belief; and choppeth in perfection of doctrine because he
can therein better wrangle. And albeit Gaudentius did join perfect and
unspotted with fulness; yet it follows not thereof, that he took those words
for all one; but rather joined together many words of diverse significations, to
explicate more fully the force of the word (Catholic.)

Now to the second member albeit Doctor Bristow (a man of singular virtue and
learning) and some others have taught the word (Catholic) to comprehend within
the latitude of his signification that which is universally perfect, and
halteth in nothing; yet no one of them does exclude the more usual and better
allowed signification of the same, which is to design the communion and
society of the whole world. Nay Doctor Bristow in the very words cited by M.
Abbot does expressly include it (and is spread over all the world,) and that
after the example of Saint Austin even by M. Abbots own confession. For albei^
that great Doctor in his youth used the wor^ Catholic to signify perfection
of doctrine; yet growing to riper judgment and being of better experience, he
abhorred that signification of the word as Donatisticall, and left it wholly to
the Donatists. wherefore let the indifferent reader judge, who deals more
soundly in the exposition of this word Catholic, whether I, that do follow S.
Austin in his more advised and riper judgment: Or M. Abbot that would have him
followed in that he taught being yet young, and which he himself afterward
upon better consideration thought good to alter. Is it not a sign of most
wilful blindness to allege that as imitable out of an Author, which he
himself advisedly corrected, and taught to be abhorred?


THE THIRD SECTION.
W. B. THE third particle of the resemblance, M. Abbot has couched in these
words. That as from Cartenna the Donatists did send Bishops to other countries,
even to Rome it self: so from Rome by the papists order Bishops be authorized
to all other countries. This is of small moment, if it were true. But I read
not in S. Austin that the Rogatists sent any Bishops from Cartenna into other
coasts, but rather required men of all other places, to come to their quarters
if they would obtain Salvation: That then may pass for another oversight.
Neither be all Catholic Bishops consecrated at Rome, and thence sent into
other countries: but they be ordinarily made in every Catholic country,
though to preserve unity and good order, their election be approved by the
Bishop of Rome Christ's vicar general on earth, and supreme pastor of his
church.


R. AB.. 3. PVT Africa in steed of Cartenna, and then M. Bishop can say nothing
against the resemblance. August. epist. 48.
I not weighing the matter so strictly did put Africa for the third part of the
world, and in that signification Cartenna is within Africa. well, let Cartenna
be put out, because Libia and Mauritania refused to be called by the name of
Africa (as Austin notes,) and let it run thus. The Donatists sent Bishops out
of Africa to dwell at Rome, or some Bishops out of Africa to create some other
bishops of their faction at Rome. So does the church of Rome send Bishops into
all other countries of their religion, or if they do not send such bishops
abroad; yet in that Bishops made in other countries must have the Bishop of
Rome his confirmation, it is all one as if he had sent them from thence.


w. B. well seeing the poor man acknowledges his error, let him be pardoned.
Let Cartenna and the Rogatists (who only reigned there) be changed into the
Donatists of Africa. That silly excuse that Africa contaynes the third part of
the world, might be to purpose, if Africa had been set for Cartenna; Continens
pro contento: but Cartenna was set for Africa, which being so obscure a part of
Africa, could not decently be put for the whole. wherefore M. Abbot has reason
to wish Cartenna to be blotted out, and so might he have done by all these
resemblances, had not his fingers itched to blase abroad his own folly. As for
his reformation of it, though he saw the disproportion, yet could he not let it
alone. For he was not ignorant that most Catholic Bishops neither went to Rome
to be there consecrated, nor were consecrated by any Bishops that came from
thence: As all the Donatists were either consecrated in Africa, or else by
Bishops who were sent out of Africa to consecrate them. what salve then has
he for this sore? Mary that it is all one to have the popes confirmation, and
to be consecrated by Bishops sent from Rome.

Some what like he might have said, but not all one. for to approve the
election of a Bishop, and to elect a bishope, or to consecrate him, be far
different things, as every man that is acquainted with these matters can
readily tell. I admit Donatists would gladly have had Bishops of their own
sect in every country, that they might have had no need to send Bishops out of
Africa to consecrate them in other places: And thereupon I do infer, that even
thereby they were convinced not to be Catholics. because their pastors and
preachers were not universally spread over all countries. contrariwise the Roman
church is proved to be Catholic, because it had in every country Bishops of
their own faith and communion. So that M. Abbot winding and turning on both
sides to get out of the briars, does still more and more entangle and fasten
himself in the same.


. 4. w. B. THe fourth point of M. Abbots comparison is this. The Donatists
would be taken to be Catholics, for keeping communion with the church of
Cartenna, even so will the Papists for holding society with the church of Rome.
The former point of the resemblance is too too absurd. for the Donatists
abhorred the Conventicle of Cartenna as schismatic, as has been often
repeated. And the second part taken as true proportion requires, is not
perfect: for we should not esteem men Catholics for communicating with the
church of Rome, if that communion were closed up within the walls of Rome, or
within her confines; as the Rogatists were pinned up in Cartenna: but for that
by communicating with the church of Rome, we do enter into communion with all
other churches of the same religion, which are spread over all the world.


R. AB. I Said the Donatists, I should have said the Rogatists, who expounding
the word Catholic for integrity and perfection of faith, as before we have
seen, and affirming themselves only to be Catholics, left it as a consequent,
that none could be called Catholics, but by joining with them. The Donatists
were in the same error concerning their church in Africa. The Papists are like
unto them both, who plead the same for the church of Rome: but M. Bishop tells
us that they do not call men Catholics for communicating with the church of
Rome, if it be taken for that particular church, which is closed within the
walls of Rome: which is contrary to that he taught himself a little before. For
he taught before that men became Catholics by holding the Roman faith, and
communicating with the church of Rome. but to shift over this, he adds; that
therefore they become Catholics in communicating with the church of Rome,
because that by that communion, they enter into society with all other
churches of the same religion, which are dispersed all the world over. But
against this it may be said, that the^ men do not now become Catholic as they
did of old: because of old it was enough to communicate with the church spread
over the world: but now it is to be added, that by communication with the
church of Rome, we must communicate with the church spread over all the world.
what if the church of the whole word do not hold communion with the church of
Rome? as when Arrianisme had in a manner ouerflowed all the world, and when the
East and west churches were divided from Rome: and before the brood of Ignatius
had converted the Indians; whence was the name of Catholic to be taken then?
Put the case that all other churches save the Roman do err (as they say they
may) how shall a man then in communicating with the Roman, communicate with
all other churches? then must you needs say, that by communicating with that
particular church of Rome you do become Catholic. finally M. Bishop does
overthrow himself. For if a man become a Catholic by communicating with the
church of the whole world; and by communicating with the church of Rome he does
communicate with the church of the whole world: then communicating with the
particular church of Rome, the name of Catholic does belong to him. To be
short, if the Donatists could have had their way, they would not have doubted
to say as much of their church, as M. Bishop does hereof his; to wit, that men
should be called Catholics by communicating with the African church, not as it
was contained within the bounds of Africa, but for that in communicating with
that church, you did enter into communion with all other churches spread over
all the world.


w. B. IN the forefront of this chapter M. Abbot ingraued this title: The
comparison betwixt the Donatists and Papists justified. And yet we see in the
beginning of every section an open confession of some fault made by himself in
the same comparison. I said the Donatists, I should have said the Rogatists
etc: well, though it cannot be denied but that this is a very simple kind of
Justification, yet I am content it pass for some kind of satisfaction. be it
permitted to M. Abbot for a sorry shift, to flit up and down, before from the
Rogatists in Mauritania, to the Donatists in Africa; now back again from the
Donatists to the Rogatists: who (says he) did expound the word Catholic, of
perfection of faith. which to have been otherwise I have showed in the second
section of this chapter. well, those honest Rogatists affirmed themselves only
to be true Catholics, and by consequence held none to be Catholics but such
as joined with them. So did the Donatists in Africa. The Papists do the like
for their church, therefore they resemble the Donatists. And do not the
protestants put in the same plea for their church? therefore they be also
Donatists. And did not the old Arrians affirm and say as much in favor of
their church? were they also Donatists? Is not this then a proper resemblance
betwixt the Donatists and Papists, that will agree unto all kind of sects? yea
unto the true Catholic church it self, to which alone in deed it does
rightfully apperteine. yet it is usual to all sectaries that take their errors
for truth, to qualify and grace their sect with the title of the true reformed
church. This resemblance then is so trivial, that a man of any sharpnes of
wit, would have been ashamed to have framed it. But if M. Abbots inventio^ were
dry and dull when he proposed that, we shall now find it fluent and acute in
reproving what I answered of the church of Rome, to wit: If the communion of
the church of Rome passed not out of the walls of Rome, then by communicating
with the church of Rome we should not become Catholics. But because it is far
otherwise with the church of Rome, then it was with the church of Cartenna, and
that in communicating with the church of Rome, we enter into the communion of
the church dilated all the world over, therefore we become Catholics in
communicating with the church of Rome; about which M. Abbot makes a foul
fumbling, but in fine cannot impeach it; he says first it is contrary to that
which I had before taught, viz: to communicate with the church of Rome, was to
become Catholic. But this he saw to be so simple, that he corrected it
himself presently, for I never said otherwise, but by communicating with the
Roman church, we became Catholics. And my reason always was, because the
communion of the church of Rome did reach into all the coasts of the earth. He
gives the second assaut against it, by averring that thereof it would ensue,
that one became Catholic now a days, otherwise then of old; because then it
was sufficient to communicate w^^h the church dispersed over all: and now we
must communicate with the church of Rome, to communicate with the church spread
over all. Is not this a high point, and a very great subtlety? when one does
communicate with the church spread over all, does he not even then communicate
with the church of Rome also, that is the chief of them all? Or was there any
time since the Apostles days when there was no church of Rome, that one might
have communicated with the church spread over all, and yet not have communicated
with the church of Rome? Yea did not they that wrote against the Donatists, (I
mean S. Austin and Optatus) make special instance in the communion of the
church of Rome, (as well as I do now) to prove their society with the whole
Catholic church? S. Austin says of Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, who was
principally oppugned by the Donatists, that he holding communion with the
church of Rome, as with the chiefest Apostolical chair, needed not care for
the conspiracy of the Donatists ag^^nst him. And Optatus speaks just to the
same sense that I do. In the Bishop of Rome the whole world does accord
together with us in one society of communion.

Note how in those old days, by communion with the pope and church of Rome,
the prelat^ in Africa, esteemed themselves to hold communion with the whole
world. M. Abbot puts forth a new case. what if the church of the whole world do
not hold communion with the church of Rome, as it was when Arrianisme did
ouerflowe the whole world? Then at least by holding communion with Rome, one
held not communion with the church of the world. M. Abbot is content to leave
the Donatists to dream awhile, and flies for advantage to the Arrians, but
they will help him no more then did the Donatistes. For though their heresies
infected many cities and countries, and drew many Bishops to their party: yet
M. Abbot I think can hardly name me any one city of the world so wholly
possessed with that Arrianisme, that it had not at the same time many true
believers in it, that would not join in faith and religion with the said
Arria^s, but stuck close to the church of Rome, and to all other true
believers. The like we say of the Eastern churches when they fell into schism
and heresy: that albeit the outward face of their congregations were
schismatic; yet there remained always in those countries, as there do now
in England, very many that did constantly defend and embrace the Roman
religion. The Indians for the most part of late time were converted: yet many
millions of souls were won unto Christian religion in the west and East
Indies by good priests, Franciscan Friars, and other religious men, before any
mission of Jesuits were sent into that heavenly harvest, as the Indian story
does testify, yea before their society was established and confirmed. If
through the abundance of iniquity it should come to pass, that the Catholic
religion should be clean rooted out of many countries (for I make no doubt
but that it shall also continue in many besides Rome unto the worlds end) yet
those countries that retain the ancient faith, shall also keep the old title
and name of the Catholic church, though their faith be not then spread over all
the world. Because it was the same faith which had been in time past preached
and believed over all. for no man holds it necessary that at one and the same
time, it should be embraced of all nations. The Donatists I grant (if they
might have had their way) would have ouersowed their tares in the fields of all
countries. They lacked not good will then, no more then the protestants do now,
to sow their cockle far and near; but with all their tossing and turmoyling
they were not able to infect half Africa only; God sending unto cursed cowes
short horns, and not yielding such success to the false doctrine of vain
men, as to his own divine word. when will M. Abbot take out this lesson, that
the church is called Catholic, not because it desires and wishes to be
spread over all, but for that it is so really and actually, at one time or
another? which the Donatists, protesta^tes, nor any other sectaries were yet
ever able to compass; but must perforce whether they will or no, leave that
singular privilege unto the Roman church.


THE FIFTH SECTION.
W. B. THe fifth branch of the comparison M. Abbot does propose in this manner:
As the Donatists held there could be no salvation out of the church of
Cartenna: so the Papists hold there can be none out of the church of Rome.
this is minced out of the fourth, and in the like sort to be confuted. It is a
principle received of both Catholics and sectaries, that there is no salvation
out of the true church, no more then there was life to be hoped for out of the
Ark of Noah. Sectaries do attribute that salvation each unto their own church.
But the church of Rome (as has been heertofore largly proved) has always
been and ever shall be a principal member of the same true Catholic church.
wherefore whosoever does not hold communion with the church of Rome, he is out
of the state of salvation according to that memorable sentence of S. Hierom
written unto pope Damasus. I following no chief but Christ, Hieronim. Epist.
57. ad Damasum Papam.

Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum sequens, beatitudim tuae, id est cathedrae
Petri, communione censocior; super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio.
quicunque extra have domum agnum comederit, profanus est. si quis in ar^ha No^
non fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio.


join in communion with your holiness, that is, with the chair of S. Peter,
upon this rock I know the church of Christ to be built: whosoever does eat
the Paschall lamb out of this house he is profane: he that is not found
within the Ark of Noah shall be drowned when the floods do rise: where is much
more to the same purpose.


R. AB. M. Bishop acknowledges the Donatists to have been of opinion, that to
obtain salvation one must communicate with their church: what then hinders
but that the resemblance stands good? for the Papists be of the same mind
touching their church. but he says, that the Donatists, and all other
sectaries do untruly atttibute to their congregations, that which is truly
appropriated unto the church of Rome, which was and is the chief member of the
Catholic church. so was Jerusalem the chief member of the sinagogue, and yet
it put Christ to death, in that communion then there was no salvation. Is not a
chief member of the same substance with the rest of the body? and what hinders
then but that the chief member may as well as the rest be corrupted and
wounded? notwithstanding I desire him to prove that it is the chief member? I
regard not what humane estimation it has had for the eminency of the place.
But with god there is no more respect of the church of Rome then of any other
church. If they will have any more, Aug de unit. ec^l. cap. 6.
let them read it to us out of the scriptures, as saint Austin said to the
Donatists. But they love not to be called upon for scriptures. he has out of
Jerome that he joined with the pope of Rome, that is with Peter's chair,
because upon that rock he knew the church of Christ to be built, and that
he was profane and not of Christ's flock, that out of that house did eat
Christ the Paschall lamb; and further that he who dwelled not in that Arc
should be drowned.

To the which I answer that albeit Jerome did join with Damasus, yet he
would not have joined with Liberius, whom he reports to have subscribed to
the Arrian heresy. wherefore Ierom did warely expound himself that he gave the
primacy to none but to Christ: Hiero. in Catalogo.
In fellowship of faith, he joined with Damasus: yet no further then he
followed the doctrine of S. Peter; which he signifies by adding the chair of
Peter. He would not have joined with pope Liberius, because though he were
Bishop of Rome, yet he sat not in Peter's chair, that is, he held not the
doctrine which Peter taught. Of S. Peter's chair in Rome w^ deem the same, as
of S. Peter's chair in Antioch, wherein then sat Paulinus: yet Jerome there
disclaimeth Paulinus, because he taught not the doctrine of Peter. upon Peter's
faith and confession it is that Ierom knew the church to be built, as Erasmus
upon that Epistle very well notes. Not upon Rome, for Rome also may hap to
degenerate. The communion of this faith is the house wherein Christ our Paschall
lamb must be eaten; And the Ark of Noah to save us. So long as the pope shall
hold the doctrine of Peter we will join with him. But M. Bishop can show us
no warrant that the church of Rome shall always continue in the doctrine of
Peter, and therefore his conclusion; that out of the church of Rome there is no
salvation, is but a vain presumption.


w. B. ALbeit the resemblance were true, because heretics in some things are
like unto true believers, ye^ it was naught worth; because it makes the
Catholics no more like to the Donatists, then unto any other sort of sectaries,
nay then unto the very true church of Christ, in whose participation only
there is that salvation which all sectaries do vainly pretend to be found in
their company. That the church of Rome is the chief and principal member of
the Catholic church, and that it never did, nor never shall fail in matter in
faith, I have already proved at large, not only by the depositions of the most
and best approved ancient fathers and Doctors both of the Greek and Latin
church; but also by diverse plain texts of holy scriptures rightly understood
according unto the same most holy and learned Prelates interpretation. whom
all good Christians are bound to believe as the Pastors and Doctors, to whom
our Savior Christ committed both the preaching of his word, and government of
his church in the purer times thereof. To repeat the same here again is
needles, and would be over tedious. The reader may if he please but turn
back to the second section of the first chapter, where he shall find them:
there M. Abbot himself attributes to the church of Rome, eminency of place,
precedence of honor, authority of estimation and account: and yet here would
seem to deny the same church to be the chief member of the Catholic church:
as though eminency of place and precedence of honor, could belong to any other
then to the chief church. how simple is that which follows? that albeit in
humane estimation the church of Rome may be more eminent then any other, yet
with God there is no more respect of the church of Rome then of any other. For
those men (of which he himself is one) should be much to blame, if they would
account that more eminent and honorable, which they know God to esteem but as
equal and of the same degree. because we are bound to conform our judgments,
to the straight rule of Gods upright censure. wherefore for that we are fully
persuaded that it has pleased god, to grant that preeminence and privilege
unto the church of Rome, we do attribute the same unto it. If we did thinck
that god did not allow of it, neither would we condescend thereunto. And who in
his right senses can imagine that God does not esteem better of them, whom it
has pleased his divine bounty to make better? As for the church of Jerusalem
it had no such promises, that hellgates should not prevail against it: or that
their governors faith should not fail. Nay rather it was by the prophets
fortold, that they should fail both in Ezechielis 7.26.

Lex peribit a Sacerdote, and Consilium a Sapientibus.


knowledge, by not believing in their Messiah, and in Hierem. 11.19.

Ego quasi agnus mansuetus qui portatur ad victimam: and non cognoui quia
cogitauerunt super me consilia dicentes, mittamus lignum in panem eius, and
eradicemus eum de terra viuentium.


practice also by compassing of his death. Thus much for the church of the
Jews. Touching the Rulers of several churches since Christ his time, others
not having the like good assurance from our Savior as the pastors of the
church of Rome had: we have more reason to rely upon the perpetual
stabilitie of the church of Rome, then upon any other. This (I say) having been
proved already not only by the testimony of all antiquity, but also by the
express word of God, M. Abbots demand is fully satisfied, and therewith (I
hope) he will rest content. Now to his answer unto that place of S. Hierom.
first, whilst he would seem an over subtle sifter of S. Ieroms words, he
overthrows himself horse and foot. For whereas he affirms that Ierom would
not have said the same of joining with Liberius that he said of Damasus, it is
very clear that he would, and might also very well have so done, according as
M. Abbot himself expounds S. Hieroms words. For if S. Hierom said no more of
Damasus, then that he would join with him so far forth as he sat in S
Peter's chair, that is, so long as he taught the same doctrine that saint
Peter taught: might he not have, said boldly as much of Liberius, though he
took him to halt in some things? he needed not doubt I hope, to follow him so
far forth as he followed S. Peter. was he not sure enough if he followed him
no further never to fail? M. Abbots answer then destroying it self, needs no
other confutation. Yet for the readers further satiffaction concerning pope
Liberius I add, that there be many Ruffin. l. 10. eccl. hist. 17. Theodor. 2.
hist. eccl 16. Sozom 4. hist 14. Niceph. 9 hist. 35:
ancient good Authors who write that Liberius was not faulty in any matter of
faith, though he yielded unto the condemnation of S. Athanasius. because he
was by the Arrians accused not of his faith, but of many pretended heinous
crimes. And albeit Liberius subscribed to the council of Smirna, yet he could
not be condemned therefore of heresy: for therein was not couched any one word
contrary to the true faith, though the word Consubstantiall were left out. yet
Athanas Apol. de fuga. Hieron. in Catal. in fortunat.
others who for their greater judgment and knowledge are to be more respected,
do blame Liberius as favoring the Arrian heresy: not that he believed any
point of it, but for that he through tediousnes of exile, and fear of
torments, yielded to do that which redounded unto the countenancing of the
Arrian heresy. And in like manner though there were nothing in that confession
of faith to which he subscribed that was not true; yet in that time when there
was so much ado about the word co^substa^tiall, to consent unto them that
rejected that word, was interpreted and taken of many for little less tha^ to
reject the Catholic faith. Briefly although his faith was sound, yet his fact
was prejudicial unto the Catholic faith, and very aduantagious for the
Arrian heresy wherefore not to be excused. nevertheles albeit of humane frailty
he therein failed, yet afterward he made good satisfaction therefore, and
carried himself so uprightly and virtuously, that he died a Saint: as
testifies besides other Ambr. de virg. l. 3. in initio. Soles mecum Beatae
memoriae Liberij praecepta reuolue re, and quo virsa^ctio^ eo sermo accedat
gratiosior
S. Ambrose, who cites his testimony as a man's of holy and happy memory. And
Basil epist. 74. Quae illia beatissimo Liberio proposita sunt.
S. Basil, who styles him a most blessed man. This by the way of pope
Liberius. Now to the true meaning of S. Hieroms words, which cannot be drawn
to that sense that M. Abbot would rack out of them, to wit, That he would
join with Damasus so farforth only as he followed S. Peter: for so might he
have been bold to say of Liberius and of his own prelate Paulinus, or of any
man else; but his true intent was to declare, that in all doubtful questions of
faith, every good Christian ought to make his recourse unto the Bishop of Rome,
who sits in S. Peter's chair as his lawful successor; And therefore by
virtue of our Saviors prayer (made for S. Peter, and his successors) shall
never fail in question of faith. whosoever therefore cleaves fast unto the
popes resolution, is assured never to fail. This to have been the true meaning
of that famous doctor, may most easily be perceived by the occasion and
circumstance of the very same Epistle. S. Ierom finding the Bishops of the East
(under whom he then lived) to be at foul square about the word Hypostasis
(which may signify either a substance or a person) and being vehemently
solicited as a very learned man, to deliver his opinion whether they should
say one, or three hipostases, would neither trust his own learning, which was
singular, nor rely upon the judgment of Paulinus (by whom he was made Priest)
who was both a very learned man, and the patriarch of Antioch, his proper
pastor and prelate; but knowing well that the final and infallible resolution
of all such doubts appertained unto the Bishops of Rome, addressed himself unto
him as unto Christ's vicar and S. Peter's successor: And was so far of from
saying, that he would follow it no farther then he followed S. Peter, or from
taking upon himself so much as once to judge of the popes sentence; that he
would believe and embrace whatsoever he should determine, Hi^ron. epist 57. ad
dama sum papam Dis^ernite (si placet) obseero, non ti meho tres hypostases
dicere si iuhetis. Ibidem. Obtestor beatitudine^ tuam per crucifixum and. vt
mihi Epistolis tuis sieve tacendarum, sieve dicendarum hypostaseon detu^
auctoritas. Ibidem. Non nouivitalem, miletum respuo, ignoro Paulinum. Quicunque
tecum non colligit, spargit: hoc est, qui christi non est, Antichristi est.
and most insta^tly besought Pope Damasus to command him, and give him
authority, to say either three hypostases or but one. And finally does
conclude, that he who would not be ruled by the pope in such doubtful causes,
was none of Christ's flock, but belonged to Antichrist. Let S. Hierom then be
taken for a perfect pattern of true obedience unto the popes sentences: and
let M. Abbot stand for an example of wranglers, and perverters of the ancient
fathers true meaning.

And for that M. Abbot brags in the end of this discourse that he told not one
lie in it (which might be taken for a miracle if it were true) Let the reader
know that he belieth here that worthy patriarch Paulinus, Ex phan. here is. 77.
when he says of him, that he taught not the doctrine of Peter in that
question. For Paulinus was of no other opinion touching the blessed Trinity
then was that great light of that part of the world S. Athanasius, as
witnesses that sound recorder of antiquity and most holy Bishop Epiphanius. So
that for no other cause in the world did S. Iero^ write unto pope Damasus for
final resolution of that difficulty, the^ for that he was fully persuaded
that it belo^ged unto the Bishop of Rome rather the^ to any other Patriarch, to
determine all such hard and doubtful questions. M. Abbots key-cold gloss
taken out of Erasmus his scholies upon that Epistle, is not worth the
answering; for he being but a late and slipperie writer, no fast hold can be
taken on him. Again his words be as uncertain, as he that spoke the^: he
supposes that the Cyty of Rome may hap to degenerate in the end. May hapso,
may hap no. So the Bishop of Rome do continue always Orthodox (as we make no
doubt but through the virtue of our Saviors prayer he shall) our pole-starr
in dark questions shall always remain firm and clear, Though the city of
Rome (which god forbid) should be ouerrun either by the Turk, or by any other
wicked race of misbelieuers to wars the later end of the world, as it was in
the beginning of the Christian religion ruled by heathen Emperors. Of M. Abbots
interpretation of S. Peter's faith and confession, has been spoken sufficiently
(I hope) in the first chapter, whither I refer the Reader. Hitherto of M.
Abbots former resemblances between the Donatists and the Papists, in steed of
justification whereof, he has in each of them confessed some one oversight or
other: besides he has made many sorry shifts to uphold them; And has poudered
them also with diverse untruths. M. Abbot having acquitted himself so bravely in
his precedent branches of comparison, now he will no doubt as worthily and
wisely multiply and increase them. The first staff of his multiplication
stands upon Donatus the pope (as he styles him, but he might more modestly
have termed him the Abbot) of the Donatists.


R. AB. THAT Archheretike exalted himself above the Emperor; Optatus l. 3. co.
^arm.
and thereby (as Optatus reports) made himself more then a man, even And
albeit he did not expressly call himself God, yet he did that which was
aequivalent; for he made his party to stand in more fear of him, then they
did of God. He advanced himself above all other Bishops; thinking none
comparable to himself. Is not the pope of Rome such another? He has exalted
himself above all other Bishops, he has lifted himself above the Emperor, and
thereby (as Optatus concludes) made a god of himself. Extrauag Iohis, 22. Cum
interim, in glossa in edit. Par. 1601. cu^ priuilegio Gregorij 13.
besides he in effect takes upon him to be God by dispensing against the law
of God, and by disanulling the institution of Christ: yea in very words he
has yielded to be called a god, leaving yet standing in the gloss of the
Canon Law uncorrected, Our lord god the pope. he will have men stand in no
less awe of him then of God himself, whiles he maks show of Gods anger at his
command to inflict it where he will.


W. B. IF men's own inventions (how silly soever seemed not unto themselves
over dainty and precious, M. Abbot would have chosen rather to have blotted
out his former childish resemblances, then to have added new unto them of the
like light nature. This his first is so general on the part of the Donatists,
and so improper to be applied to the pope and papists, (as he terms them,)
that it is worse then naught. was there ever any Archheretike that preferred
not his own judgment and invention before both Popes and Emperors too, if
they could not get them to embrace their heresies? and in this high kind of
pride and disdain, there was never any perhaps that passed the protestants
Grandsier and Ringleader Martin Luther, who with his Bible, Luther: libro
aduersus Regem Angliae. Ibidem.
was (in his own conceit) to be preferred before a thousand Austins, a thousand
Ciprians, and a thousand churches. In the eye of the world I will be (says he)
so honest, that they shall not be worthy to loose the l^^chet of my shoe. And
touching my doctrine, I am to Devils, Kaysars, kings, princes, and to all the
world too too froward and proud. In glossa co: praeten sum edictum Imperiale.
And in another place. I Doctor Martin Luther of Jesus Christ an vnworrhy
Evangelist do say, that the Emperors of Rome Turkey and Persia; the Pope,
Cardinals, Bishops, priests, friars and Nuns; kings princes and Lords with
all the world, and all the devils must approve this article: that faith alone
without any work does justify before god: and they shall have over and above
the fire of hell on their heads, and no thanks for their labor. This is Martin
Luthers inspiration by the holy spirit, the true and holy Gospel. behold the
superlatiue pride of this pelting Apostate, he and his spirit, are to be
preferred before all the world. How scornfully and contumeliously he esteemed of
kings and Emperors, and how contemptuously they were to be dealt withal in his
judgment, any man that will read his answer unto king Henry the eight may
see. I say (says he) openly without a vizard, that this Harry king of England
does plainly lie, and with his lies resembles rather a most light scoffer then
a king, etc. this for a taste of his uncivil and spiteful demeanor toward
Monarchs, conformable to his doctrine of kings delivered in these terms. A
wise king is a rare bird, and more rare yet is an honest king, they are
cmmonlie the greatest fools and the most wicked knaves on the earth; wherefore
the worst that can be, is to be expected at their hands, and litl^ good
specially in matters that belong to god: for they are gods Catchpoles and
hangmen, Luther de potesta te secui. ad Ioh du^em sa^o:
Our god is a great Lord, and therefore will have noble illustrious and rich
catchpoles and hangmen. It is gods pleasure that we should call his hangmen our
clement Lords, etc. This and a tumbrell more of like scurrility may be raked
out of that rude renegats writings against the Majesty of kings and Emperors,
with more contempt scorn and contumely out of him alone, than out of all
Catholic authors that have written this five hundred years set together: so
that none may be compared to Protestants (if they will be sibbe to their sire)
for abusing kings and Emperors, and for exalting themselves above them. But let
us leave Luthers pride, and descend to the particulars of Donats presumption,
and see how it may be applied to the pope. Donate would not acknowledge
Carthagini se principatum ^enere credidit donatus.
the Emperors Sovereign temporal power, Optatus l. 3. co: Parm.
but out of his own pride sought to withstand even the Emperors pious gifts of
holy vestments to the church, and of alms to the poor, charging his party not
to receive any such gifts from the Emperors officers. what like to this, is
there to be found in any pope? They acknowledge themselves to have received of
the Emperors courtesies most of all their Miserat Imperator ornamenta domibus
dei, m^serat eleemosinam pauperibus: d^natus literu praemisit, ne id quod
allatum ^uera^, pauperibus d^spensaret^^.
temporalties, and never yet was any one of them found that did not acknowledge
the Emperor to be supreme governor of his Empire in all temporal affairs;
although there have been among them that thought Emperors might for some
enormious faults deserve to be punished even by deprivation from that dignity.
Ibidem.
Donatus took himself to good to Dat donatus solus secreto nescio quid agebat.
pray in company with others, The pope daily not only prays with others, but
also humbly confesses his sins to others. Donatus took himself to be better
then all other bishops yea did scarce vouch safe to be called a Bishop: Raro
est appellatus episcopus, sed donatus cartha ginis.
The popes albeit higher in dignity then other Bishops, yet in true humility
esteem themselves far inferior to many of the common people. The popes may
justly terrify men with gods Judgments and indignation, if they presume to
transgress Gods or their superiors comaundements. For god has promised to
bless them whom his priests, principally such as be in authority do bless,
and to hold the^ for accursed, who^ they do deservedly accurse. Mary, so to
deliver the matter, as though the popes were co^mau^ders over Gods sentences,
is as malicious, as that which M. Abbot joins with it, is slanderous, to wit,
that the popes take upon them to dispense against the law of God, and to
disamill the institution of Christ. But until M. Abbot do bring in some better
proof heerof then his own bare words, these points may be scored up in the
rue of his former slanderous untruths. And I would gladly know how M. Abbot
can prove that the pope does suffer himself to be called by the name of God?
right worthily (I warrant you) and like himself. a gloser forsooth upon the
Canon law, neither speaking to the pope, nor writing to him but in a
by-treatise says ( Our Lord God the pope. (Mark I pray you how ha^dsomly this
hangs together. One, (and he parhaps none of the wisest) writes such a thing
in the latter end of a long gloss, that many a pope never saw, and some
perhaps never heard of; how then can that be in any reasonable construction
imputed to all popes? It stands (says M. Abbot) uncorrected in a gloss of his
canon law, in the edition of Paris printed 1601 with the priuiledg of Gregory
the thirteen. He should have added thereunto, who died fifteen years before
the date thereof; for Gregory the 13. died the tenth of April 1585. Let that
pass as a light oversight, this that follows is worse. for if it stand still
in that edition uncorrected, why is not that the fault of the corrector rather
then the popes, who be not at leisure themselves to survey over new
impressions? But what if that word (God) be not to be found at all in those
copies of the canon law which are in the popes library, as some right honest
men (who have caused diligent search to be made in the vaticane copies) have
related and certifyed? then no marvel though the popes did never correct that,
which never was to be found in the true originals. Sure I am that I my self
have seen three several copies printed at Paris, one of Anno 1517. another of
1536. and the third of 1550 or therabout, that had not that word (God) in them.
So that all M. Abbots great outcry so often repeated, hangs upon the oversight
of a poor corrector, or at most, depends upon a diverse reading: which every
wiseman knows to be a very sandy and weak foundation. And who is ignorant
that the word (God) may be attributed unto creatures, Exodus 7.1
though in a far different sense? Does not God himself say to Moises, I have
made thee the God of Pharao? Our blessed Savior out of that text of the old
Testament, Psalm 81 6 Ioh. 10.35
I said you are gods, does prove that many others beside God may be called
Gods, namely princes and chief governors, either ecclesiastical or
temporal. having for this the testimony of God himself, I need add none other.
Now to Donatus that so behaved himself in some things, as if he meant to make
himself a God. Optat. l 3 co Parm. Cum per solum deum solea^t homines iurare,
passus est homines per se iurare tanquam per deum. Ibid. Omnes discipulos suam
Partem appel labat, etc. quasi iam populum cum deo diuiserat.
among the rest, he would have men to swear in his name, as Christian men use
in lawful causes to swear by the name of God. Besides he termed all of his
sect, pars mea, my part; seuering them (as Optatus takes it) from the part of
Christ, and people of God. in these points specially according to Optatus did
he aspire to be like God. what pope did ever the like? they are so far of
from parting stakes with Christ, as that they profess themselves to be the
servants of all Christ's servants. And who was ever yet required to swear by
the popes name? so that M. Abbot by multiplying such lame halting similitudes
must needs look for little credit of either judgment or honesty.


R. AB. SEcondly the Donatists took upon them that they had always been
possessors of unity and of


W. B. What a ridiculous and lousy resemblance is this? First it differs
little from that which has been said three times before at the least, that the
Donatists take their church for the true church, therefore it deserves to be let
pass as it comes. This might have some grace, if it had been applied to the
Protestants, who take their beginning of a late vpstart Friar not one hu^ndreth
years ago as all the world knows; and yet blush not to avowch that it was
their church that was persecuted 1400 years before it was hatched. as the
Donatists who descending of Donatus, would not withstanding have had the church
that was persecuted long before Donatus was borne, to have been their
congregation. As for the Roman church M. Abbot does in this chapter (as you
shall see anon) confess it to have been always, and therefore they may truly
say even by his own confession, that Nero, Domitian, and the rest persecuted
their church. As for those papists that worship the pope for their God. Dic
quibus in terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo. If M. Abbot can tell us where
they dwell, or in what land they lived and when, what were their names, I shall
hold him if not for a great Apollo; yet for as great an oracle as that of
Apollo; in the mean season, let it run on in the reckening of his other bables
and tales.


R. ABBOT. THE Donatists alleged that Emperors and princes had nothing to do
in church matters, Optat. l. 3. con. Par men.
and held it a great fault in the Catholic Bishops to compain to the Emperor
of them: what has the Emperor to do with the church, said their pope Donatus?
Aug. con Gaudent l. 2. c. 26.
For the teaching of Israel (says Gaudentius) God gave charge to prophets not
to kings. And Christ sent fishermen and not soldiers, for the planting of the
faith. Thus vpbraiding the Emperors for co^demning their schism, and using
force of arms to repress the infinite rage of their mad-braind Circumcellians.
Of the same humor be the papists, who make princes to be sons only of the
church but no governors thereof: Did. 96. si Imper:
Kings must learn of Bishops and not teach them what appertains to Religion:
because God will have church matters governed by priests and not by secular
powers. And Christian Emperors must submit their executions unto the rulers of
the church. therefore they hold the comissioners and officers of Princes to be
no competent Judges in their causes, they carry themselves contemptuously
toward them, etc.


W. B. THE Donatists are no sure cards to trust unto in that cause of princes
dealing with ecclesiastical persons, and in ecclesiastical causes. Because
they may serve for an example on all sides. For like audacious and restles
wrangling spirits, they did run in that cause from one extremity to the other.
First, against the rules and practice of the primitive church, they would needs
appeal from the judgment of Bishops unto the Emperor, hoping by false
informations to have found some unlawful favor in his court. Opt. l. 1. co:
Parm. Donatus appellandum esse ab episcopis credidit.
whereof we have for most sound witnesses both Optatus in these words. Donate
the ringleader of the Donatists thought good to appeal from the Bishops to the
Emperor. And S. Austin, who says of them. That they wearied the Emperor with
their daily appeals. Again they first of all sued unto the Emperor, then
appealed unto him, Aug. ep. 166. Quotidia nis interpellationibus, ipsi
imperatori taedium fecerunt. Ibidem. A iudicibius Episcopis ad constantinum
appellaueru^t a quo toties conuicti and con fusi redierunt, and a pernicie
furoris no^ recesseru^t.
and after all that, would not stand to his judgment. This was their first
attempt wherein they showed themselves kindly protestants after wards, being
beaten with their own rod, they began like wiser children to acknowledge that it
did not belong to temporal princes to hear and determyne ecclesiastical
causes, as their sentences cited by M. Abbot do declare. where if they had
staid, the Catholic Bishops of those times would not have blamed them, as you
shall hear. But they fell at last to the other extremity, crying out against
the Emperor both for punishing their mad-braynd Circumcellians (that set
churches on fire, robbed and murdered) and also for that he came over all the
Donatists (as schismatiks and Heretics) with a pecuniary mulct, making them to
pay for their obstinate folly. for which they cried out against the Emperor and
his officers. This did the Donatists, Now to the application. Both the
protestants and we condemn the Donatists for denying princes to have
temporal power to suppress seditious persons, robbers and murderers, and to
punish them that be by the church declared heretics, either by the purse or
otherwise. But we differ in the other point. The protestants do hold princes
to be supreme judges as well in causes ecclesiastical as temporal, and
therefore must needs approve of appeals made fro the Bishops to them. we
granting to them full sovereign power in causes te^porall, do affirm that
they be not ordinary Judges in causes Ecclesiastical. I say ordinary because
by consent of both parties (as it was in some causes of the Donatists) they
may be chosen arbitrators or judges. The Donatists held both these opinions:
first, that of the protestants, and afterward ours. Now it is to be considered
in whether they did well, and in whether ill. To decide this controversy, let
us hear the ce^sure of the best Catholic Authors of those times. Optatus a
most worthy prelate that lived among the Donatists, Lib 1. con Parm.
blamed them greatly for appealing from the judgment of Bishops unto the
Emperor constantine the great, and relates how the same good Emperor detesteth
that their appeal, breaking out into these words. O furious and mad boldness:
they, Ad quam appellatio nem constantinus Imperator sic respondit O rabida
furoris auda cia, sicut in causis gentilium fieri solet, appellatio nem inter
posuerunt. Aug. Ep. 166. Quia constantinus non est ausus de causa episcopi
iudicare, eam finiendam Episcopis delegauit. Idem Epistola 162. Neque est ansus
Christianus imperator sic eorum fallaces querelas suscipere, vt de iudicio
episcorum ipse iudicaret, sed alios episcopos dedit, a quibus ipsi rursum ad
ipsum imperatorem prouocarent. quam re illos quemadmodum detestetur, audistis.
eorum peruersitatibus tandem cessit, vt de illa causa post episcopos iudicaret,
a sanctis antitistibus postea veniam petiturus, etc.
like the pagans, have put in an appeal. which was from the Bishops to the
Emperor. S. Austin an other Antagonist of the Donatists, in rehearsing the
demeanor of the said Emperor toward the same appeal, shows his own opinion
therabout. He first records that the Emperor would not take upon him to judge
of the judgments of the Bishops, till he was pressed thereunto by the Donatists
impudency; which to repress, he finally gave them the hearing, yet under
the correction of the Bishops, meaning afterward to crave pardon of them
therefore. all this that great doctor has set down in express terms.
further S. Athanasius of this matter uses these words. If the judgment of this
cause belong to Bishops, what has the Emperor to do therewith? if contrariwise
these things be forged by the threats of Emperors, what need is there of
Bishops? when was it ever heard that the judgment of the church took its
authority from the Emperor? he relates there this sente^cee of the great
Hosius to the Emperor: Athanasius epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes.

Si istud est iudicium episcoporum, quid commune cum eo habet imperator? sin
contra, ista minis Caesaris constantur, quid opus est hominibus titulo
episcopis? quando a condito aeuo auditum est quod iudicium Ecclesiae
authoritate^ sua^ ab imperatore accepit? ibidem in epistola Hosii ad
Imperatorem. Ne te misceas ecclesiasticis, neque nobis in hoc genere praecipe,
sed potius ea a nobis disce. tibi Deus imperium commisit, nobis qua sunt
ecclesiae, concredidit.


intermedle not with ecclesiastical causes, nor command us in that kind, but
rather learn those matters of us: God has given you the Empire, but has
committed to us the charge of the church. To who^ I will join S. Ambrose, who
to the Emperor Vale^tinian addresseth this discourse. when have you heard (most
gracious Emperor) that layme^ did judge over Bishops in causes of faith? Surely
if your sacred majesty please to pervse the course of holy scriptures, or
practice of former times, you shall find none that deny bishops in matter of
faith, Ambros. l. 2 epist. 13. ad Aug. valentin.

Quando audisti cleme^tissime imperator in causa fidei laicos de episcopis
iudicasse, etc. At si certe vel scripturarum seriem diuinarum, vel vetera
tempora retractemus, qui^ est qui abnuat in causa fidei, in causa inquam fidei
Episcopos solere de imperatoribus Christianis, non imperatores de episcopis
iudicare, etc. Pater tuus deo fauente vir maturioris atatis qui dicebat: non
est meu^ iudicare inter Episcopos, etc.


in matter I say of faith to have been Judges over Emperors, and not Emperors
over Bishops. your father being by the favor of God a man of riper years did
say; it belongs not to me to judge over Bishops. It being then most certain
and evident by the verdit of S. Athanasius, Hosius, S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and
Optatus, that the Catholic church in that her native purity, did mainteyne
that opinion that temporal Princes had no authority to determyne
ecclesiastical causes; The Donatists therein agreed with the true Catholic
church. and when they did fly from the judgment of Bishops unto temporal
princes as supreme judges in causes ecclesiastical, then they traced out the
pathway unto the protestants misbelief, and therein were condemned, and the
protestants in them, by the verdict of the most approved Prelates and best
learned doctors of the primitive church. Let this then be scored up for a
principal resemblance between the protestants and the Donatists.


R. AB. 4. THe Donatists by false rumors discouraged men from coming to church,
and gave out of the Catholic Bishops that some of them at the time of
celebration of the sacraments, Optatus l. 3. and 7.
did set an image upon the altar, or communion table, whereat the minds of men
were greatly moved, and every one said, he that tastes thereof, tastes of a
profane thing, so contrary was it holden to religion then which M. Bishop
approves now, to set images upon the Altar. But in this also the Papists are
their followers, who in the like sort devise rumors and tales of our divine
service, to make men abhor to have communion with us.


W. B. THis resemblance is more common then the high way. For men of what
religion soever they be, do seek out reasons to dissuade others from
participation in holy rites with all other religions, and specially from that
which is most contrary to their own. And never were any sectaries that
devised more lewd and vile slanders of any religion, then the protestants have
done of the Roman. And among others they do use the very same motive of the
Donatists to discourage men from going to mass. To wit that there are Images
in the churches set upon the high aultars. So that M. Abbot in multiplying his
resemblances, does but multiply and increase the protestants conformity with
the Donatists, to the shame of their own religion. what kind of Image that
was, which the Donatists rumored should be set upon the Altar (for of the
communion table or of Ministers, there was no news in the old days of
Optatus, but of Aultars, sacrifice, and priests) it is not certain: whether it
were of Dragons and Leopards, (such as the protestants set up in their
churches) or rather of some false God, I cannot find in that Author: Only I am
assured it could not be of any holy picture of Christ, or of any of his
Saints, such as Catholics place in their churches; because long before that, in
Tertullians days, there was engraven upon the chalice (wherein they offered up
the sacrifice of Christ's blood) the picture of Christ in the form of a good
shepherd carrying home the lost sheep on his shoulders, Tertul. de pudicitia
cap. 7. and 10.
as witnesses Tertulian. And that the Crucifixe was set up in churches in S.
Hieroms days, Hieron. epist. 27. de Epitha. Paulae cap. 3.
he declares plainly where he records, how the most holy widow Paula visiting
the holy places, was wont to fall down prostrate before the Cross, and to
adore, as if she had seen our Lord Jesus hanging on it. And Gregory Nazianzene
reports that his father built to the honor of God a stately church, Naz.
oratione 19. in laud prat. Bas. con. Iulianum Imper. citatur ab Adriano, Act.
2. Niconi 2. Nissen de laudibus Theodor. Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
and among other ornaments did deck it with very goodly Images. S. Basil
testifies the same, saying, in all our churches we do set up the Images of
Saints. So does Gregory Nissene in his oration made in the praise of the
Martyr Theodore. And in the beginning of S. Chrisostomes Liturgy, translated
by Erasmus, it is recorded how the priest turning toward the Image of Christ,
was to say a certain prayer. whence it follows evidently, that the Image of
Christ was by the Altar, where that Liturgy or Mass was said. wherefore when
so many worthy Prelates and Doctors of both greek and Latin church do teach
holy pictures to have been usual ornaments of Christian churches in those
ancient and pure times, it remains most certain, that true Christians could
not be frighted from Catholic churches by setting any pictures of saints in
the same, and consequently that which the Donatists spoke of, must needs be
the Image of some false God or of some monster, which they did so much abhor.


R. AB. 5. THe Donatists alleged their own councels assembled by their own
authority, against the Maximianists their own schismatiks, August. ep^st. 162.
and against the Bishops of the Catholic church. Even so do the Papists
allege against us their own conventicles.


W. B. HEre is falsehood upon falsehood: for albeit the Donatists did alleadg
their own councils against the Maximianists that were fallen from them as the
protestants do their new articles and Canons against their schismatiks the
Puritans: yet M. Abbot cited no place to prove that they alleged their own
councels against the Catholics. No more do we use to produce against
Protestants any late council of ours, or any late Catholic Author, otherwise
then to verify what our doctrine is, and what they do teach. neither can he
take any just exception against the council of Trent (if it should be
produced against them) as consisting wholly of men of our religion; because men
of their party might have been there present if they had so pleased. For they
were requested to come, and safe conduct was offered them, the surest that
could be devised, to persuade them to have appeared there in their liknes, to
have defended their new devised religion: but they like valiant men, feared to
show their face before that most learned assembly. They lay barking at home out
of their own kennells against it, but durst not in disputation encounter with
the Catholic Doctors there assembled.


R. AB. 6. THe Donatists not knowing how to make good their rent from the
church by argument, August. epist. 137.
devised crimes and slanders against their persons that defended the Catholic
party. In the same steps walk the Papists, who labor to blemish the names of
Luther, Calvin, Beza, and others by whom the Gospel of Christ has been
defended.


W. B. THis proper resemblance is borrowed out of the common of Dunses, and by
none more practiced then by protestants. who little spare the name or fame of
any Catholic writer against them, how high in dignity, how holy and learned
soever he be. Nay they are not ashamed to profess openly to the world that
they take a special pride in railing against us. Luth. Con. Sicarium
Dresd^nsem.
Let this one sentence of their great master Martin Luther serve for a
pregnant proof thereof. I (says he) regard not his complaints, that in my
book there are few other things then taunts, reproaches and devils; for this
ought to be my glory, and from henceforth so will I have it reputed of me,
that I am full of revyling, taunting, and cursing the papists, for I will
exercise my self against those knaves in taunts and curses even to my grave.
And out of Calvin's sweet works may be piked a volume of vile railing words, as
big as the bible, as Sieur de meres relates. Manifi. n. 17.
As for Luther himself, Calvin, and Beza (to omit others, because M. Abbot for
honors sake names these three, as the three worthies of their new Gospel)
they are even by principal men of their own religion so curried and reviled,
that in comparison thereof, all that the Catholics do say of them are but
fleabitings. Take a taste of these few. First of their holy father friar Luther
thus writes his sanctified son Zuinglius, in his answer to Luthers book of
the Sacrament. Resp. Zuingly ad l. Luther de Sacrament.
Here the word of God shall obtain the victory, and not those frantike
reproaches wherewith thou criest out, that we be Lutters, Devils, Lunatike,
mischievous, robbers, rebels, dissemblers, Hyppocrites, and what not? Thou
coynest rules after which the scriptures must be understood, which otherwise
thou could not allege for thy purpose, etc: Then he comes to his
commendation. Thou can not deny thy self seized with the passion of Anger to
rage, and to be mad, If thou will but soberly view over thine own book such a
multitude of reproaches and swarm of perverse opinions could never flow out of
the fountain of charity, or any reposed premeditation. In the mean season I
will make it more clear then the day light, that thou never ye^ did know
the glittering brightness of the Gospel, Mark this censure of Zuinglius of his
master Martin.
unless thou have clean forgotten it etc. Thou adulteratest, and corruptest the
word of God; thou do imitate the Marcionists and Arrians. Thus much out of
Zuinglius may serve for blasoning and displaying the arms of his reverend
master Friar Martin Luther. Now let us hear how Doctor Hunneus (a very
learned Lutheran) does describe and paint out the man of God John Calvin. I
suppose, Hu^naeus de Calvino Iudaisante. fol. 181.
(says he) that Angel of darkness John Calvin to be sufficiently discovered,
who peeping out of the pit of hell, par^lie by his detestable frantike lust of
wresting the scripture to the subversion of those fortresses, which the
Christian religion had against the perfidious Jews and Arrians: Partly, by his
writing against the sacred Majesty of Jesus Christ exalted: and in part also
by his perverse opinion of the whole matter of the Sacraments: Finally by his
horrible paradoxes of inevitable predestination, has in these latter times
darkened no small part of the sun (as it is in the revelation) drawing after
him a great number of the stars, and pulling them down headlong with himself
into the pit of hell. Of Beza thus writes Conradus Sclusselburg a famous
superintendent of the Lutheran church. Conrad. de Theolog. Calviniana, lib. 2.
arb. 1.


Theodore Beza in his sacramentary Basiliske against Heshusius which he
entituleth Chr^ophagia, does not only in the treatise it self take his leave
of all godliness and modesty, letting loose all the reins of railing, but in
the very title does vomit up his blasphemy and devilish scoffs etc: in the
first six pages and a half, he has powered out such horrible filthy and
beastly taunts, that even soldiers of his own band have wished them to be
suppressed, with his bawdy and most vnpure verses made in praise of his harlot
Candida. Beza has with his rotten railing, and beastly belching assaulted the
most holy testament of the son of God. He revileth that worthy superintendent
Heshusius most spitefully calling him a Buskin or tragical Polypheme, an ape,
an huge great capped Ass, a dog in a bath, a most doltish Sophister, an impure
sicophant, a most impudent knave. Finally he likeneth him to a devil
incarnate, that has belched up such Satanicall blasphemies, that he trembles
to relate them. This may suffice for a scantling to show how the names of
Luther Calvin and Beza (the great Rabbis of the protestant Gospel) be already
by no mean men of their own coat so canuased, disgraced and vilified, that
the judicious reader may see how little need we have to trouble our selves to
search after matter against them, to make known to the world, what odious
companions they were: seeing their own brotherhood do so fully paint them out
to the life, that any true Christian heart must needs abhor them. And they
that will not upon so fair warning take heed of them and fly from them, can
have no lawful excuse of their wilful and doting folly.


R. AB. PEtilian the Donatist being offended that they were called Donatists
retorted upon the godly Bishops the names of Mensurists and Cecilianists
derived from two principal Bishops of their party, Mensurius and Cecilianus:
Collat. Carth. 3. ca. 30.
So the Papists being vexed at that name Papists, given to them for being wholly
at the devotion of the Pope, seek to disgrace us with the names of Lutherans,
Zuinglians and Calvinists, as though we were in like sort devoted to Luther,
Zuinglius, and Calvin.


W. B. Here M. Abbot being at a low ebb, in steed of the body of the
Donatists, is feign to lay hold upon one of the company named Petilian, to
patch up a paltrie piece of a trivial resemblance. where M. Abbots gentle
spirit is to be observed: for before he would touch us for calling them by
their right names, either Lutherans, Zuinglians, or Calvinists; because they
left the communion of the whole church, to embrace those Arch heretics doctrine
and fellowship: He confesses ingenuously, that the Protestants before hand had
played with us the part of that Donatist Petilian, by nicknaming us Papists. For
he says, that we being angry with them for giving us the name Papists, did
for a revenge call them Lutherans etc: Ergo he grants that they began with
us: but were it before or after, M. Abbots resemblance may be most justly
returned upon themselves. For as the Catholics of those times called those
Sectaries Donatists, for leaving the communion of the church spread over all, to
follow one Schismatic fellow called Donate; so the protestants that were so
sottish as to forsake the faith of the Catholic church, to cleave unto the
peevish opinion of some lewd or loose renegate, are most worthy to be called
after their blind guids names, either Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinists, or
such like. And they to wreake their teene on us nickname us Papists; wherein
albeit they imitate the Donatists, yet their invention is not so proper as was
the Donatists: who of some one eminent person, christened the Catholics after
their names: but the protestants cannot tell us of what one pope or other we
took our name. If it be of all the rank of Popes, then have we no need to
be ashamed of it: for the protestants themselves are not yet become so
impudent, as to deny thirty or forty of the first of them to have been right
believers, yea very holy Martyrs or confessors: And good reason it is, that of
the first and best of them, the rest should take their names.


R. AB. 8. Aug. co. literas Petil l. 2. ca. 43. and co. Gaudent: l 2. c. 28.
THe Donatists complained that the revenues bestowed by their ancestors on the
churches were taken a way from them, and given to the Catholic Pastors. The
same complaint M. Bishop and his fellows use; that Bishoprics, Deaneries, and
other benefices founded by men of their religion and to the use thereof, are now
(as they pretend) wrongfully taken from them, and given to us.


W. B. I Do not find in S. Austin alleged by M. Abbot, that the Donatists were
founders of Bishoprics or any such like church livings; And heretics be
seldom any such founders, but as latter comers do rather intrude wrongfully
into them that were before founded by the Catholics. They complained without
just cause, when they were worthily expelled out of them. they pretended in
deed that they were lawfully descended of the former Catholic Bishops, and
that therefore those livings were due to them; which would be just the
protestants case, if it should please God to inspire into our Sovereign Lord
king James his heart, to dispossess them of their benefices as usurpers, and to
restore the dignities and livings founded by Catholics for the exercise of
Catholic religion into the hands of Catholic Bishops and Priests. who sees
not therefore how fairly the Donatists did in most things pourtraict their white
sons the protestants?


R. AB. 9. THe Rogatists being one part of the Donatists, affirmed themselves
only to be Christians: even as the Donatists did chaleng to themselves only to
be the church of Christ: and so now the Papists esteem themselves only to be
Christians.


W. B. THis has been in effect both obtruded by M. Abbot, and by me answered,
some four or five times over already, wherefore is to be now loathed as over
stale. what so me man may say in some sense, we do not much esteem: but the
body of the Catholic church does not deny heretics to be Christians: because
they be christened, and do hold some points of the Christian faith; though
such Christians, as shall never (unless they amend) have any part with Christ in
his kingdom. For that they refuse to believe many articles of the Christian
faith, and have separated themselves from the union and communion of Christ his
true church.


R. AB. 10. Aug co. literas Petilian. l. 2. c. 83 and l. 2. cap. 71. Epist. 106
THe Donatist provoking Emperors by their intolerable outrages to make laws
against them, yet when the same were executed, complained of persecution, and
their church they tea^med the persecuted church, that did not persecute; And
such on their side as were justly punished for murders and other crimes, they
called their martirs, and to their relikes they did great devotion. Even the
same course do the Papists take, who by their wicked practices having given
cause of making laws against them, do upon the execution thereof cry out of
persecution; and do call them Martirs that are put to death for such horrible
treasons, and do honor their relikes etc.


W. B. will not this proper resemblance be much more truly verified in the
protestants, who having by their mutinous and seditious practices in many
Christian countries, provoked most Catholic Princes to enact severe laws
against them: and being afterward for their open rebellions executed, yet the
protestants without blushing, do in print proclaim them for martirs, thrust
their names into their Calender? In which kind M. Fox (our doting countryman)
has (I think) excelled all his fellows. As for devotion unto their mad
martirs relicts, I read not in any place quoted by M. Abbot that the Donatists
used any; that is but a flourish of his Rhetorike, to make them seem somewhat
more like unto us, that do honor the reliks and memories of those holy
personages, that have honored God by their noble Martirdomes, and traced us out
the true steps to eternal glory. but therein they were (for ought I can find)
no more devoute, then be the protestants, who do little esteem the dead bones
of their dreaming Saints and mad Martirs. nay S. Austins words cited by him
self do declare, that the Donatists did not, and that the Catholics did,
worship the relics of martirs. these they be ( l. 2. co. Petil. c. 71) you
donatists be not blessed, but you make blessed martirs, with whose souls the
heavens are replenished, and the earth florisheth with the relics of their
bodies: vos non colitis, sed facitis quos colamus: you do worship them, but
make them such as may be worshipped by us.


R. AB. 11. ALbeit the Emperors to repress the enormious crimes of the
Donatists, Aug co. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 92.
made such laws against them; yet they would have it thought, that the
Emperors did it not of their own mind, but through the instigation of the
godly Bishops: Even so do the Papists, and namely M. Bishop, though they know
the Prince to have just cause to deal so severely with them, yet does he
impute his proceedings unto the instigation and exasperation of his Ministers.


W. B. I Must needs confess, that I know no cause why his Majesty in the
first parliament of his reign in England, did confirm all those severe laws
(with some additions) which had been enacted against Catholics in Queen
Elizabeth's days. for the same Catholics had as much, if not more, travailed
to make his highness true title unto the Crown of England known, and his
person acceptable, then the protestants, and did as willingly receive him into
the possession thereof. And albeit some few Catholics did rashly join with
protestants, to have attempted the surprising of his royal person out of their
hands, whom they presumed to abuse his Majesty very much with false and
malicious informations: Yet that could hardly be (in my poor opinion) any
just cause to confirm so many rigorous laws against the whole body of
Catholics: no more then to have made the like against protestants, who were
principal sticklers in that desperate enterprise. All which considered had I
not reason, writing in that time, to remove that imputation which seemed to
touch his Majesty, and to impute it rather unto the malice of some certain
crept to far into his royal favor, and known to be maliciously bent
against our religion, then to his highness: who (as many have reported) did in
the beginning often protest that he would take no soul money, and that he
would like of no Catholic the worse for his religion, so that otherwise he
found him loyal and faithful. Since the horrible plot of the Gunpowder,
though there be more color for those severe laws, yet there is in my slender
judgment no just cause. for what equity or conscience teaches, for the crimes
of some few offenders to punish innumerable Innocents, that never consented
unto them, nor were any way culpable of the same crime? It is the uniform
consent of all the learned, that paena sunt restringe^dae, non amplia^dae.
Punishments are to be restreyned and shortened, and not to be enlarged or
lengthned. To forgive offe^ders is an honorable duty of Christians: but to
inflict punishment where there is no just desert, is not excusable even amongst
pagans. Therefore it being the dutiful part of a subject rather to excuse his
sovereign, then to accuse him: we that hold our selves so well assured of his
majesty's most clement natural disposition, fortifyed also with just and even
proceeding in civil affairs, could not but lay the blame of those extreme
courses upon other more violent spirits, were they temporal Lords, or
ministerial I know not: but sure I am that they have showed themselves toward
men of our religion too too malicious and spiteful, God Almighty pardon them,
and give those of them that yet live grace to amend: those that be dead would
not have us to pray for their souls, and therefore we can do no more for them,
but to leave them to Gods merciful Judgments.


R. AB. 12. THe Donatists albeit they knew well, that it was but a small part
of the world that joined with them, yet gloried to use words as though they had
had a church throughout all the world. Even so the papists, although they know
the communion of the church of Rome to be accepted of but in a small part of
the world, yet take pleasure to babble as if the Popes triple crown were so
wide, as to compass the whole earth.


W. B. AS the former resemblance was pared out of that which went next before
it, so has this been thrice before touched. The odd idle man that purposed to
arrive unto the full number of twelve, is forced to mince them into mammocks,
and to make no bones to repeat the same thing in effect very often over; all
to return a full Jury of twelve, that may bring in a verdict against himself,
either of Ignoramus; or else a billa vera, for a poor piece of Invention, to
frame resemblances as common as the high way; and for the most part such, as
may be imputed to what sect soever you please, but do indeed not more properly
appertain unto any, then unto the protestants themselves. Thus far to refute
M. Abbots addition of triuiall and improper resemblances.

Now I come to confirm those points of comparison, which I to requite him, did
propose. I stood not upon common accide^ts, which lightly are incident unto all
kind of sects, as M. Abbot has done very trifflingly: but at the first do set
upon the head of the cause, and propose one similitude between the Protestants
and Donatists of that nature and force, that if it be verified, no upright
judge can deny the protestants to be Donatists indeed. This it is. S. Austin,
Optatus and all antiquity do testify, that the maine point of the Donatists
heresy consisted in this, that they affirmed the church of Christ, planted by
the Apostles, to have perished all the world over, saving in those coasts of
Africa, where their party remained. Therefore whosoever mainteynes this error
obstinatly, though he fail in no other article of belief, he is a very
Donatist. And whosoever should uphold all the branches mentioned by M. Abbot,
or any other that any man else can produce; if he do not maintain this, to
wit, that the Catholic church is perished in most parts of the world, he can
never be come a Donatist the reason is most evident. because he does not
concord with them in that error, for which they were Christened by that name. As
for the error of rebaptization it sprung up before their days, and was but an
appendix to the other: which the donatists undertook to currie favor in that
country, where it had been taught before by great personages. Now then to the
purpose, If the Protestants do teach the true church to have perished all the
world over for many hundredth years, saving that it remained among men of their
religion in certain dark and unknown corners, who can deny them to be as
true Donatists as ever were any? which M. Abbot perceiving to be as plain as
Dunstable high way, makes as though the protestants never taught the true
visible church to have faild at any time, but to have always, even from
Gregory the great his time down to our days, continued visibly in all these
parts of the world, though blemished with some corruptions; yea that the church
of Rome it self was a part thereof, as also the ancient church of England. does
not this seem strange? was it not their common doctrine that from Pope
Boniface his time (that is, for these nine hundredth years at least,) there was
a general Apostasy from the true church, and that Antichrist with his band
possessed the outward visible church, Gods true church lying hid all that while
invisible, until friar Luther cast of his frock, coupled himself with a Nun,
and began to set abroach the true light of the new Gospel? If M. Abbot will
not acknowledge it, let him and the reader that doubts of it, but turn to those
Authors of our own country To omit others: M. Parkins in his reformed
Catholic page 331. M. Fulke in his answer to the counterfeit Catholic; and
against Stapleton and M. Martial page 377. M. whitakers de ecclesia contra
Bellarminum page 144. M. Napper upon the revelations page 143. and 126. who
with the greater part of Protestants do openly cry out, that from Pope
Boniface his reign, the visible church of God Perished from the face of the
earth; the pope of Rome and his adherents (whom they make Antichrist and his
ministers) having deuowred and ruined the Gospel, and in steed of it brought
in Idolatry, According unto this opinion of those learned and famous pillars of
the new Gospel (which was in times past commonly taught among them.) The
Protestants are Donatists and worse then Donatists, for first they agreed with
the Donatists in the essential point of their heresy; that the true church of
Christ was perished. And in this they went far beyond them; for the Donatists
did not affirm the church to be perished in all places, they themselves
having for a hundredth years and more some face of a church in many cities of
Africa, and above 300 Bishops of their sect. But the protestants ancient
churches were at the first so soar beaten and utterly blasted, that they
cannot so much as name one province, where their religion had any bishops or
flourished for any one age of the nine hundredth years of that supposed
defection. wherefore M. Abbot to avoid the open profession of that damnable
Donatisme, is feign to fall into a new fantasy, that (forsooth) the Roman
church notwithstanding all her gross errors and foul faults (in their
imagination) is a true member of Christ's Catholic church: because she held
always the foundation entire, though she built hay, straw, and stubble thereon.
well fare your heart gentle sir, we are much beholding unto you for the good
opinion you have of our church and religion: but how comes it then to pass,
that our church her self being so hart-whole and tolerable, the members thereof
be by you esteemed so blasphemous and horrible? why are the lawful pastors
thereof, only for being consecrated priests, and for coming into England, to
execute the ancient and accustomed rites of priesthod made heinous traitors?
why are honest and otherwise harmles men for receiving of priests, and serving
God after the old accustomed manner, most grievously punished by loss of all
their goods, lands, liberty and life? how unreasonable and conscienceles men
be you Ministers to cry out for so severe laws, and most bitter execution
thereof, against recusants for that religion which you your selves hold to be
Catholic? If there were any good nature left in you, or spark of any kindness;
you should rather entreat pardon for men of our religion, of whom you now
challenge yourselues to be lineally descended; and in right of which descent
you enjoy many high Ecclesiastical dignities, and rich benefices. This in
courtesy you ought rather to do, then for humane and tolerable faults to
incense the prince and state against us. Tolerable I say in the course of man's
law, if Almighty God will bear with them. And if they do not exclude a
Christian man out of Gods Catholic church, as they do not in the way of your
opinion, why should earthly potentats deprive them of the common benefits of
their dominions, and not rather after the example of the sovereign Lord of
heaven and earth, suffer them to live quietly in their kingdom, and to enjoy
their own livings, which be rightfully descended unto them from their
predecessors, men also of the same religion? I cannot see how M. Abbot and all
they that embrace the same opinion, can in equity require any recusant to be
so highly punished for that religion, which they hold to be good in all
substantial and fundamental points thereof, though they think it in other of
smaller moment to need reformation. well; though that their opinion be more
favorable and indulgent to us, yet in my poor judgment it is far of from
being true. And to my slender conceit it does seem (as it were) prodigious,
how they can take that church to be a true member of the right church, whose
head they hold to be Antichrist; whose sacrifice and common service,
Idolatry; whose Sacraments, sacrilegious superstitions; the greater part of
their doctrine, blasphemies: their pastors, beasts, foxes and swine, as M.
Abbot here out of his little ciuility terms them. Briefly, the whole face of
their church being (as he raileth and writes) berayed with the filth of
Idolatry. if the church of Rome be such a monster, as he would make her, I
desire him to explicate in particular which be those fundamental points that
do constitute church a the true member of the Catholic church? In the mean
season it is pleasant to hear how roundly he reckeneth up without either
staggering or blushing, the Jolly agreement which he takes to be between
their church and ours. we do not (says he) take upon us to be any other
church then that which they call the old, but the same church reformed: we
reteyne still the same scriptures which they acknowledge: true, saving that you
have cut of at one clap five books of the old testament. we retain the same
articles of faith which they profess; you should for modesties sake have added
except some twenty or thirty. we retain the same sacraments of Baptism,
and the supper of the Lord. Just, if bread and wine be the same with the
blessed body and blood of Christ. Besides how do we agree about the other five
Sacraments, which we retain and you have cast away? They finally retain the
same form of service, except that they have cut of the best parts of it, and
as it were pulled out the heart and bowels, of the sacrifice and consecration,
leaving to themselves and their miserable followers only the pa^ings and
offals. Behold the goodly conformity of the old and new English church, of
late devised and published by M. R. Abbot minister of the word, and teacher of
the reformed church of England; He is so far of (as he says) from
Donatisme, as that he does teach the church never to have perished, no not in
the City of Rome it self: why then has he taken so much pains to prove the
church of Rome to be turned Donatisticall, unless he will now also in a very
calm and pitiful humor, allow even the Donatists church it self to have been
a part of the true Catholic church.

And so consequently like a good Atheistical libertine, allow all heretics
that professed Christ's name, to have been true members of his church. Having
thus confuted that which M. Abbot had to object against their agreement in the
maine point of the Donatists heresy; I now come to the second resemblance,
that is between the Anabaptists (an offspring of the protestants) and the
Donatists; who now do teach rebaptisation, as the Donatists did then: which M.
Abbot grants, but says my foolerie therein needs no answer. because the
Anabaptists be exploded out of all protestant churches; And to that comparison
which I made between the division of the protestants into Lutherans,
Sacramentaries and Anabaptists; with the partition of the Donatists into
Donatists, Maximianists and Rogatists: he says that I should rather have
divided Papists into Anabaptists, secularists, and Iesuists.

what voluntary light babbling is this? who ever before M. Abbot took the
Anabaptists to be papists? when as they as stiffly deny the popes authority,
the sacrifice of the Mass, the real presence, the merits of good works, and
most other articles of our religion, as any other protestants. And albeit they
differ from the Sacramentaries in some few matters, as the Sacramentaries do
also from the Lutherans: yet they be descended from them, and do agree with
them in most points of religion; wherefore they may be as well sorted and ranked
with them, as the Rogatists and Maximianists were with the Donatists; neither
will it help M. Abbot to say, that they cast the Anabaptists out of their
congregation. For the Donatists did no less excommunicate and chase out of
their churches the Maximianists and Rogatists, then the Sacramentaries do the
Anabaptists. It was then rather a foolery of M. Abbots upon so foolish a reason
to deny the Anabaptists to belong unto the common body of the protestants; and
more impudent folly is it to associate them to us, from whom they dissent
further then the other protestants do. And because we be now entered into
degrees of comparison, let it be taken for a superlatiue folly in M. Abbot, to
divide all men of our religion into Anabaptists, Secularists, and Iesuists. for
to return the Anabaptists to themselves as their own sweet brood, with whom
they consent against us in most controversies of religion: Do the other names
of Secularists, and Iesuists comprehend all Roman Catholics? be there no lay
Catholics at all, nor any other religious persons in our church besides
secularists and Iesuists? what was become of M. Abbots senses when he wrote
this? The Seminarists and Iesuists being compared unto all other Catholics both
religious and lay, do scarce amount, (as I guess) unto the thousand part of
that body. So that here M. Abbot infabling, fumbling, and confounding rather
then in dividing, surmounts the highest degree of comparison.


R. ABBOT. THE third resemblance that M. Bishop mentions is this. They held
not the faith of the blessed Trinity entire. For some of them like the
Arrians, taught the son of God to be lesser then the father. Though (as S.
Austin notes) this was not marked of their followers. This he applies to us
in this sort: sundry of their principal teachers, as Melancthon, Calvin, and
others do corrupt the sound doctrine of the holy Trinity (as I have showed in
the preface of my second part of the reformation of a deformed Catholic,)
though the common sort of their followers do not greatly observe it. In which
third point he very wilfully belieth S. Augustine, the Donatists, and us. For
S. Austin does not say that of the Donatists, but only of a second Donatus,
who was a follower of the first, who had an unsound opinion of the Trinity.
which the Donatists were so far of from approving, that there was scarce one
among them that knew that he thought so: to him only is that to be referred
which S. Austin says, If any of them have said that the son is lesser the^
the father; yet they have not denied him to be of the same substance. S.
Austin never vpbraided the Donatists with this error, Aug. Epistola 50
though Theodoret do, But he spoke by hearsay: How M. Bishop deals with
Melancthon, Calvin, and others, I have fully declared in my answer to that
preface.


W. B. HERE is a whot charge, and a peremptory condemnation before due
examination (as you shall hear) that I have at one clap belied S. Austin, the
Donatists, and their good Masters, Melancthon, Calvin, and others. But if M.
Abbot can make good no one of those imputations, then it must be granted that
he has at once let slip a leash of slanderous lies. Let us descend to the
particulars. I write that S. Austin reports some of the Donatists to have had
a bad opinion of the blessed Trinity. M. Abbot takes me up short, auouching
that he affirms that of a second Donatus only. well was not that second
Donatus a great famous Donatist, and had he not many followers? but not one of
them held with him in that error says M. Abbot. yet he seeing S. Austin to
speak of them, as of many more then one, presumes out of his own audacity,
to expound S. Austin contrary to his own express words. what marvel then if
the good fellow be bold with me? But if those words be not full enough, (If
any of them have said, etc. yet they have not denied, etc.) what ca^ M. Abbot
say unto these plain words of the said most sound doctor. Very many of the
Donatists do confess the same of the son of God which we do; Aug. de verb.
Apost. ser. 31. c. 5.

Donatistae plurimi hoc confitentur de filio quod nos, quod aequalis sit patri
filius, eiusdemque substantiae: alij vero eoru^, eiusde^ quide^ substa^tiae
confitentur, sed aequale^ negant.


to wit, that he is not only of the same substance with the father, but also
equal unto him. Alij vero eorum, etc. note these words; (but others of them)
do grant that he is of the same substance, but not equal to the father.

Now let the indifferent reader judge whether of us two be the liar, I that
reported Saint Austin to say, that some of the Donatists held an unsound
opinion of the sacred Trinity; or M. Abbot that says it was but one of them
only? when as Saint Austin teaches, most plainly, that not one only, but
diverse of them so taught. And thus briefly I have clearly wiped away the
imputation of belying both Saint Austin and the Donatists, leaving the shame
of that slander to the rash censure and little judgment of M. Abbot. Touching
the third, because he refers the reader to another place, I will also let
it alone till we come thither; where he shall see that I have no more
misreported their rabbis, then I did here the Donatists: yea that I dealt with
them very reservedly and sparingly, when I might have charged them much
deeper: because many of their followers have not only observed what evil
seeds they sowed against the sound doctrine of the most glorious Trinity, but
have also watered and nourished them, till they be now grown up unto the most
rank and stinking weeds of the Arrian and Trinitarian heresy.


R. AB. THE fourth branch wherein the protestants resemble the Donatists is, (as
M. Bishop rehearses) that among the Donatists were certain furious, and
frantike fellows that set churches on fire, cast the blessed Sacrament of
Christ's body to brute beasts, threw down Altars, broke Chalices, defiled holy
oiles, made havocke and sale of the rich ornaments of the church; In all which
points the protestants have not been one inch behind them, but rather in those
irreligious and furious actions have out stripped them, and gone far beyond
them. This I let pass as an other part of his idle babbling, only telling him,
that to fit the example of the Circumcellions, he should look unto the acts
of the leaguers and Iesuists in France, Germany, Poland, and other countries,
whereof histories might be made, if it were to the purpose.


W. B. THis fourth resemblance hitting the protestants so right on the head,
makes M. Abbot so to stagger, that he has not one wise word to answer in
their defense. Is it idle good S. or of small regard, that the protestants do
resemble the wicked Donatists, in their irreligious and malicious carriage
toward the consecrated houses of God, yea toward his blessed body in the
Sacrament of the altar, toward holy oils, vestments, and all ornaments of the
church? Does it not argue very apparently that there lies lurking in them a
very profane and spiteful spirit, that cannot abide the majesty of Gods
service; but abhors all things thereunto belonging? Hereunto may be added,
that like as the Donatists did pluck of the veyles of virgins, whereby they
professed themselves to be the spouses of Christ, and to have renounced all
secular marriages, and vain worldly conversation: Even so did and do the
protestants, where any such professed virgins do fall into their hands, robbing
Christ of his spouses that profess chastity, fasting, prayer and all holiness
of life, and turning them out into the wild and wicked world, there to live at
large like other worldlings. for this lo is a special priuiledg of Luthers
sweet Gospel.

Now for that he fableth of leaguers and Iesuists in France and other
countries, he speaking without book, must give me leave to believe mine own
eyes rather then his slanders. For I have to my grief often seen the ruins
of many goodly fair churches and religious houses blown up, or beaten down
by men of their religion; and have read of extreme outrage offered by them to
priests and other religious people. To omit their robbing of churches, pulling
down of religious houses, deflouring of virgins, with other their outrageous
and irreligious behavior in France only, to say nothing of our own country
and others, whereof a large and lamentable history might be compiled.


R. AB. THE last point of resemblance M. Bishop makes to consist in this. That
like as the Donatists devised a new kind of psalms to stir up their drunken
and drowsy spirits, to their service and sermons: So the protestants have
framed a new kind of Geneua psalms to be song before their preachings. A new
kind of psalms say you M. Bishop? do not you know that they be the psalms of
David, and of other prophets and holy men? And do they seem new because they
are translated into English meeter, and fitted with plain and easy tunes to
serve for the peoples use? Or is it not laudable to use songs and psalms in
the church? That the Donatists used such songs in their churches is M. Bishops
lie. For Saint Austin rather signifies that they used them at their drunken
bankets. Saint Austin commends sober singing of psalms, and so does Saint
Leo. Leo de collec. ser. 4.
But the Papists use to join filthy songs, even with the canon of their Mass,
as witnesses Cornelius Agrippa. Cornel. de vanit. scientiaru^ c. 18.
Thus you see that M. Bishop very unfortunately entered into retorting of this
comparison of the Donatists, nothing fitting his turn, etc.


W. B. LET that first be remembered, which all the world can witness for our
religion, that we both highly esteem, and do daily practice the singing of
king David's Psalms, and therefore M. Abbot spends his mouth in wast, when he
endeuoreth to recommend unto us the laudable use of sober singing them in our
churches: which their church has received of ours, and has somewhat to do, to
mainteyne the same singing against their younger brethren the puritanes, who
like of no such Romish rites. But how dares M. Abbot to avouch so peremptorily,
that all their Geneva psalms be nothing else but the psalms of David? How many
pieces and broken sentences have they devised of their own heads to patch the
rest together, and to make them up into broken meeter? what, will they say
that all their additions joined and sowdered to the rest, be inspired by the
holy Ghost? Or can that truly be called a psalm of David, that has one
sentence in it not dictated by the holy Ghost? But in their meeters many such
sentences be added, which are not assured to be of the holy Ghost: wherefore
they may well mar, but cannot make up any psalms of David. Besides they have
some very heretical sentences interlarded among the rest: As for example this,
in the invocation of the holy Ghost before the Sermon: Keep us from all
papistry. Finally there be some whole psalms made by by Robin woodcocke I
trow or some of his fellows no less Dunsticall then heretical. Take for a
taste thereof the first staff of the last song in their psalter, composed by R.
W. which I thought good to record here, that the reader may see how elegant and
pleasant they be both for meeter and matter.

Preserve us Lord, by thy dear word,
From Turk and Pope defend us Lord,
Which both would thrust out of his throne,
Our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear son.
These must needs be very noble verses, that have thrice Lord in them. And
as for word and Lord, Throne and son; though the words do end in the like
syllables, yet they agree not in sound. If M. Abbot would have the simple
reader believe, that S. Austin, and S. Leo (when they speak in the praise of
singing of Psalms) did mean David's psalms in meeter, let him produce but one
good Author to testify that they were so turned within 900. years of those
Doctors deaths, and then hardely believe him. If he cannot, then every man
may see what credit is to be given to his allegations. That S. Austins words
which I alleged are to be understood of Psalms, which the Donatists sung in
their churches, rather then of songs in their drunken bankets; may be gathered
out of the comparison that he makes between them, and the psalms that were
sung in the Catholic church. And S. Austin might well by a Metaphore usual in
the holy scripture, call the Donatists new mad devises against the ancient
custom of grave singing in the quire, their drunkenness. As for the worshipful
testimony of Cornelius Agrippa of our mingling holy things with profane, it
being recorded in a book of condemned memory, I hold it not worth the
answering. Sure I am that M. Abbot by producing of such Authors, cracketh his
own credit. for he promised in his Epistle to the reader, that he would only
use the testimony either of some learned Bishops of Rome, or of some other
famously approved author, and commended in that church; And this book of
Agrippa de vanitate scientiarum, is by name condemned by the same church, in
the Cataloge of forbidden books; wherefore M. Abbot is no man of his word.
Finally like to a tatling tennis plaier that comes well beaten out of the
tennis court, yet to comfort himself, and to save his poor credit with his
friends, brags that those mates with whom he played, were no matches for him:
yea that no man that day was able to stand in his hands: Even so M. Abbot
having behaved himself as simply, as a man of either wit or learning could do,
either for defending of his own, or for offendi^g his adverse party, yet
concludes as though he had gotten the field, and clean foiled his adversary,
saying, that I did unfortunately enter into retorting of that comparison,
nothing serving my turn, but that he like a nimble te^nis player had returned
my own bals upon me, and that with very great advantage. well, brag is a
Jolly dog, and leesers must sometimes be suffered to have their words. Let the
judicious and indifferent reader but weigh well, first, what kind of
resemblance M. Abbot endeavored to make between the Donatists and the Papists:
to wit, to challenge to themselves to be the Catholic church: To be, or
rather to desire to be dilated all the world over: that out of their church
there was no salvation; To spread ill rumors of their adversaries: To discourage
men from joining with them, with a Ragmans roll of such rotten riff raffe
common to all sects, and to none more usual then to the protestants
themselves; So trivial I say, that any man of ordinary discretion, would have
been ashamed to have put them down in print to the view of the world.
Afterward on the other side let him but call to mind, what resemblances I have
proposed between the Protestants and the Donatists, and weigh how substantial
they be in themselves, and how properly they fit the protestants. The first
was, that the spirit and soul of Donatisme co^sisted in affirming the church
of Christ not to appear in any other part of the world visibly, but to have
clea^ perished, saving in some few places where men of their religion lived: Of
the same mind were the chief protestants for many years. Secondly, the
Donatists were the first among Christians that appealed from the judgment of
Bishops unto temporal Princes, though they afterward repented themselves
thereof, when they saw that the said princes would not help them. Is not this
one of the chief heads of the protestants Gospel? yea does not the whole
frame of their new religion hang upon the supreme ecclesiastical authority of
kings? Thirdly, they beat down Altars, abused the blessed Sacrament of
Christ's body, defiled holy oiles, confiscated sacred chalices, and sold them,
together with the vestments, and other holy ornaments of the church. All which
are so proper to the Protestants, that they blush not daily to practice it, and
make open profession of the same. 4. The protestants (like unto the Donatists)
by putting innocent priests to death, make martirs, whom we may worship.
Finally they pulled of the veiles of religious women, which were signs of
their professed virginity, exposing them to the hazard of the wild world. In
which ungodly and irreligious practice, the protestants have gone far beyond
the Donatists. But that they may not take too great pride therein, let them
hear the upright censure of the holy prelate Optatus, passed 1200. years
agone against them, in the name of their dear brethren the Donatists. In this
kind you have done as great damage to god, Optat. l. 6. co Parm.

In hoc genere tanta damna fecistis Deo, quanta lucra diabolo procurastu
Conflastis impie calices, crudeliter fregistis and inconsulte rasistis altaria
Nudastis denuo capita iam velata: de quibus professionis detraxistis indicia,
qua contra raptores aut petitores videntur inuenta. Spiritale hoc nubendi genus
est, in nuptias Sponsi iam venerant voluntate and professione sua, and vt
secularibus nuptiijs se renuntiasse monstrarent, spiritali sponso soluerant
crinem, iam caelestes celebrauerant nuptias.


as you have procured gain to the devil. you have impiously melted Chalices:
you have barbarously broken down Altars etc. and a little before: you have
uncovered the heads of virgins, that were veiled, drawing from them the marks
of their profession, which were invented to declare that in will and profession
they were married to Christ. By these few resemblances hitting the protestants
so right on the thumbes (to omit many other) the indifferent reader may see,
whether my retorting of M. Abbots comparisons were to the purpose or no, and
whether of us have more fortunatly travailed therein.


. 6. W. B. TO conclude this passage, seeing M. Abbot went about to prove the
church of Rome to be like that of the Donatists, by no one sound argument, but
by diverse trifles and untruths, he must look (unless he repent) to have his
part with liars in the poole burning with fire and brimstone. And if it please
the reader to hear, at what great square the Donatists were with the said
church of Rome, (to which M. Abbot would so feign resemble them) I will briefly
show it out of the best records of that time. L. 2 co. lit. Petil. c. 51.
S. Austin speaks thus to the Donatist Petilian: what has the church or sea
of Rome (in which Peter sat and now sits Anastasius) done unto thee? why
do thou call the Apostolical chair, the chair of pestilence? See how
friendly the Donatists were wont to salute the church of Rome, stiling it the
chair of pestilence. That noble prelate Optate to this Issue has thus
deposed. whence is it that you Donatists take upon you to usurp the keys of
the kingdom, and that presumptuously, and with sacrilegious audacity, you do
wage battle against the chair of Peter? If the Donatists did wage war
against the church of Rome, surely there was no likelihood of any good
intelligence between them. wherefore like as the Catholics of Africa then, so
they were linked in communion with the church of Rome, set light by the
outcries of the Donatists against them (as witnesses S. Austin when he said
of Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, Epist. 162
one of the princes of the Catholic party; he needed not to care for the
multitude of his conspiring enemies the Donatists, when he saw himself by
communicatorie letters joined with the Roman church, in which always
flourished the primacie of the Apostolical chair etc.) Even so we at this
time need as little to esteem of the bitter reproaches, and deceitful arguments
of the protestants, So we stand upright and firm in the like society of faith
and religion with the same church of Rome.


R. AB. MIstake I did in some circumstance, but lie I did not, because to lie
is to go against a man's own mind and knowledge. That the Donatists were at
square with the ancient church of Rome we confess: But what is that to the
latter church of Rome, which is degenerated from the old, and in tying the
Catholic church to her own place and function does rather resemble the old
Donatists? besides the Donatists were at as great square with all other
Catholic churches, some of which were also mentioned by saint Augustine in that
and other places: why then does M. Bishop make that peculiar unto the church of
Rome, which S. Austin leaves indifferent to that and other churches? and as
other churches afterward became chaires of pestilence, so might the church of
Rome, for ought that S. Austin there says of it. The like is to be answered
unto Optatus, who teaching the Donatists to have been whole enemies unto the
church of Rome, does not hinder but that the latter church of Rome might agree
well enough with them. Finally S. Austin does not say, that Cecilianus joined
with the church of Rome alone, but joining with that and other Catholic
churches, needed not to care for the Donatists. So that there is no more there
for the communion of the church of Rome, the^ for the communion of other
churches. He will say, that a principality is there attributed unto the church
of Rome: I answer as before I have done, that a principality of honor may be
give^ to it, but not a principality of power. And does it follow that because
the principality of the Apostolic chair flourished there till that time,
therefore it should do so ever unto the worlds end? These are loose and vain
collections unfit to stablish the conscience of sober and advised men.


W. B. FOr a conclusion of this chapter M. Abbot tells us, that albeit he
mistook somethings, yet he did not lie in any part thereof; and the proof in
part is very pretty: because (for sooth) he went not against his own mind.
His mind and pleasure then being to say, that the Donatists taught the true
church to be only at Cartenna; Secondly, That the Papists do teach now that
the same true church is contained within the walls of Rome only; 3. That no
other man's Baptism besides a papist priests is avaylable to Salvation; 4. That
none among the Indians be truly converted to the Christian faith, but all of
them are forced to receive baptism with out religion; when he (I say) wrote
these and twenty mo such like most luculent lies, yet in all this he did not
once lie; the reason is in readiness, because he never went against his own
mind: His mind then giving him (belike) that to vilify and slander the
Papists, he might tell a hundredth worse tales of them then those are. Good Sir,
if upon Etymologies of words you presume to deliver such senseles and wicked
doctrine, it may truly be said to you for ought I see Domine mentiris,
whether you teach it against your own mind or no. For although a man that of
mere ignorance tells an untruth, does not properly lie; yet when he
presumes to shoot his bolt, and to give his censure rashly of things commonly
spoken of contrary to the truth, as M. Abbot has done: then he may be said
to lie, though he know not perfectly the contrary; Because he might and
ought to have learned out the truth thereof, before he presumed to deliver his
Judgment thereon in such absolute and peremptory terms.

As the Donatists were at open war with the old church of Rome: So does the
modern church of Rome, as greatly as the old, detest the same positions of the
Donatists. To wit, that the church of Christ is perished all the world over,
saving in some odd corners. 2. That men baptized by unsanctified Ministers
ought to be rebaptised. And so of all the rest, which either Optatus or S.
Austin then recorded for special points of the Donatists doctrine. That the
now church of Rome does differ in any one article of faith from the ancient, is
that which M. Abbot does often say and repeat, but never yet could, nor here
after shall ever be able to bring any one sufficient proof thereof, wherefore
by all right and reason, the said church is to retain her former good
reputation and credit, with all honest and upright consciences. For if every
man have title unto his good name, until he be convicted to have committed
some such fault; as meriteth the loss thereof: much more the church of Rome,
(being the most honorable congregation of Christendom) ought to hold her due
estimation and credit, and enjoy all her privileges, until it be lawfully
proved, that it has justly deserved to be deprived of them. for, in dubijs,
mel or est conditio possidentis. In all doubtful causes she that is and has
been fifteen hundredth years in possession, is to keep it still. I grant that
when S. Austin either defended the honor of the church of Rome, or magnified
the society and communion with it, did thereunto join some other church: But
the mention of them not being to our present purpose, what reason had I to
recite that which was needless? when as every man knows that as well as then,
so now, whosoever shall reco^cile himself to the church of Rome, he shall
thereby reenter into communion with all other Catholic churches throughout the
whole world. And whereas M. Abbot would have his credulous reader suppose, that
S. Austin made no more reckoning of the church of Rome, then he did of any
others; That is flat contrary to that which S. Austin sets down in the very
same place, who to prevent that Cavil, does enterlace this Parenthesis in the
honor of the church of Rome (where always flourished the primacie of the
Apostolical chair.) And in his Epistle 165. being to give an insta^ce of the
perpetual succession of pastors in the church, makes choice of the church of
Rome, as of the better assured and more safe and sound, and there does intimate
that the Bishops of Rome, though they might live amiss, yet should never fail
to instruct aright all that seek unto them for resolutions of their doubts in
matter of faith. wherefore M. Abbot if he will give credit unto that most holy
and learned Doctor (whom as well protestants as we do esteem for one of the
soundest recorders of antiquity) he must needs yield unto the church of Rome;
both that it is the principal of all the rest, and that it shall for ever
continue the most assured Oracle of the holy Catholic faith. which if he
refuse to do, he leaves apparent proof unto all the world, that he had
rather with the Donatists rail at her and revile her; then with S. Augustine
and other holy prelates, extol and magnify the primacy of that Apostolical
chair, and defend the ever durable succession of her pastors, as well in truth
of doctrine, as in order of persons. of which I have more largly spoken in the
2. Section of the first chapter n. 29.


WHETHER EVERY CHRISTIAN MAY BE Saved in his own religion, albeit therein
be some errors in matter of faith.
BECAUSE M. Abbot in the precedent chapter grants that the Roman church, and
the church of our forefathers in England, were true members of the Catholic
church, and consequently in the state of Salvation, albeit he esteems them
infected with sundry gross Errors: And for that I otherwise know, that very
many remarkable persons in our country do greatly desire to hear this
question more exactly discussed: I thought it more convenient to let the
ensuing chapters of M. Abbors trifling book to rest for a season, and
presently to fall in hand with this matter, which is no less longed after,
then it is necessary to be known. For the more particular explication of
this weighty difficulty, whether every one may be saved in his own
religion or no, I (leaving a full treatise thereof unto them that have better
leisure) think good to touch these three points.

I. First whether he that believes aright in the one living and eternal God,
and lives honestly, may be saved without express belief in Jesus Christ our
Savior. II. Secondly, whether believing aright both in God almighty Creator
of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ our redeemer, with all other
fundamental points of the Christian religion, he may be saved that does
therewith believe amiss in some other articles of the Christian faith. III.
Thirdly, I will add a word or two about the public profession of the same
Christian faith: because besides an honest life, and a true belief, that also
is necessary, to salvation.
I took it not amiss to handle briefly the first point, although there be
few Christians that make any doubt of it; because I my self have heard some
good souls very virtuously given, but not sufficiently instructed, to be of
opinion that it made no great matter what religion they professed, so they
feared God and led an honest life among their neighbors. Their opinion seemed
to issue out of Good nature, and a great love of honest life and upright
dealing, which they saw to be wonderfully decayed, and almost perished in our
miserable country. The best reason that I can frame in favor of their error
is this: Almighty God is most merciful, full of goodness and compassion
toward all his own creatures, he knows our inbred ignorance and weakness,
and therefore is not likely to be highly offended against them, that do their
endeavor to serve him according to their knowledge and capacity, how slender
soever it be: Now many there be in the wide world brought up among Turks and
infidells that never heard of, or at the least never had sufficiently declared
unto them, that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world: wherefore it seems
that such may be saved without faith in him. And among us Christians some be
so dull of capacity and blockish, or have been so extreme ignorantly or
evilly brought up, that they have not been well taught to believe in the
Savior of the world, Christ Jesus; may not their gross ignorance beg their
pardon at our most merciful Lord his hands? Besides S. Paul declaring what is
necessary for him to believe that will approach unto God, seems to require
but two things: The one, that he believe that God is, the other that he is a
rewarder of all them that seek unto him. Hebr. 11.6.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and is a rewarder to them
that seek him. But we may well believe that God is, to wit a spirit of
infinite goodness, wisdom and power, the Creator, conserver, and sovereign
ruler of heaven and earth, and of all things in them: also that as he has
created all things of his inestimable goodness, and preserves and governs all
with incomprehensible wisdom and equity: So he will in the end as high Judge
of the quick and the dead, call all reasonable creatures to an account of
their dutiful behavior toward their so good and high maker, preserver, and
ruler; and out of his immense bounty most abundantly reward all them that
have in this life sought unto him and diligently served him: And on the other
side severely punish them that have neglected their duty toward him, and
transgressed his holy commandments. All this (I say) and much more one may
believe. without the knowledge of Christ, therefore it seems possible, that some
men may obtain salvation without faith in Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.
Notwithstanding these petty reasons, they must needs acknowledge themselves to
be very simple, and utterly ignorant in the new Testament, that believe any
salvation to be possible, without express faith in Christ. For there is
nothing more cleerlie taught, nor more often inculcated, then that we shall
never be saved, nor so much as attain unto the gate and entry of salvation,
which is to be justified, except we believe in him. Let these texts of holy
writ be well considered. First our Savior himself says to his heavenly
father. This is life everlasting, Ioh. 17.3.
(that is the means to obtain life everlasting) to know thee the only true
God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Behold the knowledge of Jesus Christ
is as well required to salvation, as the knowledge of the true God: Ioh. 3.18.
Again, he that does not believe in the son, is already judged, because
he has not believed in the name of the only begotten son of God. See
certain damnation assigned to all them, that do not believe in the only
begotten son of God Christ Jesus. Ioh. 15.
The same is also confirmed by his own mouth where he taught, that he is the
vine, and we be the branches. giving us to understand, that unless we be
graffed in him, and made partakers of his merits and grace, we can bring forth
no fruit worth life everlasting. Sine me nihil potestis facere, without me
you can do nothing. The same doctrine was plainly published by S. Peter prince
of the Apostles, Act. 4.12
saying: There is no salvation in any other, for neither is there any other
name under heaven, given to men wherein we must be saved. with him accords
that great doctor of the Gentiles, and pure vessel of election S. Paul, very
often teaching that no man can be justified by any other means, the^ through
faith in Jesus Christ. The justice of God by faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.22.
Gal. 2.16 1. Cor. 3.12.
unto all, and upon all that believe in him. Again, other foundation no man
can lay, besides that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus. If faith in Christ
be the foundation of all our spiritual building toward heaven: then surely
without that, no man can enter into possession of the beautiful palace of
heaven: no more the^ a man can build up an earthly house, without laying first
the foundation thereof. The dearly beloved Apostle of our blessed Savior, that
Eagle eied Evangelist, Apoc. 7. v 9. and 14.
and high prophet S. John seeing in spirit the innumerable great multitude of
the heaue^lie citizens was told, that they were those that came out of great
tribulation, and that had washed, their stoles, and made them white in the
blood of the lamb. And there was not one among them that yield not thanks
as well to the lamb, as unto God; saying. Salvation to our God that sits
upon the throane, and to the lamb. There by giving us to understand that there
is not one admitted into the joys of heaven, that had not been before made
partaker of Christ's merits, through faith in his blood. The reason why we
ought to believe in Christ, to be made partaker of his merits; besides that it
is most sensible in it self, may be deduced out of the sacred scriptures. Is
it not most meet and convenient, that he who is to receive an inestimable
rich gift through the favor and deserts of another, be brought to know his
benefactor? that he may at least acknowledge how much he is beholding and
bound unto him. Our blessed Savior then being that lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, that has fully satisfied his fathers just
indignation against us; that redeemed us out of the most miserable captivity of
the devil, and has purchased for all such as wilbee obedient unto him, the
kingdom of heaven: Every man must needs confess it to be very great
reason, that all this should be published and made known to them that were to
receive the benefitt of it, that they might love, honor, serve and obey him,
that had bestowed the price of his own most precious blood, to make that
heavenly purchase for them. The Apostle does in effect teach the same, though
after his divine manner some what darkly in these words. Romans 3.25
Justified gratis by his grace, by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom
God has proposed a propitiation by the faith that is in his blood. That is to
say, god having of his mere mercy through Christ's merits, pardoned the
sins of the world, He sent his Apostles to publish the same into all corners
of the earth, proposing and promising remission of sins unto all that should
believe the same Christ Jesus to be the son of God, made man to shed his
blood on the cross, for the redemption of all mankind. This capital article
of our belief, God would have preached all the world over, and confirmed by
innumerable miracles, sealed also with the blood of infinite Martyrs, to the
everlasting salvation of them that should willingly embrace this joyful
tidings, and unto their just condemnation, who hearing of such happy news
would either not believe it, or not accept of it. This position having so
clear evidence in the word of God, needs small testimony of the ancient
fathers, wherefore I wilbee content with the brief sentences of a few of them.
Iren. l. 3. cap. 21.
S. Ireneus says plainly, that they who know not the Emmanuel that was borne
of the blessed virgin, are deprived of that great gift of life everlasting.
Ambros. li. to. of. sic. c. 29.
S. Ambrose agrees with him affirming. That the Apostle laid Christ for the
foundation, that upon faith in him, we might build the works of Justice. S.
Gregory the great was of the same mind expounding the same text of the Apostle
thus: Greg. l 7 epist. 47.
whosoever with the love of God and his neighbor holds the firm faith of
Christ, does lay that self same foundation of Jesus Christ, which the Apostle
speaks of. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, l 18. c. 47
S. Augustine deposes the same in these clear words. it is to be believed,
that to please God, and to live according to his will, was never granted to any
body, unless unto him were from heaven revealed the one mediator of God and man
Christ Jesus. S. Hierome must not be excluded out of this holy consort, for
he upon these words of the Apostle, S. Hier. in c. 1. ad Ephesios.
He has predestined us unto the adoption of sons in Christ Jesus does
argue, that we cannot be the sons of God, unless we do embrace the faith
and knowledge of his son Jesus Christ. This point being thus proved by the
word of God and testimony of the ancient fathers, it wilbee very easy to
answer unto those poor objections that were propounded in the beginning. God
(I grant) will not condemn any man for not believing that which he never
heard of: wherefore if in any coast of the world the Doctrine of Christ be not
sufficiently published, no man there shall be condemned for not believing in
him; but for other mortal and grievous offenses, which they have in their life
time committed against the light of reason and law of nature. If any amongst
those infidels have bee^ so happy, as not to have committed any such mortal
sin, Act. 10.
(which cannot be without the special aid of Gods grace) if there be any
such (I say) like the good Italian Captain Cornelius mentioned in the acts of
the Apostles, he shall find the like extraordinary succor from heaven, as to
have an Angel to teach him, or at least to direct him to some Peter, that may
thoroughly instruct him in the Christian faith. Among Christians there can
hardly be found any one (I think) so vngratiously bred, that never heard of
Christ: because that is contained in the Creed that all Christians are taught
even from their infancy, and are bound to know, so far fourth as their
capacity and wit will give them leave: which if they should neglect to learn
after they come to years of discretion, they are worthy to be deprived of
all benefits issuing and growing by Christ, because they contemned so much as to
know him. To that text of S. Paul, that he who comes to God, must know that
he is, and that he is a rewarder, etc. I answer first, that the Apostle
says very well, that he must know those two points, but he does noth say
there, that he needs to know no more: And elsewhere in all his Epistles does
teach that over and besides that, the faith in Jesus Christ is necessary for
all men. wherefore this point must be added to the rest. I answer secondly,
that one cannot know particulary how God is a rewarder, unless he know the
incarnation of Jesus Christ. because God will reward no man with life
everlasting, but through the merits of Jesus Christ, and for that he is a
member of Christ, and for such good works, which a man without faith in Christ;
and without aid of his grace cannot perform. Thus much of the first point

Now to the second, which is the principal question. whether holding the right
faith in Christ Jesus, and believing the other fundamental articles which are
contained in the Apostles creed, one may be condemned for not believing any
other article of the Christian faith. For the plainer explication of the state
of this question it is to be understood, that many of the unlearned and
simpler sort, may be ignorant of many matters appertaining to faith, without
danger of damnation; because by reason of their lack of capacity, or for
other necessary occupatio^s about getting of their poor livings, they are not
bound to know expressly much more then is delivered in the Apostles Creed, and
what does concern the right use of the sacraments which they themselves are
obliged to receive. Nevertheles every Christian man and woman may very well
be bound not to defend the misbeliefe of any one article of faith, after he
shall be given to understand that the Catholic church has declared the same to
be so. There is a great difference between the dispositions of two such
parties, for it is one thing to be ignorant what the church teaches in such a
case, and another not to be willing to believe it, abeit he knew well enough
that the church commands him so to believe. In the former there is a ready
good will to obey the truth, as soon as due information shall be given him, and
mere ignorance in the mean season hinders his consent. But in the other
party there is a loose liberty of believing what him lists, and an
obstinate resolution not to believe and obey the church any further then they
themselves shall think good. These men I say albeit they believe aright in
Jesus Christ touching his own person and mediation, and do not deny any
article of the Apostles Creed, at least as they understand it; yet do they
dwell in the state of damnation, and shall not be saved unless they repent.
This proposition I know will seem over rigorous and terrible unto many, but
being a matter of eternal salvation or damnation, at least as I take it, they
must give me leave, that prefer the honor of Gods truth before the phansies
of men and the care of their salvation before currying of false favor with
them, to advertise them of it whiles they have time to take heed to it,
requesting them to consider well of the reasons that I shall now deliver unto
them in proof of the same, and then I trust in God they will also come to be
of my opinion therein. The first may be thus propounded. If it were sufficient
to salvation to believe in Christ, and in the other articles of the Creed (as
they take them,) this great absurdity would ensue thereof; that all heretics
anciently condemned were unjustly condemned, and might well notwithstanding
their heresies and condemnation have lived and died in the state of salvation:
which to imagine were to condemn all the Orthodox churches, and ancient
fathers, of great impiety, and extreme want of Christian Charity. I will prove
that absurd sequel by the enumeration of the most notorious Heretics. The
Arrians (for example) did profess to believe in Christ, so far forth as is
delivered in the said Creed. To wit, that he was the only son of his
father, borne of the virgin Mary and our Lord. They did indeed deny him to be
consubstantiall, that is of the same substance with his father, and coeternall.
but thereupon discoursed much like as some Protestants do now about
Transubstantiation, who profess Christ's body to be really present in the
blessed Sacrament, because Christ's words do teach that plainly; but they will
not admit of Transubstantiation in any case; for that they find not that word
set down in the scriptures. So these Arrians did profess to believe Christ to
be the Savior of the world, to be also the son of God truly and really,
yet because there was no me^tio^ of Consubstantiall in the scriptures, therefore
they were content to believe so much as was in the scriptures, but their tender
consciences (forsooth) would not suffer the^ to adventure one pace beyond the
express word of God. Notwithstanding their fair pretense they were roundly
condemned by the church in the first general council for most damnable
Heretics, if under that pretext they refused to b^leeue that Christ Jesus was
consubstantiall unto his father, and coeternall.

The Nestorians believed all that the Orthodox church taught of our savior
Christ Jesus, and of all the other articles of faith, saving that they held him
to have two distinct persons, as well as he had two different natures. To wit,
the nature of man to have had his own person of man, even as the nature of God
had the person of God. The Apollinarists did not swerve from the Catholics in
any other point of faith, except that they maintained our savior Christ to
have had no soul of man, but that his Godhead did supply the place of the
soul. Eutiches and his fellows agreeing in the rest, avouched the flesh of
Christ to be turned into the divine nature. All these did profess to believe
in Christ, and to hold all the articles of the Creed. So did the Macedonia^s
that imagined the holy Ghost to be less then the son. And the latter
Grecians also, that deny the same holy Ghost to proceed as well from the son
as from the father. The Pelagians did not deny Christ or any article of the
Creed; no more did the Novatians nor the Donatists, at lest as they understood
the creed. For albeit the Nouatians denied priests to have power to forgive
some certain of the most grievous sort of sins, as the Protestants do now deny
them to have power to forgive any at all: yet they denied no more then the
protestants do, that article of the creed, I believe remission of sins. For
they believed that God could at all times forgive all sort of sins, though
they denied priests to have power to remit some of the most enormious. So the
Donatists though they taught the church to have been decayed all the world over
saving in Africa, yet did they profess to believe the Catholic church: But
they expounded it to be Catholic, not for that it was spread over all, but for
that it retained all the seven sacraments, or for that it professed to keep
all Gods commandments, as you have heard before. Out of these examples I
frame this argument. If it were sufficient to salvation to believe in God our
Creator, and in Jesus Christ our Redeemer, withal other articles set down
expressly in the Apostles Creed, Then were the Arrians, Macedonians, Pelagians,
and all those other above rehearsed heretics, notwithstanding their obstinate
cleaving to their condemned heresies, in the state of salvation: because they
refused not to believe any of the foresaid points: But to hold that any of the
above named heretics, dying in their said heresies, died in the state of
salvation, is to gainsay and reprove all pure antiquity, it is to condemn the
holy prelates and most learned Doctors of the primitive church of want of
learning, want of Judgment, and want of charity; who cast those erring men, as
heretics, out of their churches; condemned them to the pit of hell, as the
professed enemies of Christ, and the Devils champions. Besides the best informed
Christians of those times chose rather to suffer all kind of torments, then to
profess any one point of their condemned opinions; which had been great folly,
if with the profession of them they might (holding the other fundamental
points) have enjoyed Christ his favor, and been inheritors of the kingdom of
heaven. Moreover, what necessity had there been for the most learned and
renowned ancient prelates to have taken such pains, either in writing so many
learned volumes, or in disputing or preaching against those heretics, if they
might have been all saved every one in his own religion? Might not also the
huge charges and exceeding great pains of assembling of general councels have
been well spared, if those men for whose right information they were called,
might have obt^ined salvation, though they had been let alone in their own
errors? It must needs therefore be granted, that the best Clerks, and holiest
personages in the purest times of Antiquity thought it enough to damnation, to
deny any one article of the Catholic faith, Matthew. 7.15.
after it was in any general council declared for such. Does not our blessed
Savior, when he styles heretics by the name of false prophets, and
resembles them to ravening wolves that devour Christian souls, cleerlie
demonstrate, that they have no part in his good grace and favor, but be in
his sight odious and hateful creatures? Again, when he does in another place
compare the^ to thieves and robbers, Joan. 10.1.
that do break into his fold of their own authority, and take upon them to
be his ministers, when he sent them not, scattering and killing his flock.
Does he not (I say) plainly intimate them to be guilty of death and eternal
Damnation? Tit. 3 11.
S. Paul charge us to avoid the company of an heretical man, knowing that
such be subverted, do sin, and be even by their own judgment condemned.
And elsewhere among the works of the flesh rangeth heresies, sects, and
divisions, forewarninge us expressly that whosoever does committ any of them,
shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven. what hope then can there be of
their salvation? wherefore heretics being by our Savior likened unto wolves,
Gallat. 5.15.
thieves, and robbers; and by his Apostles declared damnable creatures,
incapable to enter into the kingdom of heaven; who were also in all ancient
councels held for accursed; can any body be either so ill advised, or so
foolish hardy, as to persuade them that there is any hope of salvation for
them, unless they forsake their errors in season? But because worldlings never
want false prophets to lay pillowes under their elbowes to uphold them in their
errors, some such may here step forth, and in their excuse say for the^, that
seeing they believe in Christ, and hold all the articles of the Apostles Creed,
though they err in other points, they cannot be heretics, and therefore
whatsoever is said against heretics, does not touch the^ that be not of that
number. This excuse will not serve the turn: for as I have before showed,
neither Arrians, Nestoria^s, Pelagia^s, nor any other most notorious heretics
did plainly deny either Christ to be Savior of the world, nor any other
express point of any article of the creed? nevertheless they were by the true
verdict of the ancient Catholic church denounced and declared for heretics.
In a word if to believe in Christ, and to hold the rest of the Apostles Creed,
were sufficient to preserve any Christian from the Canker of heresy; then he
that would deny both the old and new Testament to be Canonical scriptures,
and the true word of God, might be no heretic: because the Canon of holy
scripture is not expressed in the creed. So he that would overthrow the whole
Hierarchy of the church, and send all the sacraments into banishment, might
escape the brand of heresy: because of those points there is no particular
mention in the said Creed. wherefore it is most certain, that men may be most
wicked and damnable heretics, albeit they profess to believe in Christ, and
do not deny any one substantial point expressed in the Apostles Creed, if
they shall wilfully defend any other erroneous doctrine, contrary unto the
truth revealed by God, and so declared unto us by the pastors and doctors of
the Catholic church. For witness whereof I will now cite only two, leaving the
rest for the vpshot of this question: Aug l. q. in Math. q. 11.
the one shall be the great Doctor of the church S. Augustine, who as I have once
before showed, does teach in formal terms that person to be no member of
the Catholic church, who does believe obstinatly any falsehood in matter of
faith, knowing it to be such. And the second shall be Martin Luther, whom
albeit we take for an Apostate Augustine friar, yet the protestants esteem
him as a great man of God. He for want of one article of belief condemns
all the Sacramentaries to the pit of hell, these be his words. It shall
nothing profit the Sacramentaries to speak of spiritual eating, nor to
believe in the father, the son, Luther lib. quod verba Christi Stent.
and the holy Ghost, so long as with blasphemous mouth they deny this article
of faith, which Christ has proposed to us by his own holy mouth: This is my
body that shall be given for you. Behold, no salvation to be possible, if you
deny but that one article of faith.

Among many other causes, why such misbeleeuers are esteemed worthy of so
grievous punishments, there be two principal: the first is, that they will
not believe God himself revealing his divine mysteries unto us; The second,
because they will not give credit to the church proposing unto them the same
truth. All Divines hold that there is no matter of faith, which is not revealed
unto us by God himself. whether the same verity had need to be put down in
writing, as the protestants seem to require; or that it suffices to be
delivered by word of mouth, as we hold, is a question between us: But we all
consent, that what soever is propounded unto us to be believed, must needs be
first revealed by God. whence it follows evidentlie, that he who denies to
believe any one article of faith, is convinced not to believe God himself in
that point; for he it is principally that tendreth it unto us to be believed;
wherefore he that refuses to believe it, is forced to this exigent, that he
must needs confess himself to be persuaded either that God teaches not the
truth always; or else that we are not bound to believe him in all things
either of which is most irreligious, and a very blasphemous crime. For as S.
James disputes. He that has kept the whole law besides, and does offend but
in one point thereof, is made guilty of the whole. Even so he that believes
God in all other articles yet in some one refuses to believe him, is made
guilty of the whole. That is, as S. James expounds it, offends against the
Majesty and verity of the law giver, not reputing him worthy of credit in all
matters what soever. But to think God not worthy to be credited in any one
word or title, that shall proceed out of his divine mouth, is in truth to make
him no God at all. For he is no God, that either will or can be untrue of his
word. Here the poor Christian trembling at this consequence will cry out that
he does believe God in all things, and God forbid that he should once imagine
him not worthy to be credited in whatsoever it shall please his divine majesty
to reveal: But he will say, that he knows not that God has revealed this
unto him, or at least is not well assured that he would have him to believe it.
This I grant is the lesser faut of the two, yet not in any sort tolerable. For
if it has pleased his divine bounty to reveal unto us, for his own honor,
and our instruction such heavenly verities and mysteries; how can he take it
well at our hands, that we either will not vouchsafe to take notice of them,
or which is worse, will not believe them to be true? They that will not
believe, are in the holy scriptures worthily called rebels, because they band
themselves against Gods truth, according to that of Job, Rebels fuerunt
Lumini, Job. 24. v 13.
they were rebels against the Light, and therefore as Rebels and traitors must
look to be punished. The others that will not take the pains to learn,
according unto the small measure of their capacity, all such matters as
appertain to their own estate and calling, must needs acknowledge their
extreme undutiful carelesnes in the highest matter that can be, and that
which does also most concern them, to wit, in the only necessary business of
their own everlasting either salvation or damnation.

And withal confess, that they are unworthy to be known of God their
Sovereign Lord and maker at the latter day, for that they neglected to know
their duty toward him, whiles they lived here on earth. Of them the Apostle
h^th already pronounced this sentence. 1. Cor. 14 38
If any man know not (to wit the things belonging to his duty toward God,)
he shall not be known of God, but shall be shut out of the gate of heaven.
And if they stand knocking there, thinking to get in by their ouerlate
importunity, they shall be answered as the foolish virgins were, Math. 25 12.
with a Nesciovos, I know you not. the force of this discourse in brief is:
whosoever refuses to believe God in any one article by him revealed, shall not
be saved: but they that think to be saved in any religion, refuse to believe
some articles of faith revealed by God: ergo, they cannot be saved. The second
cause, why wilful refusers to believe any one arttcle of faith do incur that
heavy judgment, is for that they do offer great wrong unto the true church of
God his deerly beloved spouse, and our spiritual mistress and mother. It is
agreed on by men of all sides, that the holy Catholic church is the temple of
the holy Ghost, the mystical body of Christ, and the pillar and fortress of
truth. wherefore to offer her that affront and disgrace, as not to give credit
to her testimony (speaking specially unto us in the behalf of Christ; 2. Cor.
5.20.
pro Christo legatione fungimur, for Christ we are legates,) and in the name
of the holy Ghost, (visum spiritui sancto and nobis, It has seemed good to the
holy Ghost and us) it not only to contemn her, Actor. 15.
but to despise Jesus Christ also that has ordained her to be our instructor
and directer, and to set naught by the holy ghost that speaks unto us by
her. we cannot be ignorant what our Savior has said of the governors, and
principal rulers of the church. you shall be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, and
in all Jury and Samaria, Act 1.8.
and unto the uttermost coasts of the earth. If Christ has made choice of the^
as of substa^tiall honest me^ sit to be his witnesses, do not we offer him a
great indignity, if we refuse to believe them? namely when we know him to
have said of them. Luc. 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me,
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Yea adds in another
place, whosoever shall not receive you nor hear your words, Math. 10 15.
going forth out of the house and city, shake of the dust from your feet: Amen
I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of the Sodomits and
Gomorrheans in the day of judgment, then for that city: Behold how straightly
we are charged to hear and believe Christ's witnesses, the pastors and Doctors
of the Catholic church. If we do otherwise, we shall be taken to despise
Christ, and to despise his heavenly father, and shall find no less
intolerable judgment, then did the stinking and abominable Sodomites.
Moreover, the pastors of the Catholic church are not only Christ's bare
witnesses and Ambassadors, but they be also our spiritual governors. Act.
20.28.
Posuit vos Spiritus sanctus regere ecclesiam Dei. The holy Ghost has
appointed you to govern the church of God. If they be our governors we must
obey them. Hebr. 13.17.
Obedite prepositis vestris, and subiacete eis. Obey your Prelates and be
subject unto them; he that resists power, Romans 13.2.
resists the ordinance of God; And of all governors, the spiritual (that do
represent our Savior in a higher degree) are most to be respected. Therefore
more heinous is the offense of every one that does obstinatlie withstand them,
then of others that withstand their temporal prince. Math. 18.17.
Qui ecclesiam non audiverit, sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus. He
that will not hear the church, let him be taken for a heathen and a publican.
whereupon there is commonly in all general councels, Anathema, an
excommunication and curse upon all them, that shall not believe all and every
article of faith in the same general counsel declared and determined. which
does most manifestly demonstrate, that any man who shall refuse to believe any
one article of faith, by the church declared to be such, is worthy to be
excommunicated, that is, to be deprived of the society of Christians in this
world, and consequently of the fruition of Christ in the world to come, if
they do not in time repent. whence I gather this short argument, he that
refuses to believe Gods witnesses, the pastors of his church and our
spiritual governors, in any one article of faith, deserves to be condemned:
but they that hope to be saved in their own religion (of whom we now speak)
do refuse to b^leeue Gods church in some article or other of the Catholic
faith, therefore they deserve to be condemned. For the further explication of
the great conveniencie and necessity we have to believe and obey the
Catholic church in matters of faith, let is be well weighed, that it does in
manner as much import us upon whose credit we believe any thing, as what we
do believe. for such is the weakness and uncertainty of our own Judgment, that
we need nothing more, then to have an assured guide to conduct us safely in
the high matters of divinity, which do far surmount our natural
understanding and capacity. Because as the Apostle discourses divinelie,
faith is of hearing. How shall we then believe, Romans 10.
without a preacher? and how shall any man preach unto us, without he be
sent? which is as much to say, that without the help of some body sent from
God to teach us what we have to believe, we cannot believe aright. wherefore
it does wonderfully much import us, to make right choice of this instructor for
such as our guide and director is, such is our faith. If our guide be blind,
we following him shall blindly fall into the ditch with him. If he see
clear, if he be well advised, staid, and certain; following him, we shall
be assured to walk in the straight path. For example. The Turks believe in one
God, maker of heaven and earth, as we do; yet have they not the true faith
thereof as we have: because they have not the same guide and instructor for that
article that we have. They be led to believe that, by the credit which they
give to the ministers of Mahomet, who out of his Alcaron teach them so to
believe in God. we believe the same, for that the Catholic church does so
teach us in the first article of our Creed. Ours is the act of true faith,
because we are directed by the true church that cannot deceive us. The Turks
persuasion is no act of true faith, for that he takes it on the credit of
them that may deceive him: And do without doubt in many other points deceive
him: wherefore whether they do in this or no, he is uncertain; and
consequently his persuasion being uncertain, he cannot have any true faith,
which is certain and without all peradventure. In like manner the Jews albeit
they have the old testament for their foundation, yet being destitute of an
vndoubtable directer, and taking for their blind guides their Talmud and
Rabbis, are clean void of all true faith; because their persuasion also
relieth upon them that may, and do very often misleade and beguile them. For
come to some other question of faith, yea to the principal and ground of all
the rest; that is, to believe Jesus Christ to be the son of God, and the
true Messiah and redeemer of the world: The Turk not finding that in his
Alcaron, nor the Jew in the old testament (according to the exposition of their
Sinagogue) do most blindly and obstinatlie refuse to believe it. See then of
what importance the direction of a true sincere guide is in all matters of
faith. wherefore it has pleased the unsearchable wisdom of our blessed
Savior, to give unto all his faithful servants for a most assured guide, his
best beloved spouse the Catholic church, 1. Tim 3.
the pillar and ground of truth; to whom he (being to depart out of this
world) bequeathed the holy Ghost to teach her all truth, Ioh. 14.16.
and that at all times, unto the worlds end. I will ask my father, and he
will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever: Ioh. 16.
when the Spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth. Therefore it is
great reason, that we should both acknowledge our blessed masters careful
providence over us in providing us such a guide; and also take our selves fast
bound to obey the same holy church, in all her declarations made to that
purpose. It is not then without exceeding great cause that all good Christians
even from their infancy are taught to believe this, that they never afterward
fail therein; And that they may the better remenber the same good lesson, which
does so much import all men to learn perfectly, they do from thence forth make
daily profession thereof, when they say in their creed, I believe the holy
Catholic church. That is, I do not only believe, that there is one holy
Catholic church; but I profess to believe what the same church does teach me
to believe, all and every article of faith, without exception against any one
of them. for if I do believe her in one, and not in another, I am become such a
chooser, as the Latins following the Grecians call hereticus, an heretic; and
do indeed show that I do not assuredly believe the church, as Gods interpreter
that cannot err, but only so far forth as I think good. And then it may
be asked me, why I do believe her at all, if she do but now and then tell the
truth? for it may be that then she does not say true, when I do believe her.
To put us out of all these doubts and difficulties, the selected governors of
the church, the masters of the world Christ's hoy Apostles, before they did
depart to preach the Gospel to all nations, set down this for a most assured
principle of the Christian faith. I believe the holy Catholic church, to
teach all Christians, that in those supernatural mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, we must not lean to the light of nature, or trust to our own
Judgments, or follow the advice of every one that will take upon him to be a
master; but hold our selves preciselie to that which the holy Catholic
church does teach us, and obeie her fully and wholly in all things. Out of the
premises this argument may be framed directly to our purpose. No man can be
saved, unless he follow the direction of the one holy Catholic church in all
matters of faith: but they that be of opinion, that every man may be saved
in his religion, do not follow the direction of the Catholic church (which
does teach all men to embrace and follow one only faith and religion) wherefore
they that will not embrace the said one only faith, which the Catholic church
teaches cannot be saved. To make this more plain and probable, let us in a
word or two examine the special means that the protestants use to attain
unto the true understanding of Gods word, and thereby unto salvation. where we
must observe by the way that we all agree in this, that there is nothing to
be believed, which is not by God revealed unto us. The Protestants do hold all
that to be written either in the old or new Testament: wherein we dissent from
them, teaching all revealed verities not to be written in the Bible, but some
of them to pass from father to son, by word of mouth and by tradition. Of
which difference here I do not dispute, but we all taking for our ground Gods
own and only word revealed, written or unwritten, do inquire how we come to
the true understanding of it. we say by the explication and declaration of the
Catholic church. The Protestants approve not that means, but under the color
of man's inventions rejecting of it, do either lean to their own judgment and
learning, or follow the authority of their chief preachers, or else run to
the revelation of the Spirit speaking inwardly to their spirits. Now if none
of all these be assured means, to attain unto the true understanding of Gods
word, then their faith that relieth principally thereon, cannot be assured.
Some of them in great zeal and simplicity will say, that they rely only on
the word of God: but good poor souls they know not well what they say; for
the question being about the understanding of the same word of God, we
affirming the word to be for us, they denying that, and chalenging it to be
for them, who shall judge whether of our pretentions to the same word be true?
they will confer one text with another, so will we, and consider all
circumstances too; we will repair also to the originals and have respect unto
the Analogy of faith. briefly we will use all humane diligence and pray also
to God to assist us supernaturally: yet when we have all done we come to no
agreement. who shall the^ agree us? If they would come with us to the Catholic
churches determination in some general council, we should quickly have an
end: but they upon one vain pretext or other fly of, and will finally follow
no other, then one of those three guids before named: whereof the first, which
is their own learning and Judgment, be it never so great, yet they may
mistake and fall into error. Omnis enim homo mendax. Romans 3.
For every man is subject to be deceived, specially when they be in passion
and strive to uphold and make good their own conceits against others; for
then they do oftentimes run astray very strangely. Secondly, the Protestants
that rely upon the reputation and credit of their preachers, how can they set
up their rest upon them assuredly? for that first their masters being men, may
be deceived as well as other men may be: and that they are in deed deceived,
not only the Catholics (who are the far greater and founder part of
Christians) do affirm, but those also that they themselves hold for men of
God, do testify the same. For example Martin Luther with his disciples repute
Zuinglius, Calvin, and all the troop of Sacramentaries to be deceiving
masters, and to err damnablie in the matter of the blessed Sacrament. On
the other side the Sacramentarie protestants do all teach that Luther with all
his followers erred as in many other points, so principally in that matter of
the real presence. which of these two (to omit diverse other their
contradictions) shall a poor protestant believe and follow? both he cannot,
because what the one affirms, the other denies, and each of them says that
the other is deceived. He the^ taking them both for true of their words, must
needs believe neither of them, for that the one avoucheth the other to be in
error. He may (leaning to his own Judgment and liking) rather follow one of
them then the other, yet he cannot do that, without some fear of being
deceived himself, because he has so many even of his own side to be against
him; wherefore he can have no faith at all in these points. For faith is an
assured persuasion of that to be true which you do believe, without any doubt
or fear of the contrary. Let us now come to their last refuge and surest hold
(as some take it) of the spirit, which is indeed the most wavering and
uncertain guide of all the rest. For does not the Lutherans grosser spirit
buzze into their brains that they have found out the light of the Gospel? yes
I warrant you says every good Lutheran. Not so says the purer and nimblet
spirit of the Calvinists: it was but the dawning of the day that appeared to
M. Luther, the light of the Gospel began then only to peep up; but the bright
beams thereof brake not out, till M: Caluins doctrine glittered. The more brisk
spirit of the Brownists, does assure the^ that the nooneday light of the same
Gospel shines only in their Horizon. And what shall we say to the
Anabaptists? who as they be the most frantike of all other, so they brag most
of all, of very familiar acquaintance with the same whispering spirit; with
which they are so haunted, that they have almost hourly new illuminations and
strange revelations. See I pray you into what endless dissentions this doctrine
of the spirit does lead her folowers. It being then most manifest that there is
such variety, and so great contradiction in the way of the private spirit,
every man that has a care of his salvation, will I hope take heed thereof, and
not suffer himself to be abused thereby. He was inspired by the true spirit of
God that gave us this fair warning. 1. Job. 4.1
My dearest believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits if they he of
God: because many fal^e prophets are gone into the world, which deceive many.
And Satan that trudgeth about so busily, seeking whom he may devour, finding
so many ready to listen to the cursed council of his wicked spirit,
transformeth himself often into an Angel of light, that he may the better
beguile them that give ear to such secret whisperings. wherefore they that
desire not to be misled, must follow Saint John's counsel, try the spirits
whether they be of God or no. Ibidem.
If the private spirit do not agree with the public spirit that conducteth the
Catholic church in all truth, be well assured that it is an erring spirit,
sent by Satan to deceive you and to lead you into error. To recollect this
point in brief, If no man may rely either upon his own learning or spirit,
not may safely trust any private teacher or preacher; then the protestants
best means to obtain salvation be very uncertain, and consequently they
that wilbee assured never to err in any one article of faith, must not rely
upon them: but embrace wholly and fully the doctrine of the Catholic Roman
church, and hold themselves close and fast thereunto. Math. 16
That church is built upon a rock that always has and ever shall stand
firm, without flitting or tottering too and fro; and Christ prayed, Luc. 22.
for her governors faith that it should never fail. Ioh. 16.
The holy Ghost is always with her to teach her all truth. And in very
common sense, when a controversy rises about any point in faith, is it not
much more probable, that all the learned assembling together out of all coasts
and countries of Christendom to confer thereupon, should boult out the truth
of that question better, then some few passionate, and discontented men, that
oppose themselves against all the rest? Thus verily stands the case between
the Protestants and us. for when Martin Luther, John Calvin, and others
(discontented men and none of the best mark) ran out of our church, and
cried out that therein were many errors taught, and many foul abuses
maintained, a general council was called, the best learned of all Christian
countries were assembled to hear and determine those controversies. The
ringleaders of the new Gospel were most courteously invited thither, to show
what moved them to make that alteration: but their consciences telling them
that they were not able to justify their bad cause before so many learned men,
they durst not appear in the council. we then have very great reason to
follow the judgment of the whole corpse of Christendom. but small probability
have the protestants to prefer the passionate opinions of a few malcontents
flying from true trial, before the calm and mature acts and definitions of
all the rest, that were ready to have performed it. God send them grace to see
it in time: least as they have wilfully followed them in their errors, so they
be not here after against their wills forced to follow them to eternal
punishment. I have staid the longer to declare the commodity and necessity of
submitting our understanding unto the censure of the Catholic church, because
without that be joined to Gods word, to certify us both which is the word of
God, and what is the true sense and meaning thereof, we can have no true faith
at all. for the declaration of the church is necessarily required as a
condition, without which our faith cannot ordinarily be assured of that which
it is to believe. whereupon that great light of the world S. Austin was not
ashamed to say, Evangelio non crederem, August. co Epis^. fundame^tre. 5.
nisi me moveret Eccl^siae Catholicae authoritas. I for my part would not
believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic church did move me
thereunto. whence it is easy to gather, that they who do not take their
direction from the said church, (as all they do not, who think every Christian
may be saved in his own religion) have no assurance in their faith, and
consequently no true faith at all, wherefore they cannot be saved. which I do
thus confirm; for the Apostle teaches that Sine fide impossible est placere
Deo, Hebr. 11.6.
It is impossible to please God without faith: which must needs be understood
of the true faith, because God is the God of truth, and hates all that is
false: but the true faith is but one only, and of the same nature in all men:
which the said Apostle does confirm, when he writes that there is but one
Lord, one faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
one Baptism: but they that make account to be saved in their own religion,
be not ordinarily, nor cannot be all of one faith. for one faith cannot
teach us to believe two co^tradictory propositions to be true: by the same
faith one may believe more, and another less, according to the measure of
faith that it has pleased God to bestow upon them: but one cannot believe
clean contrary to the other, As for example, That Saints are to be prayed
unto, and that they are not to be prayed unto. That we may pray for the
dead, and that we may not pray for the dead. For one of those propositions
must needs be false, wherefore they that believe, men may be saved in both
these opinions, have no true faith at all; because true faith cannot believe
that which is false, and one of these two must needs be false. This may be
yet further confirmed, for that those men who think one may be saved in any
religion, do want the aforesaid true and only means of unity and agreement
in one faith. for they rely not upon the explication of the Catholic church
(which is the only way to hold all men in one faith) no more then if they had
never heard of that article of our Creed, I believe the hol^e Catholic
church; but take (as it has been before declared) for their guides in matter
of faith, either their own Judgment, skill or spirit; or the advice of some of
their friends: which are much more like to lead them into a hundredth diverse
opinions, then to reduce them to unity in faith and religion. wherefore it is
evident that the uniform faith of the body of Christendom (which alone is
the true saving faith) cannot dwell in one house with that liberty of
believing what they like. Moreover, all men seek after the true Catholic
church, that they may find out the true doctrine of the Christian faith, and
enjoy, the right use and administration of the holy Sacraments: This is so
clear and agreeable unto the Protestants marks of the true church, that it
cannot be denied: but if in the same church there may be errors maintained in
matters of faith, and the Sacraments may be corruptly administered, men
should in vain take so great pains to find out the true church and obey it.
because in the way of that opinion it is needles to salvation, to be free from
error in faith, or to have the Sacraments sincerely administered. for one may
be saved (say they) in that religion, where there be errors in faith
defended, and the Sacraments vnpurelie handled. This argument may be thus
enlarged and enforced. They that with the true belief of the fundamental
points of faith do mingle some errors in other articles, for those their
errors, to what Master do they belong? Not to God, who is the Author only of
truth and light, and in whom (as Saint John witnesses) there is no darkness.
Deus lux est, 1. Ioh. 1.5.
and tenebrae in eo non sunt vllae. He must needs therefore be one of the
devils retayners, Ioh. 8.44
who is father of all liars, and master of them, that do embrace errors: to
say, that he is Gods for the truth which he holds, will not avail; for God
will not part stakes with the Devil, but either he will have us wholly his;
to wit if we will love him with all our hearts, and wholly believe in him: or
else he will wholly reject us, if we think to have any other master with him,
or believe in any other contrary to him. God is so Sovereign and Jealous a
Lord, that he will not dwell in the same house with Dagon. 1. Re^ ^^
either we must cast out Dagon, or he will cast us of. we must not halt (as
the zealous prophet Elias warns us) Between God and Baal; but either wholly
follow God, 3. Reg 18, 22.
or else assure our selves that he will wholly reject us. For as the Apostle
argues, what society is there between light and darkness? ^ Cor. 6.1^.
what agreement between Christ and Belial? none at all. For our Savior
himself has defined: Math. 12.3^.
He that is not with me, is against me. Luke warm fellows (that be part
of the one, and part of the other) he will vomit out of his mouth, as raw and
undigested humors that his stomach cannot abide. Because (says he) thou art
Lukewarm, Apocal. 3.16.
and neither hot nor cold, I will begin to vomit thee out of my mouth. The
foundation of this is drawn out of this maxim of moral philosophy and
divinity recorded by S. Dennis the Areopagite, c 4. diuin^. 1. 2. 18 4.
and seconded by S. Thomas of Aquine: Bonum ex integra causa, Malum ex quolibet
defectu. This is the difference between good and evil: that to make a thing
good, there must concur all things requisite, both for substance and
necessary circumstance: but if one thing requisite be wanting, it makes the
whole action evil. One bad herb marreth a whole pot of pottage: and one
spoonefull of gall, a butt of Maulmesey: even so if there be one known error
in matter of faith, it corrupts the whole substance of faith, as if there
reign one sinnfull vice in a man, it destroieth the whole frame of virtue, and
does absolutely make him vicious, and casts him clean out of Gods favor, so
long as he continues therein: according to this sentence of the kingly
prophet, Odisti omnes qui operantur iniquitatem, Psalm. 5.
and pordes omnes qui loquuntur mendacium. Thou O god hate all (and every
one without exception) that work iniquity, and wilt destroy all them that
speak lies. mark attentively how our sovereign lord does hate, and will
destroy as all them that work wickedly, so all them that defend lies: which
all they do who uphold any falsehood in matter of faith against Gods truth.
finally this positio^ that every Christian may be saved in his own religion
is very pernicious and damnable, were it for nothing else, then for the manifold
mischievous sequeles thereof. for it cannot but breed in men a wretched
carlesnes of what religion they be of. which draws after it a number of sins,
and is the very root of Atheism. For if a man may be saved in any
religion, it makes no matter of what religion he be; whereof it will ensue,
that most men following the bad inclination of our corrupt nature, will prefer
before all other the worste and loosest religion that may be, because that has
most ease, liberty, and carnal pleasure in it. which wicked persuasion having
once seized the heart, farewell all painful endeavor to perform virtuous
actions: and welcome sloth, case, and fleshly liberty; which cannot but in
short space engender a lothsomnes and contempt of all religion, and paue a
fair broad high way unto Atheism. wherefore this opinion is utterly
misliked, even of many of the more discreet, and better minded Protestants. And
in very truth if we would but lift up our minds a little toward heaven, and
consider attentively either the infinite majesty of Almighty God, or his
inestimable bounty toward us; how can a Christian let any such sinful
thought sink into our heart, as though we need not greatly care how we serve
God, whether we believe in him fully yea or no? O very evil advised and base
minded creature, yea unworthy the name of any of Gods Creatures, that sets so
little by so sovereign a Lord and Creator! Have we not at his bountiful
hands received freely our souls and bodies, our health, wealth or whatsoever
else in this world we either have or be? And is there any hope without his
favor and grace to attain eternal bliss, and all that our heart can desire
in the kingdom of heaven? yet so unkind and ungrateful unto such a divine
benefactor be too too many, so dull and senseles in matter of their own
eternal either weal or woe; that they seem to stand at habberdupoise whether
they should serve God or no; or at most, they wilbee sure not to ouershoote
themselves in his service, but to hold back and afford him as little as
possible may be. Be not these animales homines earthly minded men degenerated
from the noble condition of reasonable creatures, and made like unto pecora
campi, cattle of the field? who persuade themselves that it does not belong to
men of their calling, to converse with spiritual persons, or to spend much
time in reading of spiritual books, and learning their duty to the
Almighty, but leaving those melancholy meditations to monks, do esteem men
of their quality rather borne and bred some to keep dogs, and to follow hawks
and hounds, others to grase beasts, and to ouerlooke their shepherds and
pastures. I speak not this to condemn the moderate exercise or pleasure that
such wordly men may lawfully take in their worldly business, and much less in
reprehension of good husbandry, but I desire to leave some impression in the
hearts of all Christians of tendering, and attending with all, the service of
God; and would gladly persuade all sorts of men, women and children, that
incomparably much more care, diligence, labor and study is to be bestowed in
procuring the salvation of their souls, then in all other affairs whatsoever.
And that they are wonderfully ouerseene, and exceedingly much to blame, that
make so small account to know their bounden duty unto the most glorious and
blessed Trinity. And because such men like not to be troubled with much musing
upon long lessons, I would counsel the^ and all others to read often over and
over this one text of holy scripture, and to give dilligent ear unto it being
indicted by the holy ghost for our perpetual profit.

Harkon O Israel, thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, Deuteronomy. 6.5
and with all thy strength; And these words which I co^mau^d thee this day
shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach the^ to thy children, and thou shall
talk of the^, when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. where is much more to
the same effect. If Almighty God required of every poor Israelite, a
complete knowledge of his law and commandments, and a most careful diligence
both to observe them himself, and to teach them also to his children and
family: will he require less of us Christians whom he has called to greater
perfection, and to whom he has also made greater promises? specially
considering that he gave us his only begotten son our blessed Lord and
savior to be our master and instructor, who refused no pains day nor night,
to walk up and down on foot in a rugged hilly country for thirty three
years, to teach us those heavenly mysteries and to make us partakers of his
inestimable graces. what shame then shall they be put to. what punishment do
they deserve, that will not vouch fafe to harken after those heavenly lessons,
nor yet so much as receive them willingly of his servants, when they be (as
it were) put into their mouths? are they not sure to be (with the slothful
and unprofitable servant) cast into utter darkness, where shall be continual
lame^tation, weeping, and gnashing of teeth? This by the way to awake those
drowsy sleepers, and to strike a due reverent fear into the hearts of such
negligent and careless creatures, that make so small reckening of learning their
duty unto Almighty God. Now I come to close up my former principal question,
with some of the ancient fathers and most learned doctors sentences, who with
full consent do teach that they shall not be saved, that do hold obstinately
any one error in matter of faith. Naie that every good Christian ought rather
to loose his life, then suffer one word or syllable of his faith to be blotted
out, perverted, or betrayed. I will begin with that of S. Athanasius in his
creed, Athanasius creed.
because it is sole^nely read in the church service as most sound and approved
doctrine: whosoever wilbee saved, it is necessary that he hold the catholic
faith. which unless he do observe wholly and inuiolably, without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly. Greg. Naz. de fide.
S. Gregory Nazianzen teaches, that nothing is more dangerous then those
heretics, who holding all the rest soundly, do in one word (as it were with
one drop of poison) infect that true and approved faith of our Lord, which the
Apostles delivered unto us. see how ane error in one word of faith, Apud
Theodoret. lib 4. bist. ecclesia ca. 17.
does poison all the rest. S. Basil his best beloved and holy companion was of
the same mind when he said; that they who be skillful in holy scriptures,
will not endure so much as one syllable of the divine decrees to be betrayed;
but rather in defense thereof, if need be, will not refuse any kind of death.
Ambros. de filij diuinitater. 1.
S. Ambrose consorts with them, forewarning all Christians to stand upon their
guard most vigilantly, and in no case to suffer such pestiferous, and venomous
errors to be poured into their souls, one drop whereof is sufficient to infect
and poison the pure doctrine of Christ. S. Hierom declares, Hieron. co. Ruffin
Apolog. ^ vltra med
that for one word or two, that were contrary to faith, many heretics have
been accursed, and cast out of the church: S. Augustine more particularly and
fully then any of the rest. August. de here.
He that believes any one heresy, that either has been or shall be devised,
cannot be a Catholic Christian. Again, They that in the church do savor of
any thing that is attainted and ill, if admonished to taste of that which is
sound and right, they do resist obstinatlie, they become heretics, Idem de
ciuit. l. 18 c. 51.
and going forth are to be reckened for enemies. thus much of the second
question.

Now I come to that third part which I promised to touch in a word or two,
before I finished this chapter. because it is not sufficient for a good
Christian to believe all that is to be believed, and to have a full resolute
purpose to keep all Gods commandments, unless he do also carry a willing mind
to make open profession of his faith, when time and place do require it, what
soever loss of goods, liberty or life, he is thereby like to incur. I do not
say, that every virtuous soul is bound to lay himself open at all times, and
to all sorts of men, (though he may not at any time deny any article of
faith, or make profession of any false religion) but when either the honor of
God, or the edification of our neighbor do exact the same at our hands, then
not to profess our faith openly, is both shameful before men, and in the
sight of God damnable. The fundamental reason hereof may be gathered out of
this; that as it has pleased the sovereign divine majesty to reveal many
high mysteries unto us seely mortal creatures, to our exceeding great comfort
and instruction; so it is his blessed will and pleasure, that the same be
divulged and proclaimed all the world over; that all sorts of men may (if they
look well to it) reap the manifold rich benefits that do ensue thereof. And
contrariwise that they who will not give care and credit thereunto, and make the
right use of such a precious and inestimable offer, tendered unto them from the
Almighty maker of heaven and earth their most loving Lord and master, may for
that their most sottish ingratitude be worthily for ever rejected and cast of.
whereupon it has pleased our divine savior to testify of himself, that one of
the principal causes for which he was made man, was to publish and declare
those heavenly verities unto mankind: Joan. 18.37.
for this (says he) was I borne, and for this came I into the world, that I
may give testimony to the truth: and for the same purpose, as he was sent
himself from his heavenly father, so did he send his Apostles and disciples
into all coasts of the earth, that they might annou^ce and preach the same
divine doctrine unto all nations. Math 24 14.
This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached to the whole world, in
testimonium omnibus gentibus: for a testimony to men of all countries. And as
it has pleased God to make choice of some certain persons, to be principal
preachers to the same his divine word; so his will and ordinance is, that none
of his servants shall be ashamed to make profession of any part thereof, when
it shall concern either the honor of God, or the good of his neighbor. The
first reason thereof may be collected out of that which went before, thus: if
our blessed Lord and redeemer Christ Jesus was borne to give testimony to the
truth, every good Christian (that is a lively member of his mystical body)
must needs take himself also to be borne anew to the same end and purpose, and
therefore when time and place do require it, they must either testify the truth
publicly, or show themselves bastards and cowards, much unworthy the name of
Christians. The chosen vessel of grace S. Paul speaks learnedly and nobly
when be says: cord creditur ad iustitiam; ore autem fit confessio ad salutem.
By har^ we believe to justification, but by mouth confession is made to
salvation. Like as there must be a pious and devout inclination of the soul,
to bow it to the obedience of faith, whereby, as by the prime means we attain
to Justification: even so to arrive happily unto the haven of salvation, we
must by word of mouth make open profession thereof. For if one should be
conuented before the magistrate and questioned about his faith, if he then do
not stand to the profession of it, he first, depriues Almighty God of that due
honor which we all do owe unto his divine Majesty; for we show our selves
to fear men, more then him: and do besides betray his truth, and make it
contemptible in the estimation of the beholders. For how should other men be
induced to value Gods testimonies at that high rate at which king David (who
was a most cunning spiritual Ieweller) set them when he said, They are to be
desired much above Gold and the rich precious stone, If they see them that are
accounted Gods servants and wisemen to set so light by them, that they are even
ashamed to make profession of them? Is it not a great dishonor to Gods cause to
see his followers when it comes to the trial, to turn the shoulder and
shrink away from it? The ungodly do assemble together to outcountenance the
truth of God, to revile and vilify his servants, to terrify all the beholders
from the embracing of his truth: And Gods unworthy and faint-harted soldiers
called thither to uphold his honor, and to testify the verity thereof to all
the assembly, be dumb and dare not speak one word in defense of it. Shall
not such men in upright judgment be convinced to have forsaken God when he
stood in most need of their service, and to have betrayed his cause by not
defending of it at all, when they were called forth to have ^^oken in defense
of it? yes verily. for their indictment is already drawn and registered by that
great cleark S. John the Evangelist under the name of certain principal
persons among the Jews in these words. Ioah. 12.42.
Of the Princes also many believed in Christ, but for the Pharisees they did not
conf^sse, that they might not be cast out of the Sinagogue, for they loved the
glory of men, more then the glory of God. Those Princes partly to keep their
credit with that state, and partly for fear^ of being cast out of the
Sinagogue, durst not confess Christ though they believed in him. Is not this
the very case of them that believe our faith and religion to be the true
Catholic faith and religion, yet to keep their credit in the world, or to
avoid those discommodities which by professing of the Catholic faith they
should incur, dare not come to that noble act of confessing it? they must
needs therefore yield themselves guilty of that which follows in the same
text; that they love the glory of men, more then the glory of God. They had
rather please and be well thought of by poor mortal creatures, for
condescending to do what they would have them to do, then to be highly
esteemed of their most dreadful lord and Creator, as his trusty and faithful
servants. They do over and besides wonderfully scandalize their poor brethren
that be of the same religion: whereof the weaker sort are by their ill example
shaken and induced to forsake their faith. And the stronger cannot but greatly
grieve to see Gods cause so wretchedly betray^d, and their infirm brethren
scandalized. To say nothing of the glory and triumph which they leave unto Gods
enemies as conquerors over his feeble servants, and the occasion they give
them to harden their hearts in their errors. wherefore as principally for the
honor of God and his holy cause, so also that we give no offense unto his
faithful servants, or occasion of joy to his adversaries, we must pluck up
our spirits, when we be called to answer in matters of religion: And not
regard either the shame of the world, or any temporal loss that thereby may
betide us, but lift our hearts to heaven, and consider how honorable it wilbee
in the sight of Angels, how grateful to God, and acceptable to our glorious
blessed Savior to acknowledge him before men, not to fear or be abashed to
give testimony to his truth in the presence of his enemies. which we shall the
sooner and more willingly perform, if we then call to mind these his most
comfortable words: Math. 10 22.
Every one therefore that shall confess^ me before men, I will confess him
before my father which is in heaven. Behold what esteem and great reckening
Christ makes of this out ward confession of his truth, though he shall get to
himself little or nothing thereby, yet we shall gain exceeding much, in that we
shall purchase his extraordinary favor against the day of our last reckening,
and be therefore most graciously welcomed of him, and by himself be presented
to his heavenly father, in the presence of that most glittering and noble
company of heaven, as very faithful and stout servants that stood valiantly
for the defense of his cause in the face of the enemy; we shall then hear
these most confortable and joyful words, Euge serve bone and fidelis. Math 25
21.
well fare thy heart good and faithful servant, because thou have been
faithful to me in time of trial and temptation, I will be as faithful to
keep promise with thee in this day of just retribution. Thou was put to shame
and confusion before men, thou shall now have honor and glory in the presence
of Angels: thou was content for my sake to leese the good countenance of thy
Prince: but thereby thou have purchased the favor of my father, king of heaven
and Earth: they, for thy noble confession have thrust thee out of thy lands and
livings, enter therefore into possession of the most Ample rich and glorious
kingdom of heaven, supra multa te constituam. I will place thee over many
things, and give the a recompense that shall a hundredth fold surmo^t thy
losses: for the short and light pains that thou did then suffer for me,
receive from this time forth for evermore, no less then the very self same joy
(though not in the same degree) of thy said Sovereign Lord and Master. Intra
in gaudium domini tui: Enter into the joy of thy Lord. which are so great, so
delitious, so precious and perpetual that neither eye has seen, nor care
heard, nor heart of man is able to conceive.

wh^t good Christian had not leifer to incurr the danger of an open confession
of his faith here on earth, then to forgo so high and inestimable a recompense
thereof here after; specially if he lay there unto the other part of our Saviors
sentence. Math. 10.33. Luc 9.20
He that shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my father which is
in heaven. Or as S. Luke relates. He that shall be ashamed of me or of my
words, him the son of man shall be ashamed of, when he shall come in his
majesty. Observe that it is all one to be ashamed of Christ's word, that is, of
his faith and religion, as to be ashamed of his own person: and that he who
shall not (for fear of the world) make open confession of them in time and
place, Christ at the last day when he comes to judge the quick and the dead,
will be ashamed of that person, that is, look heauely upon him, reject him, and
condemn him for ever and ever. This is so evident and plain out of Christ's
own mouth, that it requires not any confirmation or testimony of man. And if
need were I could show that it was in the primitive church holden for an
accursed heresy, and condemned in the name of the Helcesaites, to think it
lawful for them that in heart believe in Christ, to deny him with their
mouths, when they stand in danger of losing their goods therefore. See Eusebius
in the 31. chapter of the 6. book of his Ecclesiastical history.

To close up this chapter, every good Christian must take for most assured
that it is not sufficient to salvation to believe in Christ, and to hold the
fundamental points only of our Christian Religion; but rest persuaded that
the wilful refusal of believing any one Article of faith (declared by the
Catholic church to be such, and to us well notified) will be at the last day
evidence enough to cast any Christian: otherwise many of the old reproved
heretics were in the state of salvation, and very unjustly by the most holy
and learned Prelates of Gods church excommunicated and condemned, which once to
imagine cannot be but great impiety. And if any subject how great and noble
so ever he be, for one fact of treason or felony does justly deserve death by
the censure of all lawmakers; and a man making the law of Moises frustrate,
Hebr. 10.28.
without any mercy died, as the Apostle witnesses: how much more worthy is
he to die the death, that shall be convinced not to believe the fountain of all
truth Almighty God himself in some thing, not to give perfect credit to his
chosen messengers and infallible witnesses, and to disobey them whom he has
appointed to be our spiritual pastors and governors. And when our blessed
Savior (who loved the eternal salvation of our souls so dearly, that to
make a full purchase thereof for us, was content to give his most precious
blood) when he (I say) to who^ we are so exceedingly much beholding and bound,
has out of his incomprehensible wisdom provided the best and most assured
means that may be, to hold all Christians in unity of faith and religion, by
tying them to believe and obey his one holy Catholic church: those libertines
will not hold themselves to his assigned ordinance, but out of their own
presumption believe whom, and what they list, and so by little and little grow at
lenght to believe nothing at all. wherefore to avoid all these most dangerous
inconveniences; and to escape Gods just indignation, let us submit our
understanding wholly unto his divine revelations, and be most vigilant and
careful to learn out what his blessed will and pleasure is that we should
believe, and be as forward and ready to believe it without any resistance or
staggering. for the sovereign Lord of heaven and earth is a jealous God, and
will not part stakes with any, or be served to the halues.

His high and inviolable decree is, that we both love him with all our heart,
and also believe in him fully and wholly. yea over and besides when we be
called to it, he will have us not be abashed to confess his holy name, but to
stand valiantly to the public profession of his sacred faith and religion,
whatsoever it cost us. and then will he without all doubt in time most
convenient call us to the possession of his heavenly and everlasting kingdom,
to live for ever and ever in all joy, honor, and glory with his most holy
Angels and all blessed Saints. To which most h^ppy resting place Almighty God
of his infinite mercy, through the inestimable merits of our most glorious
Redeemer, bring us all in the end.

AMEN.
I desire thee (courteous reader) to bear with the faults in printing, which
be very many through the composers ignorance in our language: the grosser are
to be amended thus.
For, page read. woe, 10. who. Pselues 31. themsel: There est, 64. the rest. wr
69. warning. wr, ibid. writ. boo 70. book. desirer, 75. desire. wn, 76. own.
thee, 77. the. Gods ir 76. good sir. 851. 78. 85. donasti, 88. donatist. chook,
92. choking. construct, 118. consumat. de, 119. fide 51. 123. 1. hom: 1. ibid.
9. disco, 132. dioscorus. And 138. to be put out. mise 144. 155. ipse. cap 99.
158. 9. flock, 164. flock. Alhi, ibid. Alchimist. tossed and 172. to stand.
courto 171. court. lest 172. lost. ditous, 173. ditious. others 180, other.
dipro, ibid. dispr. boh, ibid. both these, ibid. the. Innocentin, 16. tius.
justly 189. justly. nous, ibid. house. or 214. of. ane any, 226. any one. no
250. yea. yea ibid. no. bith 241. both. popes the 273. the popes. both in, 284.
in both. in 287. l. 2. to be put out. ferneut, ibid. fervent. suto, 288. into.
biet his ibid. bie this word 300. world. seetes, 301. sects. have, 307. hanc.
qui 328. to be put out. qua ibid. quae do 336. does. do 342. do not. church a,
350. a church. wholly 367. whot. ofo 308. of. dat, 320. orat. cem 225. catum.
ibidem (in his successors) tobe put out.


