Frauncis Billerbeg^ from Constantinople, written to David Chyrtaens of
Germany, S. P. D.
WHen at this time I lived at Constantinople, and deliberated with my self, of
the argument of an Epistle to be sent to you (...) that I should show unto
your matter not unpleasant, if I should signify unto you, somewhat of the
Governors, which are under the Turks Empire: And of such things which are
done in Persia: and of other things which I saw here, or have received of
men of singular credit worthy of memory.

I thought it superfluous, to write unto you of the Ecclesiastical state
amongst these people, when as I do understand by your Oration. yt you have
better intelligence then I, which a Nobleman Communicated with me: For unto me
it was most acceptable, both for other causes and also forasmuch, as I
persuaded every thing to be true, which therein is contained.

It pleases me to begin with the Emperor himself, whose name is Amurathes
the third, the second son of Amurathes
Selimus, who is about thyrty years old. He began his Empire with the murder
of five young brethren, whom he strangled. He is off a low stature, a great
head, gross A (...) on (...) Tur(...)
(...) and leysie, and in a manner never moving them. (...) awes and cheeks
pulst up and swollen. A long nose (...)tched down to his mouth. A thin red
beard: pale ^^ted for the most part. The rest of his body leysie and feeble. He
has the faling sickness. It is certain that his spirits are f^^ble and
fearful, for he dares not go The great Turk has the faling sickness.
on hunting, wi^^ the which he is now and then delighted but very seldom: nor
to pass over Bosphorus to his Parkes, unless the Sea be very calm.

It is reported that he quaketh every inche of him, when he hears the sound
of Armor and Gunnes, whereupon The Turk fearful and a cowarde.
it falls out, that contrary to the custom of his elders, he commits his
wars to his Deputies. They say, that he is ruled by the commandment of his
mother and his wife: these being corrupted with gifts and rewards, procure
the Emperors favor to many. It is said, that he is contented with one wife,
which thing, they rather impute to his imbecillitie, then to his temperancie.
He has a son whose name is Mehemet, Mehemet.
the only inheritour of so many kingdoms: notwithstanding that he is scarce
fourteen years old, nevertheless it is said that he has children: which
thing I would not have credited, unless it were most manifest, that he was
begotten when that his father was scarce fourteen years of age.

Amurathes abstaineth from wine, notwithstanding, the Soldiers which served
his Father Selimus, were so The great Turk drinking no wine.
used to wine, that many of them cannot be compelled to abstain from wine,
contrary to the commandment of the Law maker. This is that Amurathes, and
such one he is, that is now worshipped and feared of the most part of the
Monarchs of the world, who most presumptuously gloryeth in his letters, that
he is the only governor of the world. Sians called Bassa, a man excelling
both in Sians.
courage of mind and comlines of body, is Amurathes Vicegerent, and elected
his chief Councellor, and named of the Turks, Vezi^ Asem. He may be called
Proto^ezirms or chief Counselor. Soliman, when he was young, gave him his
name S^ans, which signifies fair ^
and comely. He is now about 40. years of age, by nation an Hungarian, he
never fought battle, nor went a warfare, although he was ^ermed in Greek,
(...) There are besides this man S^ans, four others (...) ^.
Basle which are of his pri^ie Counsel, of the which, twain are now here
resident: Misach which signifi^^ ^
Messiah, and Meheme^ces, these are both by nation (...)ans, neither of them
b^the (for I did inquire) famous in Cheualry or warfare. The other two, new are
in the wars against the Pe^sians, Sinan and Osman, of the ^
which the one is of Epirus by nation, who is said to be of a seemly stature,
a leave body, a black fa^e, an Eagles nose or bill, of an angry stomach, and
not to be pacifyed.

He subverted Gulett, and took the kingdom of Tonis from the Spanyardes, and
commanded Peter Portacarrerius the President or Captain of Gulett to be beat
to death with Cudgells, near to the I Will Coregra, to the infamy and dishonor
of the Spanish nation. Before this time, he warred in Arabia prosperously. He
has not now so prosperous a wind against the Persians.

The other called Osman Basla, and he is of Bosnia: He ^
is now Resident at the broken places called Casp^^ por^^ with an Army: There
is great emulation between these twain for the obtaining of Glory.

After Vez^ri Basse, Beglerbegus of Grecia is had in Beglerbegus of Greece.
great honor, he is called Mehemetes, by nation an (...)rian, This man next
after the Emperor and his Vicesultanus, has the cheifest place, and there
upon has this proud name, (which signifies the Lord of Lords.) The rest
of Beglerbegi live in provinces appointed to them.

This as the chief of them, follows the Emperors Court, that if there be
any thing needful to be done, he executes it. He is expart in warfare. His
Court is more frequented then the other men's of war. Next unto him, the
Admiral of the Sea is of great authority: whose name is Och^alus, by nation a
Calabrian, he is Ochialus
called of the Turk Captain Bassa, retayning the Italicall word: these
Lieutenauntes of the Sea, are called by the Italians, Captains.

This man's condition is as it was before, both homely, base, and seru^le. This
man in a battle fought at Naupact, or at the Gulf of Corinth, led the left
wing of the Turks Navy, and then the Algeries were the prosulthaine. At the
beginning of the battle against Malta, he repressed the men of war, which
bouldly set upon him, in so much that the Maltamans were put to flight
Notwithstanding recovering their strength, they set upon him afresh: who,
when he saw his Army to give back and fly, he saved his life by conueying
himself away with 40. Galleys, when as Andreos Auria a Genua, Every Gallie had
six Ores.
pursued after him very slowly: Nevertheless in a short space he repaired his
Navy, and in y^ next year he repelled the violence of our Soldiers, and
stayed their enterprise at P^loponesus: and the third year after that
conflict, he and Sinan Bassa took Gulett.

Two years before this time he assailed with his Navy to Colchis and there
subdued the inhabitants about the River Phasis, there he builded a strong
Castle in the foresaid River. In all other points he wrought rather by
subtilty, then magnanimity. When he was about 33. Agalamiza^oram.
year of age, he was made Lieutenant of the Ianizarorans. He was more comely
then any of the rest, and of greater humanity and entertaynment, of a merry
and pleasant countenance, but altogether ignorant in marshall affairs,
because he was newly aduaunsed of a mere Courtier, unto that Lieutenantship.
As it is reported, he is about to marie the Emperors daughter, with whom he is
in singular favor.

This man's name is Abraham: to whom the whole authority of the Turks Empire is
in a manner committed, all christian men's children and such as are at under
age, are taken from their parents, except Ochialie, who was brought into the
power of the Turk: he was condemned to the Galleys: notwithstanding he denied
the Christian faith, and became a Revolt, and was infected with the
superstitions of Mahumet, and by that means he was aduansed to such honors.

The wars between the Turkish Emperor and the Persians.
NOw let us speak of the battle against the Persians and of such other
matters as I have here noted. In the beginning of the Battle, that I may
profoundely rippe up the matter, Mustapha was sent against the Persians, one of
the Tezi^^is Basses, a man very expart in marshall affairs. He first invaded
the Georgians of Iberia, who worshipped Christ after the manner of ye Greeks
Georgians.
because that they seemed to favor the Persians and he oppressed them in such
sort at unawares, that they took from them the best part of their Province and
Country, with a City, the name whereof is T^flis, and moreover laid a
yearly tribute upon them. Media. Hi^^^ell ^. (...). Mehemetes.
From thence he invaded Media, at the same time that Hismaell king of the
Persians dyed. His brother Mehemetes Hodebendi being a lover of peace and
tranquillity, and who knew the strength of the Oth^mans, was desirous to make
an end of that strife, rather by reason and discretion then by war: and
therefore sent his Ambassadors to Mustapha, to conclude a peace, and to take
truce: until that Ambassadors should be sent to Amurathes to to conclude a
peace. But Mustapha, a man of an unquiet spirit, and whom fortune favored,
utterly rejected the mention of any peace. Wherefore the Persians prepared
themselves to war, to revenge the new and old iniuryes, committed by
Othomannus: They met together at a City called Zerua, by the which
Othomannus. Media, called Zerua.
name Media is now called, they fought a cruel battle, many men killed on
both parties. Notwithstanding they departed, not knowing who had the victory,
saving that the Brother of ye king of Tartaria, which now reigns at the
Meer^ or Lake, called M^o^is. This Brother of y^ king of Tartares, brought with
him 30. thousand horsemen to aid the Turks, according to the covenant made
Maeotis is in the hye Tartaria, bordering upon Persia
between them. From thence forth they fought venturously, and doubtfully who
should ^^nquer, until that license was granted to the persians, to send
Ambassadors for peace. And that Mustapha was called home again, and an other
placed in his stead. The Persians Ambassadors, when they came hesher to the
Emperors Court to treat of peace, and that they could not agree, then the
Turks demanded to have all Media, but the Persians stood stoutly therein,
and in their own defense did what they were able to do, and so returned safe
home. Which thing was done the last year about the Month of August.

Now that they could conclude no peace, they returned to their Armor, and
prepared themselves to war, The Persians every where spoiled the Country,
and laid the ^inan Bassa
fields wast, they burnt Granges, Villages, and Towns they intercepted all
manner of victuals, in so much that the Turks were in great distress, Sinan
Bassa, who succeeded Mustapha, being their general.

The Turks were so plagued with hunger and pestilence, and specially by the
plague, that they were compelled to leave of their proceedinges, and divide
their Army. At this present Sinan Bassa, gathers his Army again, and is
before this City, which is called Ezeru^: Ezerum
This City stands upon Euphrates. Here he received aid about the
beginning of April. At the same season, Armor, Artillery, and money, were
brought by Pontus Euoxinus, to the City Trapezum, that they might be Trapezus.
It deuideth Europe from Asia.
sent unto the Army.

The other Army of the Turks are resident at the Broken ways, called Caspiae
portae, Osman Bassa being their Leiuetenante, the which unless he be defended
by the benefit of the place: and had received aid from the Tarters, he should
have been in great distress. The places between the Armies are so wasted and
spoiled, that neither of them for want of victual can help the other. It is
reported that the Persians, would gladly have peace: for hither to the spoil
has been in their provinces or Countries, for they in especial laid waste
their own Country and Territories: that thereby they might repel their
enemies. It appears also, that it repented the Turks of the beginning of that
war.

To omit other things Beglerbegus came at that time from the City Ezeru^
where he was Liuetenant, Beglerbeg
and had lost his head, because he was prouoker and promouter, of that
unfortunate war, unless that he had given to the wife and mother of the
Emperor, two thousand Ducats to speak for him: whose pardon they obtained of
this condition that he should bring into the Emperors Treasury every year
2000. Ducats, here upon it is manifest, that both Turks and Persians, were
desirous of peace: nevertheless neither of them would seem to give place to
the other.

Sinan Bassa is looked for here every day, whom they say shall have commission
from the Emperor to conclude peace with the Persians: Some say that he was
called back again, as he was in his journey toward Constantinople, because
that the Persians with whom he had made truce, had broken their promise: and
because that they made a great slaughter of the Tu^kes, besides the Sea called
Mare hyrcanum: who thought nothing less then that the Persians would have
transgressed the truce which they made with Sinan Bassa: ^ut I dare not asfirme
these of a truth, because it is as yet uncertain.

The cause why these two people, of one ^iuing, and of one superstition do
fight so cruelly, one with the other, is this, (for so they report.) The Turks
accuse the Persians, that they have neglected to send Ambassadors and rewards
to Amuratha, the lawful successor of Soliman nus and Selimus: according to
that covenant and composition which was made before time, between Soliman nus
the Emperor of the Turks, and Thamus the king of the Persians. Amurathes
interpreted, that intermission of sending rewards and Ambassadors, as a
contremp tious sign of enmity, when it was never neglected in the time of
Thamus: and for this cause he ^^^aded his enemies country: neither would the
Persian^ require peace, and therefore it came to hand strypes.

It is certainly believed, that if Mustapha whom I said before, was called from
the Army, had remained still in Mustapha
the Army, the Turks should not have come into that distress, in the which
they are now at this day, because he was most expart in marshal affairs, and
had the best knowledge of those Countries. He was therefore called home to
Constantinople, because he was accused that he did not admit the Ambassadors
of the Persians, sent to entreat for peace: and that he sold all the offices
in his Camp for money. Mustapha for his good service was discourteously
rewarded: wherefore he fearing the threatenings and displeasures of the Emperor,
drank p^ys^n Mustapha.
and so dispatched himself, being just four score years of age. This is
that Mustapha, who took Cipres from the Venitians in our days and killed
Bragatinus, the Governor of Famagusta, pulled the skin off his body, which
thing he did contrary to his promise. He also, what time as, Beglerbegus was in
Egypt, pacified the commotions and tumults, which were in Syria.

He subdued the Arabians which had rebelled. He overcame in Battle
Baiazetes, the son of Solymannus, who though his Father was living, made an
insurrection against his Brother Selymus, and thus he persecuted him, by the
commandment of the Emperor, on such sort, that the wretched caytife, lost
both his life and the kingdom. And thus much we have heard of Mustapha. Now I
will declare breefely what I have heard of other matters worthy of
remembrance.

The 12. of the Callendes of June, when the Admiral of the Sea departed hence:
whose name was Ochiali* he went into Africa, that he might stay and repress
the seditions which were in the kingdom of Tunes. The Moors, after they had
received their king, who was the lawful inheritour, by the means of the
inhabitants of Malta: and who had been hitherto detayned in Niapolis, and in
my time he rejected the superstition of Mahumet, and imbrased the religion of
Christ. The Moors (I say) for the most part, rebelled against the Turks.
After that he had pacified the sturres and vproares of the kingdom of Tunes,
it was in his commission that he should invade the kingdom of Fees, the which
thing if he bring to pass, as he is purposed, it seems that the Christian
kingdoms shall be environed on every side, with the Turkish Armies. This is a
matter more detestable, that the Princes of the christian common wealth, are
the causes of so much misery: whiles some of them be in such seenritie, and so
careless, that they lie as it were buried in pleasures and idleness: othersome
are occupied in Civil wars, unto their utter destruction and confusion,
neither do they consider what the common enemy is about, or what should be
done or prepared against him.

Of the peace concluded between King Phillip and the Turk.
ABout the Callends of May John Marilian of Mellan, after Truce between the
Spanyardes and the Turks.
he had obtained here of the Emperor, truce for three years, departed hence
to Venis, and from thence to go into Spain. He was here three years
entreating for peace, and now at the length obtained it, but on such sort,
that neither Christian nor Turk, thinks it to continue: for both of them
applied themselves to the time, rather then that either of them desired any
freendshippe of the other. For the Turks are occupied in the wars against
the Persians: and the Spanyardes in Civil wars.

Moreover, the conditions of the truce are such, that whethersoeuer of them
likes, may break of without impeachment.

It is to be lamented, that this most mighty king, is King Phillip
of force to resist the violence of the Turk, and will not which thing he will
not do, because he may more safely invade his own people: and so suffer the
great Turk to rage at his pleasure, and notwithstanding, entreated for peace,
and obtained an uncertain truce, doubtful and not to be trusted.

Both the public and private state of Christians, begins so to fainte, and
to decline, and as it were to were so sore sick, that it is a manifest sign
and argument, of some notable and sudden mutation and change.

Many Christians, every day seeing the prosperous success of the Turks, and
having their felicity and proceeding in admiration: and contrariwyse, perseuing
the miseryes of the Christians, begin to reuolts: and receive the irreligious
impiety of Mahumet, denying Mahumet
Christ's Religion.

Among whom there were of late, three Italian Friars or Munckes, of the which,
two of them being apprehended, Christians denying their faith
by the fraud and malicious devises of the Spanyardes, and Italians, dyed
myserably. The third, for as much as he was an expert, famous, and eloquent
Preacher, he gave himself over to the blasphemies of Mahumet, and became a
Turk. I omit these things, because I know that they are grievous unto you,
and lamentable, unto whom I wish both eternal and temporal felicity. Let
this be in stead of a conclusion.

Certain other news of the wars between the Turks and the Persians, dated
the 9. of July following, after the former Letters.
SInan Basse, (of whom we made mention before) returned Sinan Basse
out of the Camp, which was against the persians, to Constantinople, the 6.
day of August, as he was returning, there met him at Choalcedon A City in
Asia against Constantinople.
four Galleys, with principal Captains, called Baslaes.

The next day after his return, he declared the conclusion of peace, between
the Turks and the Persians, and truce for one year, with the singular
contentment of the Emperor. The same Sinan Basse, brought with him to
Constantinople, ten of the chief of the Georgians, as pledges, least that
they should inline at any time to the Persians, and always hereafter be
subjects to ye Turks. The Ambassador of the former king of Fees, was ready
every day to depart, and very well content, that the Turk was about to call
home again Ochialus, who was sent to aid the new king: after that he
understood the new King of Fees, to have yielded up to the King of Spain, the
Haven called Larcaca, over against the City Arzilla, the which Haven is now
kept, and defended with a garrison of 600. Soldiers.

There were Letters sent to Venis from Constantinople, the 19. of August, and
delivered the 15 of September, that there was truce taken between the Persians
and the Turks.

There were Letters written from Constantinople, the 13. of November, that
there was a most noble and notable Embassage of the king of Persia, in the way
to Constantinople, and almost there: which signifies unto the Turk, that if
he would restore the City Zerua, and all Media, according to the composition
made with Sinan Bassa, that then they would return, otherwise they would
proceed.

They looked daily for the return of Ochialus from Fees

The 9. day of March is appointed for the circumcision of the Turks son.

It is concluded at Constantinople, with the Ambassadors of the king of
Transyluania, that he should add to the old tribute or pension, four
thousand Ducketes more.

Of the Tarters, bordering upon the Emperor of Muscouia.
THe Region where the Crames dwell, enuironeth on the Southside, the kingdom
of Mosche. The King of these Muscouia.
Tarters, is the vassaile of the Tarters tributaries to the Turk
Turkish Emperor, and paieth Tribute to him.

He when he prepares himself to war, cannot make of fighting Soldiers
meet for those affairs above 40000. in his Army.

There lies a wilderness very large of the Circassians, between the lymmettes
and borders, of this king of Tartaria, and of the Empire of Muscouia, Savage,
and untilled, void of men, without buildings or woods, there appears
nothing in it, save only the earth, grass, and the beauty of the Heavens.
Tanaiis it deuideth Asia, from Europe, and runs through this wild
wilderness. Tarters Casanenses


From these superior Tarters (...) Crea^^es, until the borders of Moscouia, an
hu(...) forty and ten German miles, where you m(...)le over Tanaiis, and
Occam, and many other le(...) Ryuers.

On the Eastside, border the Tarters, Casanenses, called Astracan, whom the
Emperor of Moscho, partly by violence, partly by fame means, have subdued,
and made them subject to (...). Duke of Muscouia false of his promise. Russians
and Tarters subdued.


They did inhabit(...)yr Country or Province quietlye certain years
(...)nioying the Preuilegies of the great Duke, who is yet a live: until that
the great Duke, broake his promise, as he was wont to do, and conueying them
other where, by little and little set Deputies over them. Notwithstanding in
the former tyranny, the Russians, with the Tarters, were rooted up, in so
much, that in 50. or 60. Miles, there are neither men, nor any buildings or
houses.

Beyond Casan, which stands on the otherside of Vnolgot, about 500. Miles
from Moscha dwell the Tarters, called Nagii, of whom Tamerlen had his beginning
as the Turks report.

Tamerlen a Scythian, invaded Asia, and killed 200000 Turks, in the year of
Christ 1345.

These were once most mighty, but were destroyed with the like tyranny that the
Ruscians were.

The cause of their utter destruction, rose with this occasion. For as much as
they had no certain Rulers: whom they ought to have obeyed, they have no
standing mansions or houses, neither any use of money, of Corn, or Salt.

They have Sheep and Herds, Camells and Horses. The Nobility and Gentlemen
of that Country, use their Mothers natural tongue, they are called in Russia
Boyaren, with us Noblemen.

They waver abroad hither and thither, with their Cattle, without any certain
mansio^ places, neither can they remain above three days in a place, for
lack of pasture.

Their habitation and magnificencie, consists in their Chariots, which have
diverse Celles, or diverse places or Chambers: one for their Wives, another for
their Husbands, and the third for their household stuff, and to certain
lousy skins or rags.

In the arse of they Carts, hang two great Lether Bottels, wherein they put
Camels milk, Mares milk Cowes Milk, and Ewes Mylk, hand-ouer-head
altogether, this they swallow up greedily until they be drunk.

They kill very seldom any Camells, Horses, Oren or Sheep, unless that they
be diseased, they boil and seeithe the flesh of such Cattle, as be sick,
or as dye without kylling: and they devour it without either Bread or salt.

The Nobelest men of them, eat up the pottage: as for their Servant, they
gather the Urine of Camelles and Horses, and of other Cattle, which they
account as very dainty. If they lack this, they must be contented with
Fennish and Moorish water. Whosoever is the Mursi.
strongest and mightiest among ye Mursians, he kills the weaker scotfree
without any punishment, and takes away all that he has, and for this act he
is highly commended.

They have neither maiestrates, laws nor judgments. In the year of Christ
1563. there was a Mursian, with one eye, whose name was Ismaell, a notable
Nigromancer.

They are meruailously delighted with that art, the cunninger that a man is in
that Art, the more is his estimation. The said Mursa brought to pass with
inchauntments, that he killed all the rest of the Mursians, with tempests and
Thunderboltes, whom he could not otherwise overcome.

When he had killed certain thousands by this means, he supposed, that the
rest which was left alive, durst not rebel: which thing befell to him
prosperously. Nevertheless, after his death, by the same means that he
entreated others, by the self same his children were destroyed.

These be those Tarters, which being driven by penury, These Tarters serve the
Emperor of Muscouia.
and want of ^ictualles, do serve the great Duke of Moscouia, with fifteen
thousand men, and no more invaded of late Lauonia.

Notwithstanding, they being offended with the Emperor of Moscho, have
coupled themselves with the Creames, called also Tarters, who in the expedition
or The City Moscho burnt 1571
setting forth, and voyage of the Tarters, in the year of our Lord 1571.
aided the Creames: at what time, the City of Moscho was set on fire and burnt.

The true description of the magnificall Tryumphes and Pastimes, represented at
Constantinople, at the solemnizing of the Circumcision of the Sultan Mauhmet,
the son of Amurath, the third of that name, in the year of our Lord God
1582. in the Months of of May and June. T. H.
IN the year of our Lord and Savior. 1582. the Sultan Amurathe, Emperor of
Turkey, seeing his affairs to be in evil order, perceiving also the
contrariety of affections in his Subjects, did now determine with himself to
win the good will, and to be better beloved, and more esteemed of his then
before, and also to be more redoubted, and had in greater estimation amongst
Strangers, and foreine Nations and Countries then ever, thought it necessary
and very requisite, to make a great solemnity in the Circumcising of Sultan
Mahumet his Son: and for the better performing of his purposed determination,
did summon together the greatest part of all Christian Princes, to the end
that this Feast might be solemnized, as it were before the eyes of the whole
world: And in deed, the Ambassadors of many Christian Princes, and Mahumets,
were sent unto Constantinople, that is to say, the Ambassador of the Emperor
of France, of Polognie, of Venice, of Persia, of Fees, and of Tartaria, of
Transiluania, and of Moldauia, with many other Princes. Now because this
pompeous Triumph (the news whereof has run through diverse places) ought to
be solemnized, and shown before so many people, of so many and sundry
Nations, with what apparel, with what expenses, and how magnifically do you
think was it begun and ended.

Now to declare unto you, the place wherein sundry sorts of Plays and
Pastimes were shown, it was marvelous great and large, wherein was erected
great Theaters and Scaffolds of woodde, distinguished and separated into diverse
parts, as if they were Chambers appointed for every Ambassador, places as well
to banquet in, as also for every Ambassador, places as well to banquet in, as
also for to behold the Plays and Pastimes. Amurathe, was in the most fair
and ritchest place of all the rest, from whence he might through lattisses, or
grates, see every one, without being seen of any one. Behind him was his
Mother, his Wife, and his Sister: and on the one side of him was Sinan Bassa,
his Lieuetenant general, then the rest of his Earls and noble men, on the
other side was the Ambassadors of the aforesaid Kings and Princes. In the
midst of all these Theaters there was a fair Tyltyard, all open and
discouerd, eighteen hundred paces long, and twelve hundred paces broad, very
finely paued: and in the same there was two most excellent and ancient
Pyramidesses, the one of marble four square, very cunningly made, and the
foot of it to uphold this Pyramides, there was four great and mighty
Pillars, four square, and round at the top, the inscription whereof does
show, that the Emperor Theodosia, did cause the same to be erected in that
place: the other was of stone cunningly erected, without any kind of simonde
or mortar, and this was made by the Emperor Constantine, and near unto these
Pyramides, there were certain pieces of woodde, set up very high, so that
they did appear much more higher then the Pyramides, these pieces of wood had
betwixt them, reaching from the one to the other, engines made of cor^e,
composed in manner of a Tabernacle, to the which was tied an infinite number of
Lamps, very splendisaunt, most dexteriouslie handled, which cast a great
light throughout all the place. There was also a wheel, much like unto Myll
wheel, the which turned continually of it self. There were also five Images,
in form and fashion like unto great pyllers, very high made, all of wax,
and painted with diverse colors, very splendisaunt, and shyning brightlie,
because of the gold wherewithal they were garnished: to be short, all things
were very methodically and sumptuously set forth.

Now the day of Circumcizion approaching, which was the eighteen of May, in
the year aforesaid, Amurathe and his Son, accompanied with Dukes and
Earls, and many other Officers, together with many thousands of people
martched forth, with great triumph out of his Castle, dyrectlie unto the place
appointed, for these Plays and pastimes: and as they descended from horseback,
there was shown unto them in the base Court of the Castle, three hundred
strange Beasts, made all of Sugar, very diuerselie disposed and ingeniously
invented. That done, the Son of Amurathe followed with great and more brauer
troop of men then before, went toward his Mother: for it is the custom of
the Turks, in the Cyrcumcizing of the Son of their Sultan or Seigniour, that
this Son before his Cyrcumcizion, must go and give the Dirnear adieu, and
last farewell unto his Mother, whom he sees no more: after that, he being now
arrived at his Mothers Palace, leaving all his train apart, he went unto her
reverently doing his duty, remained with her alone the space of two hours:
after long conference, he humbly took his leave and departed from her,
dyrectly unto the place of pastimes, the manner whereof, I will declare unto
you, as hereafter follows.

THe cheifest place of the base Court of Amurathe, was finely paued, and
garnished round about with Tapist^ie, and Tyssue, and sparckled with Gold and
Silver: In the middle thereof, went the five Pillars and Images above
mentioned, laid, and laden within the Chariots. Now as Amurathe passed round
about this base Court, with an Army of men, behold the Chariottes, began of
themselves to run round about, both backward and foreward, in such sort,
that for the time, of the great cry, and shoot of all the people with joy,
of clapping of hands, with leaping, dancing, and with Tabours, and Trumpettes
sounding, it raised such a number, that all the whole City did sound
thereof: every man now might well know, what heaps, and companies of all
sorts of Nations, there were then in Constantinople: but amongst so great a
multitude, there were found fifteen Turkishe soldiers, whereof some of them
bare Spears and Iauelins, other some Knives, which they had made fast under
their sides, and in their hands: othersome had Helmets or Headpeeces, so hard
set upon their heads, that the blood ran down upon their foreheads, and
they all bleeding, with such sores, wounds, and hurtes, to show that they were
ready pressed, to spend, and shed their blood, even to the last drop, for the
maintenance of their Princes life.

His Son being now so recomforted (as it were) in his heart, with the great
rejoicing and loyalty showed him of all the people, he caused to be cast out,
whole great handfulles of money, and he himself cast it out, in great
abundance: and afterward, with all haste and speed, he came to find out his
Father: but as for his Mother, she caused the very same day a Feast to be made
ready, at the commandment of her Husband, unto the which there were bydden
all the women, and the daughters of the Lords, Seigniors, and Gentlemen of the
Court: it were, and would be too tedious to set down, and describe the
preparation, and great royalty which was privily made at that Feast, where
there was not one man among them all: yea, and one may presume, that it was
very sumptuous and costly, when day by day they carried a thousand dishes
of dainty meats, and as many fine sugared Marchpanes into the Hal, where all
these women were. Furthermore, Amurathe himself, sent them a gift, and
present of five hundred Pillors of Sugar, very artificially wrought: and this
solemn banquet lasted, and continued seven whole days together: and at the
end thereof, the Mother, the Wife, and the Sister of Amurathe, together with
all the women of their company, went to see the sportes and plays.

I will now in order show you the Feast of Amurathe, the place, the guests, and
the time, how long it lasted: but you must understand, this was not made in one
only place, nor that the guests did banquet together in company one with
another, as Christian people use, and accusteme to do: for, as for Amurathe
himself, he dined alone in his brave banqueting house, as in a Cage,
accompanied only with his Eunuchs, and such as were instruments, and
ministers to his ordinary pleasures: the company of women had their banquet
apart from him, as is aforesaid: The Lords and Seigniors of the City, were
separated in their brave banqueting house, and the Kings, and Princes,
Ambassadors in them. Moreover, Amurathe mynding to blow abroad his
lyberalitie, did feast all their Officers within the Tents, and Tabernacles
dressed, and made ready in the Iousting park, and after this manner he used,
and entreated them. viz. The first day the chcheefe Gentlemen were invited, and
bidden: the next day following, were bidden their Officers: then after them the
trauailers, or the adventurers in the war: and the Lords of the Court always
kept company with the Gentlemen: If you now ask me, what, and how many sorts
of meats there were then served at this Feast: there was no other thing at
all, but Hens, and Mutton, with some porredge, and boiled broth, and such
like things set upon the table: but there you should not see, Venison,
Wildfowle, nor any kind of Fish, whatsoever, nor no dainty nor licquorishe
meat, all simply, and homely dressed, if a man should compare them with ours
here, and yet nevertheless, all the guestes were well content with their
fare, but they were evil served with their drink, for they were served with no
other, but water and sugar: They be such people, as openly before any body,
they abstain altogether from drinking of wine: but among themselves privily,
all the wine in the world will not satisfy, nor suffice them, such gluttons,
and licquorish people they are: and thus do they feast themselves twice every
day. And toward the evening, they bring forth before the people (so desirous
to see the Triumphs, and magnificensies, which pass day by day, to behold)
into the same Park aforesaid, and being set down together there upon rushes,
they bring forth (I say) green cheese, bread, broth, and mutton, in a
thousand platters, and dishes every day: and as soon as the meat is brought,
the Tabers, and Trumpets sound out, at the first sound whereof, the people comes
running to this kytchin, fighting and scambling for their supper, and for their
meat, as earnestly as if it were to run to make an assault: so that one
snatcheth on one side, and another on the other side, and that as one has
caught and gotten, another is ready to pluck and tear again from him: and to
be short, you should see them run so on heaps after (...) victuals, as if they
were dogs half starued to death: yea, and a man might well call this a feast
for dogs, for there was nothing at all brought them to drink. The meats being
taken away, Amurathe cast down from his Scaffolds, of gold and silver by
handfuls, with Goblets of gold and silver, very cunningly wrought and made with
pieces of gold, and diverse sorts of money: behold now what a solemn feast
this was.

Now follows it, to speak of the plays, sports, and pastimes, the which I
will declare unto you in three articles, how they were represented, and showed
at three sundry times. The one sort thereof were called forenoone sports:
another were called afternoon sports: and then the last of all midnight
sportes. The inhabitants, and Artificers of Constantinople, those forenoone
sportes with all their royal and brave attire. The soldiers and men of war,
the laborers, the minstrels, the leapers, and dauncers, the inglers, and such
like, did employ, and busy themselves about the afternoon sports. The
midnight sports were passed away with burning of Fortresses, Holds, Horses,
Elephantes, and other creatures made by art. But let us now consider the
forenoone sportes, the beginning whereof, were marvelous and pleasant: for
presently after the dinner which they had given to Amurathe, and to all his
guests, soon after the Sun was up, behold a great troop and company, of more
then a thousand of the chief and principal Merchants of Constantinople,
walking in brave apparel, with Ensigns and Tabors: the Turks martched first
along, and then the Christians: the Jews were more sumptuously apparelled then
all the rest, made their back ward: And before all this goodly company, went
all the honorable, grave Syres, clothed according to the dignity, and
worthiness of their ages, bearing with them, rich presents, and gifts of
gold, and silver: then followed them, men of lusty age, carrying also in
their hands, other such like presents, and they marched on all armed. After
them came all the young youths decked, and trimmed up in wenches apparel,
with gowns, iewelles, and bracelets, and all other precious ornaments, and
tyrings, the quiver upon their shoulder, the bow in the left hand, and a
crooked Foarde in the right: These were followed of a company of pretty fair
little children, bearing of small reeds, or Canes like unto Darts, and
branches of Palm trees, of Nosegayes, or Po^manders, of Saffron in golden
cloaues, all in high Hattes of the Turks fashion, clothed in cloth of gold,
with garments of embroderie: and long large gowns, as rich, and fair as
possible might be. After all those, there came thyrtie men, drawing upon a
Chariot of eight wheels, a shop of eight cubits long, and six broad, beset
all within, with stars of gold full of Tapistry, and precious costly
clothes: all this company having made three towers by the before said Park, at
the length arested, and stayed in good order, even in the midst thereof, over
against Amurathe: and then you would have said, that the riches, not only of
Constantinople, but also of all the whole world, had been brought into that
Park, for there should you have seen such precious stones, such pearl, such
gold, such purple, and such things of value, that one would pryse, and praise
them far above both gold and pearl.

Now as all this great company of Merchauntes were there resting themselves:
one old man began, and so all the rest followed with one common voice, to cry
as loud as they could: God grant the Emperor life, with all prosperity and
felicity. And after this salutation, some of the old aged sort, did guide and
conduct the Chariot, wherein the shop was, and brought their gifts and
presents, unto the house of Amurathe, which on his own behalf, had also
bestowed gifts, and presents upon them: but because I saw but a little, it
may be thought that the one gave not again, so much unto a great many, as the
great many did: and now it is come into my remembrance, what the Poet says:
That such is the myserie of this life, that those as have but little, must yet
bear and carry that themselves, unto the huge high heap of riches. Even so,
Amurathe making a show to be lyberall toward the people, paid with a few
small trifling gifts, the great riches, which were offered him at this
solemn Feast: Mark now I pray you, how one thing follows after another: for
he then having both taken and given, the Merchaunts returned with them, as if
they had been parted, and gone away quite.

The next day after, Sinan Bassa gave the pastime of two blockhouses, in the
one whereof was a band of Christians, and in the other a band of Turks: these
Castles or blockhouses, were covered all over with thick paper, and
strengthened about with towers: he took with him three score horsemen, which
put themselves in two bands, and fought for those Castles, but the victory
still went on the Turks side: It was a lean, and childishe ^astime, in the
presence of so notable a Seignior, to see thee Lieuetenaunt general of all
Turkey, make sportes and pastimes of children, with his principal and chief
Captains: all the beholders thereof stood a watching, to see some great
royalty come from that Bassa, but they were deceived of their expectation
herein. Well, let us leave off, and pretermitte this a thing so much to be
laughed at, and let us consider of other things and sightes, then, and there
seen: and first of those of the Admiral, who brought into the Park, or
Tiltyarde, a Fortress made of boordes, and planted within an Island of paper,
encompassed with six Galleies and Foystes, the which was called Cypress. He
begins straight way to beat down this Fortress with the Cannon shot,
which were within the Galleies: then he caused to give it an assault, and so
carried it away: this lo, was the true show and representation of the taking
of Cypres: and in this assault you should have heard the Turks bellowe and
cry, so high, and hideouslie, that every one was astonished, and at his wits
end.

Then after that, all the handy crafts men, and Artificers of Constantinople,
being prepared for the nance, and stryuing who among them all should offer and
give unto the Turk, the best and ritchest present and gift, came to make a
show in the Park, without keeping any order at all, but all in one day, and
as it best lyked every one of them.

The first band and company, was the Mahumemeticall Priests, bearing Books
in their hands, but chiefly and above all, the Law of Mahomette, written in
fair great Letters: their Musti, (which is in Turkey, as the Pope is in all
Europe,) was set in a high Chair, and carried upon a Camel: at every
step, he turned, and looked over the leaves of his Book, fayning as though
he had searched, and sought for some great secret matter: then having given
his blessing unto Amurathe, he was led into the Princely house, to offer
up his presents? which done, he returned again with his Priests and
Preachers. You should have then seen (which I cannot tell you but with great
grief, and weeping eyes) that great Patriarch of Constantinople, followed of
his Clergy, having the Patriarchall Robe (which is in manner of a Ceape)
trayning upon the ground, and all of black, the which he offered unto the
enemy of the Christians, with a great sum of Gold, within a vessel of
Silver: and then of all his, and of his sort, he was saluted with a loud
voice: To say the truth, it was a sight most lamentable, at the beholding
whereof, a man might well allege the ancient cry, and complain of Hellas,
Alas: At the which extremity, the discord thereof, has raunged over, and
destroyed a number of meste miserable Citizens: he which hitherto, and
heretofore has looked to have all at command, and himself to be subject,
nor underling unto none, behold, into what poverty, beastly thraldom, and
myserie he is now fallen and come.

After him, did martche along the Patriarche of Armenia, doing even as the
other did. Then came the Artificers, bringing their Shoppes upon Chariottes,
and working of their Occupations, even in the presence of Amurathe, the which
he marked as dillygentlie, as if he meant to have learned some thing of them.

I do here set thee down (gentle Reader) the particulers, although it has
been a thing very grievous unto mine eyes to behold and see, and to my hand
to write, being meruaylous weary, with those so long pastimes: yet if thou
have time and leisure, to read, and peruse the same, they will be unto thee,
but as plays, sportes, and recreations.

First of all, then came the Goldsmythes, carrying diverse pieces of
workemanshippe of Gold, and of Silver gylded, very ritchlie, and artificially
wrought, as Cups, Goblettes, Platters, Knives, Penkniues, and such like other
thing: they were in number about an hundredth, both old, myddle age, young
men, and children, all most sumptuously apparrelled. After them was drawn
upon a Chariotte with six wheels, their shop, glystering, and shyning round
about on all sides, by reason of the vessels of Gold and Silver that were
therein.

After them you should have seen a great number of Orapers, Taylers, Smithes,
Masons, Carpenters, then of meat dressers, which dressed and made ready, diverse
sorts of meats, and gave them away freely to all the people, which accomponied
them: the Butchers martched also in order with their shambles, and butcherie
well furnished with flesh, and with trypes: then came the Cooks with their
kitchen, and cookerie: and after them the Fishmongers, with diverse good made
ready dishes of fish: then the Victuallers, bearing diverse kinds of meats,
and of wines made of water, and of cherries in great vessels, whereof they
gave to as many as would drink: after them came the Bakers, the Potters, and
the Ioyners, which presented and offered unto Amurathe, a gylded table, and
besette with diverse sorts of very brave, and fine stones: then the Grocers,
and Appoticaries, bearing with them saffron, incense, synomond, India spyces,
and other such like spyces: then the Glassemakers, which made their vessels
of glass, in the sight, and presence of all men: then the Embroyderers, going
in gowns, and cloakes of cloth of gold: then Dyers of all sorts of clothes
of all sorts, and colors: the Velvet men, the Taffyta men, the Parchment
lace makers, the Cutlers, the Kniuemakers, the Sadlers, the Spurriers, the
Fullers, the Tanners, the Curriers, the Chaundlers, all these having their
place according to their degrees, and every thing in particular. Yet must I
not here forgette the noblest sort of all Artificers, which are the
Laborers, who with the plough, and twelve great Dren, labored the earth in
that Park, to the great benefit, and good of all those, which were
assystaunt, and by at this pastime.

Neither must I with silence pretermit, and pass over, the Fishermen with
their nets, and all otheyr fishing tools and instruments, being in a little
small Cockeboate, from which they fished, the little small fishes: After all
these came the Barbars, which dressed and cut off the beardes and heaires, one
of another: the^ (...) Feather makers, the Fealt makers after the (...)she
fashion, Hatte makers, Bonnet, or shadow makers, Candlestick makers, Weauers,
Brasiers, P(...) and Founders without number: After those ca^e^ (...)
Merchaunts of cloth of Silk, of Fustians, of Bu^^ssins, of Wosstedes, and
half w^st^d^s, and of B^r(...) etc. Followed of Couerlette makers, and
Lapi(...) men: after them came a great company of Garden(...), with all sorts
of fruits, flowers, and herbs, carrying about them for a show, the Images
of him, whom the old ancient Paganes, called the God of the Gardens, decked,
and trimmed up with leaves, Nosegayes, and Garlandes of flowers: they had
behind them, the Sheepheardes, Ox keepers, Horse keepers, Mule keepers,
Carters, Wheelebarrowe men, and Carriers with their Horses, Mules, and Asses,
which were decked up to make a laughing sport of to the world. And because that
they presented, and brought nothing with them, but woodde, water, and stones,
they were straight ways driven out of the Park, and so they went their way
with shame, and reproach. By this tale, you should have marked the avarice, and
covetousness of Amurathe, which commanded that they should very honorably
entertain, and make much of them, as brought him any fair and rich gift: yet
contrarily, he neither would see nor hear: but he drove them far from him,
which brought him gifts according to their abillitie and power, and not to his
lyking.

I must now set down for the afterward, and last company, the Singers, Players
of Instruments, Scholars, Monks, Iuglers, Tumblers, and Plaiers: people which
among the Turks, are as like them in fashions of living, in apparel, and in
styring from place to place, as one drop of milk is like unto another, neither
better nor worsser: the heart of the singers and Musicians, had great good
agreement and concord, with the army of seditious soldiers: there you might
have seen Arabians, Mores, Persians, Grecians, and Spaniardes, sounding of
their Cornets, Trumpets, Tabors, Cyterons, and other Instruments within the
Park, or Tiltyard, where they made such a confused noise and sound, without
tune, change of note, or keeping of tune and space, that all the whole Town
sounded and rong with the route of their voices, and soundes. Last of all,
marched on the Scholars, which of a truth you would not have judged to have
been such: but rather you would have taken them for, Pilgrims, and begging
Friars: for a man could not have presumed any otherwise of them, seeing them
wrapped in such couerings, with white hattes tied about the myddle with
stringes: bare footed, with foul dyrtie hands, and a most filthy and yrksome
countenance to behold: they presented unto Amurathe certain books, and
painted papers of their own invention. The Monks followed after them, with a
company of poor Pilgrims, which go in pilgrimage to Mecque, as they call it,
which is the Sepulcher of Mahomet, they are counted very holy men in Turkey:
clothed like Scholars, which do nothing but labor and trotte up and down
with their bodies, making themselves lean, as in the end, they loose all
their wit and understanding: and because they rested, nor stayed not in any
one place, at any time, but always were skipping, and dancing about: a man
might very well compare them unto Curetes, and Corybantes, the ancient
Priests of Cybele, the graund mother of the two Paganes: unto them it was among
all other, that Amurathe caused many small presents to be made. They were
presently followed of Players, more in number then flies, or gnattes, one sort
masking wise, other some having Myters, like Popes, and crowned: balde, and
half shaven, their visages of all most strange: with Goats beardes, their
mouths wide open, as if they would have swallowed up as many as looked upon
them: some of them having their garments all to broken, and as it were fleade
over their ears: other some half naked, and half covered, and other some
altogether naked, and shameless without measure.

Now these proper youths, and naughty packes, being once come into the Park,
they began to cry out, to snort, and to lay on load upon the pales, and
upon the kettelles, pottes, and pannes, platters, and basins, stryking upon
little belles, chyldrens rattles, and cymballes, with a most strange and
confused noise, entermixte with daunces, and their most horrible and dissolute
behauiours, for they made mockes and mowes, and gyrned at as many as laughed at
their follies, and they never ceased to turn and tumble upon both hand and
foot. There was amongste them one Spaniarde, who being separated a little a
sunder from the rest, began to leap and dance, both his compass and
measure, with such a right remoouing of his feet, and as orderly wauing, and
shaking of his hands, and with so brave a turning round of all his whole
body, together, so fine, and artificially, that he did most properly
show, and set forth in a manner, all the brave iestures, and moouinges of the
body (prescribed, and foretold of by Plato:) both backewarde and forewardes,
to the right hand, and to the left: high, low, and round: whereof; and
whereby, all the beholders conceived a wonderful great delyght, and pleasure.

Moreover, these aforenamed players had among themselves, as it were a chief
Captain, which was an old man, the most villain, and arrantest knave of all
the whole company: and he forsoothe was set upon an Ass, the which three young
merchaunt men upon croutches, and gyrded about with a lynnen cloth, and half
naked, went before, holding him up upon staves. This sight above all the rest,
terrified me very sore, and then for the time, my speech was quite taken from
me, and my tongue was, as if it had been fast tied to the roof of my mouth.
Now some of that company made pastime all day long; with Apes, Catles, and
Dogs, with young Goats, and little Mules, with Hearts, and small byrds:
upon which their sportes and pastimes, Amurathe him self, being given
altogether to vanities, was more attentive, then unto any other, yea, then all
the rest: for there was nothing with them, but gamboldes, friskes, and daunces,
morisques, singing, cryinges out, and such like vain exercises: some of them
in this their sporting and playing, were bytten of Serpents, and venomous
beasts, and presently then again they were healed, and made whole of the same
biting: and then lo, they made many most shameful countenaunces and faces,
most unworthy to be set down in writing.

Hitherto, I have spoken altogether of the forenoone (...)tes: let us therefore
now consider of the afternoon, which were no less sauced, spiced, and
peppered, with pomp and pride, then the other, although there was not in them
in all points, so great store of riches, and magnificencie, as in the first.
Was it think you a lean, or thin sport, to see so many Soldiers fighting,
as in battle raye: and so many Footmen assayling; and forbidding the Turk
as it were from his Castles, and Holds, with wrestling men a number, and
dauncers, martching altogether, and with a number of others, making proof of
all their prowess, and manhood? There was not one man to be found, which
took not great pleasure and delyght, to show all his valiancie, as well for
him self, as for all those as beheld and looked on.

But I will first begin with the Combat of the wrastlers, an exercise very
much set by among the Ancients, and such a one, as did very much delight as
many as beheld the same: For the Herald had no sooner ended his proclamation,
and cry, but straight ways came forth in to the same place, xv. couple of
wrastlers, all naked and oyled after the old fashion, to catch hold the one
by the other, every one by his companion: one amongst the rest, pricked and
praunced on, and set out himself in the midst of the place, showing his
broad shoulders, shaking his arms, and as Dares did, whereof Virgil makes
mention, challenge and provoking the rest to wrestle: and suddenly a young
man came in before him, which was to sight, no less strong, nor stout then
the other, and he began lust lie to cast up his legs, and his fistes
into the air, then having made a prayer with a loud vayce, and marching a
little up and down, to make himself somewhat nimble and plyant, he lays me
fast hold upon him, as had so defied him, by and by they came unto handy
gripes, and to graple themselves together, laying each other upon the ground,
flatt upon their noses, then rising up again, they fell to it lustily,
sometime thrusting and pushing, and sometime clypping, and colling each other
very straightly: sometime shifting of places, and lifting one another up aloft
into the air. The one of them went about to catch the other fast by the leg,
whereby he should leese his offered blows and breath and all together, but he
there with unfolded and untwined his legs, and set upon the other as
earnestly, for to make him loose all that labor: now they having been at
their prises for the space of three (...)es, they were both so weary, so
soultry whot, and so out of breath, and yet so fleshed one against an other,
with choler, and shame to see all the whole Court standing, and watching all
ye while upon them, giving judgment on them, so that in the end, they were
well feign to give over and rest themselves, and then Amurath commanded them
to depart. Then came the other also in their order, but they wrestled not so
stoutly, nor yet so long as the first did. And this is all that the wrastlers
did.

Behold now came a company of 50. men, all on Horsbacke, well armed, and
furnished throughout, both for their hands, and for all the rest of their
bodies, for all sorts of Combats, their crooked swords by their sides, their
bucklers about their necks, their howes in their left hands, and staves in
their right hands, like unto the half Pikes of Arabia, for the pastime and
sport which they would make.

But because these be extraordinary sights, I have thought good to write and
discribe them somewhat more at length. First of all, there were laid in the
above named Park, eight heaps of Gravel, of equal height, and distaunce,
four on the one side, and four on the other. In the midst was a narrow
straight way, but well covered over with fine thin sandy Gravel, of purpose:
that if any of them in running should fall down, their fall should not hurt,
nor endaunger them, by means of the softnes of the Gravel: upon these hylls
of Gravel, were fastened staves and posts, having four on the one side
white, all round at the point, and the other four also white, made cirkle wise
and as a fireshouell, all made of Leather and Paper very properly. They were
the points, and ends, where he might sit and see all the sport and play of
the Horsemen which began to march on that way step by step: first by great,
then in reign, and as in battle raye: upon that they put themselves out of
rank altogether, and began their race with slack bridle one after an other,
and so near, and just unto one another, that their horses were one at
another heels: and in running, they took their arrows out of their Duiuers,
and couched them in such good order that they touched the very rundels, so
swiftly and so quickly as the eye was able readily to see the mark at the
second course, because they had not drawn, nor shot before but only at the
rundels, they now settled themselves against both the two, as well the rundels,
as the others made cyrklewise (as I told you) and with so wonderful a
quicknes, and readiness therein, and helping themselus sometime with the left
hand, and sometime with the right without any turning or bowing of their
bodies: and for the third charge, course or onsette in couching, they one while
covered their right shoulder, and an otherwhile the left, with their bucklers,
and that with quicknes incredible.

Moreover, in running at all the bridle, they drew out their swoordes, and
cut the rundels, percing quite through the other fashioned cirkles, and all
this was done in one only course or race: then turning the bridle all short,
they addressed themselves against the ends and points thereof, and with their
drawn swords, they abated and beat down the same: and by that means they
got again their bows, and made one shoot or draught up into the air:
Furthermore, they wrought and did great maruailes with their half Pikes, in
diverse kinds of Combatts, and in the end when with their swords they had
cut in pieces, they plucked up the staves and poastes which were made fast
within the Gravel hills, and cast them up into the air, and in running,
they caught and held them fast in their hands, then lifting them upon their
horse saddles, they began to use and handle them as before they did their
swords, and long bows.

But before I leave off and give over these particulers, I will speak of one
thing, most worthy of all to be marked and

such a thing in deed, as a man may take it impossible, but I my self saw it.

Out of these aforesaid number of 50. went two young men, very fair and
brave among all the rest: the one of them stood on his feet, in the saddle
upon the Horsback, and took his companion upon his arms, standing upright
upon his feese, and being in this order, and manner, they put forth the
Horse, (and gave him the Carriere:) and they held them very fast, and he that
was the uppermost of them, sh^t out all his arrows against a rest, and proppe
of wood, which he had in his right hand, that carried him. Moreover these two
young men having ranged up and down, and ^yed themselves fast to our Horses
by the bridles, the one of them leaped up, and sets me one of his feet upon
one of the saddles, and the other foot upon the other saddle, where he held
himself as fast as if he had been glued too, bearing still his companion
upon his arm, standing upright* and holding in his hand the forenamed proppe
of wood, against the which, the other being now already mounted so hie, did
most finely shoot and hitt the same, and yet notwithstanding the Horses did
run a very swift pace. There were others also among them, which having six
naked swords, and the points thereof fast tied upward to their Horse saddles,
put their heads also upon, and toward the saddels, and their feet upward,
and so made the Horses to run a galloppe, as fast as if a man should say,
thus and thus it shall be. On the otherside there were among them, which set
them two at once in one saddle, and as the Horse ran with all his power and
might, they skipped up and down from the Horse, and then to the Horse
again, very nimbly and lustlie, one after an other, and never made no stop
nor stay at all: others there were, which turned themselves both backwarde and
forward in the saddell, the Horse still running, and coursing up and down
very roughly, and ^oysterously, making I say such friskes and gamboles in the
swift running course, as were in deed most wonderful. This being done, they
all ran together on a heap, and being gotten up again on feet, upon the
Horse saddels, they shot out their arrows very strongly and with great
violence: and being in the end dispersed and set so a sunder, they ran one
against an other, with their half Pykes and Iauelins, and did show diverse such
notable feats, as the old ancient spear men were wont and accustomed to do
in courses and feats of Cheualrie: furthermore, they taught very many fine
feats and most notable, unto their men of war: as how to prepare and make
ready the battaill: to assail: to press: to enclose the enemy, and hemme him
in one every side, to strike him both on the right side and on the left, to
deck and trim up their own companies, and to give the onsette: to take in
and to rebate: to prick on, hold fast, and turn their horses, to pursue and
follow after, to leave off again as they lust: to take: to spoil: to break
in, and thrust upon the enemy overcome: to encourage the hearts of the
Soldiers when he has the worst, to gather all his companies together: finally
he taught all the particular points of war, wherofboth Soldiers and
Captains ought not be ignorant. And a man may right well speak of these
foresaid 50. Horsemen, as the Poet Virgil writ of the Combatt of Julius and
others, in the fifth book of his Eneiedos, Viz olli discurrere pares atque
agminatermi deducti^ soluere choris. etc. which is as much to say, as

FOrthwith like very valiant men,
They take their course, and part,
And by three and three in warlikewise
From the troops they all do part
Spreading abroad as reason is:
Their flagge and ensign fair,
And then again unto their places,
in order they repair.
Where, with offensive weapons they,
Do strike the other parts,
So vehemently, and with courage bold,
As kills their silly hearts:
Then meets the one, and with the other,
With violence very great,
Sometimes forward, and sometimes backwarde,
As they do think it meet.
And in their running courses then:
Some sights you might behold:
As represents some Combats fine.
And battles brave and bold.
And afterward they ginne to flee,
They turn their backs amain:
They march like men, but will not fight,
The peace is made again.
WEll now that we have spoken sufficiently of y^ sight of the Horsemen, let us
also begin to say somewhat of the Combattes, and skirmishes, and of the taking
of the Fortresses, and Holds by the foot men: where the Reader shall see how
the Turks took them by assayling and invading of them.

There were two Fortresses made of Boardes, gylded and painted with djuers
colors, well garnished with Walls, little Towers, Rampires, and Bulwarks,
whereof the one was called the Turks Fortress, and the other the Almaignes,
or Dutchmens, and there were 30. Soldiers clothed with the Arms and attire of
the Almaignes in the one: and 30. of the Turkish side in the other, which was
garnished and decked up with many Engines and fine devises of war. And for
to begin, the Almaignes which would first be seen, and have as it were the
upper hand of all: sent two of their spies unto the Turks Camp, whereunto
when they were approached and come, they beheld and saw, to their pain and
grief, what they were minded and determined for to do. For there was one of
the two taken, and the other saved himself by swiftnes of foot, and he told
unto the Almaignes how all things had passed. Now when they understood of
the Turks evil meaning toward them, they went thence away, to convey and
hyde themselves very unorderly, about the Turks hold, who being as it were
amazed thereat, and troubled with their noise making, went all of them out
thereof, giving a charge, setting the Almaignes in a rowte or company, and
leading them fighting, even unto their Trenches, crying out with a loud voice,
saying, that this shameful flight of the Almaignes, had brought unto them a
worthy victory: and as for the Almaignes, this rowte and company now
swelling in stomach against them, they began to consult and determine of what
was to be done, judging with themselves, that it be^ooued them to assay, and
prove all other ways and means, before they came to war, but yet in
conclusion, they were resolved to give the Turk a Battle: and so both the one
and the other being well furnished, went away in company.

The Almaignes carried Pikes, Eucklers, and sw^rds, but the Turks covered
themselves all over with their Bucklers, marching all a great, and fayning
that they were afraid, and that they would not fight at all, which did so
encourage the Almaignes, that they thought verily to weary and tire the Turks,
who being now well awakened, and stirred up with this mockerye, gave them a
sign and token, laying hands upon their weapons, and crying with a loud
voice Alla, Alla, (which is as much to say, as God:) they made their pieces
play: then they came unto the battle, which was so sharp, that what of one
side, and what of the other, their number was not much unlike: then was there
again a new Combat, and skirmish to recover the bodies, but that was ceased
and stinted by and by: The Almaignes now retired into their own quarters,
whether also the Turks approached, so that the skirmish began afresh whereas
the one part sought against the other very sharply, and a long time: in the
end, the Turks constrained the Almaignes to save themselves within their
Castles, whereas they did besiege them, fighting most furiously, and laying on
lusty load against the place, with all the power of their pieces. The
Almaignes yet resisted them very bravely, and withstoode a great many of their
assaults, but at the last they were overcome by the Turks, who began to
beat down their Gates, to spoil, and to kill as many as they found hidden
in any place, to thrust down the other from the top of the Castle to the
bottom, to arest them that fled, and to bring them Captyues, with their
hands fast bound behind at their backs: this done, they se^te up an
Ensign, or flagge upon the top of all the Castle, and in sign and token of
victory, they caused a great triumph to be made, with Tabours and Trompets,
besides this there were brought into the foresaid Tyltyarde, xiii. other
fortes, and holds, which were not far distant from the two Fortresses, and
they yielded themselves up unto the victorions. And besides all this as
happened and chanced at the Combattes, and in the taking (as aforesaid) three
men which stood and beheld this war, were slain and killed with Cannon
sho^te: such are the sportes, and pastimes of Tyrauntes, which never make an
end and give over, without shedding of blood: Let us now say somewhat of the
Spear men: I will tell you at one bare word, that of fifty couple of
runners, there were not two found, which did meet, and encounter each other
ten times: neither yet any otherwise, but in friendly passing one by an
other: by reason whereof, all the whole world cried out amain upon those
gentle Iousters, which were constrained to retire: but the two last runners,
being ashamed thereof, at their last Course, did so boysterouslie, and so
fiercely encounter each other, that their horses were both killed with the
brunt then given between them, and the two runners them selves very
greeuouslie hurt therewith.

Then came before them one of the Wrastlers, a very mighty, and a marvelous
strong man, worthy to be compared unto that Milon so much extolled, and
celebrated at Crotone: for proof of his prowess, he lyfted up an high, a long
piece of woodde, which twelve men could not styre, nor remove from the ground,
but with great pain, and with much adoo: then he took the same upon his
shoulders, without holding the same with his hands: and afterward, being laid
down flat upon the ground, and his shoulders, and thighs being fast tied and
bound, he took up and bare upon his breast or stomach, a great thick stone,
which ten men had rolled away, and yet he made but a mock and laughing
stock of that his load. And yet behold, a thing more marvelous then all
these: four men did cleave long pieces of wood upon his belly. Moreover,
with his teeth and his hands, he did bruise, and break in pieces, a horsenayle
of iron, and with such force, that the one half stuck fast in his teeth, and
of the rest he made two pieces, in each hand one: and with three blows with
his fyst, upon the Coulter of a Plough, he brake it quite in sunder: and with
his bar^ tongue he lycked the same Coulter put into the fire all read hot:
the same man also, with his teeth alone, did saddle, bridle, and harness a
horse, and did diverse and many other most marvelous things: by reason
whereof he got to himself great gains, and was very much praised, and
commended of all men, because of his strength, and force altogether so
extraordinary and strange. But before I make an end of the discourse of the
afternoon sportes, I have considered with my self, that it shall not be any
thing at all hurtful to the Reader, if I speak a word or two, of the
dauncers over the line: many of them there, showed forth brave proofs of
their skylles: but there was one among all the rest, which gained and got the
garland from them all: and I know no man that was not wholly ravished, to see
them run so suddenly, with so good a grace, without stinting, and with so
valiant a boldness.

A certain Poet reports in one of his Commedies and Stories, that the simple
and common people were in a muse, at the beholding of one named. Quidam, which
walked up and down upon a Cord or Line: But if so be that this Poet had
seen that as I speak off, he would without doubt, have been driven out of
countenance: for this fellow went up upon the Lines, which were fast tied to
the rafters, and beams of the house, as high as a man might well discern, and
with such swiftness and nimblenesse, that a man would have said, that they had
been Ladders or Stayres, and then he came down again very boldly, both
backewardes, and arsewardes (as they say) and also foreward, not having any
other stay, or proppe, but a little small staff, or stick, whereof he made
him a counterpeise: one while he daunced upon the Cords with both fee^e, and
another while with one alone: sometime with the left, and sometime with the
right: now stark naked, and straight ways his hose on: now clasping his
legs about the cords, with his head hanging downward, and so turned
himself round about, and then loosed his legs, caught hold again with his
hands, and skipt up upon it: he slidde also marvelous right and boldly, from
the top of all, (...) the very bottom of all, and that as I esteem the
cheifest, and principallest sport and pastime of all is: at night forsooth, he
tied fast to each of his feet, si^e naked drawn swords, and continued his
sport, with such playing, and passing away of the time, and with such clapping
of hands on all parts, so that if by chance any one of the lookers on, ought
him any malice or grudge, or would have wrought him any mischief in his
sleep, he himself by his agillitie and nimblenesse, would presently have
awaked out of his sleep: by means whereof, by the common voice and cry, of
both great and small, at that solemn assembly, he was called and named, the
chief and principal master of that craft or occupation.

You have now already seen (good gentle Reader) the royalty and great
worthiness of the sports and pastimes, of both before and after dinner, very
grosely given and set down before you: but in few words, and of a very
truth.

Let us now then conclude, (if it please you) and let us describe unto you,
the sightes which they made, and were to be seen in the night: and although
that they were not much unlike unto the day sportes, yet I will in brief
declare them unto you. Presently and immediately after Sun set, they lighted
their Lamps, which were hanged up in the Tabernacle, and in the wheel made of
Cords: (whereof I have spoken heretofore) the which Lamps, turned very
round by art and cunning, and burned very clear, and light all the whole
night. Moreover, there were every night, lighted in the said Park, to the
number of thyrtie Lynks, or Torches, from the which, all the whole Theater,
received a most famous and clear light, and brightness. Now these things
being in this order disposed, they shot off squibbes full of powder, which
made a marvelous noise and sound: and as they fell upon the ground, they
spette out six or seven sparkles, like unto Stars, and very pleasant to
behold.

Then after all this, they brought in every day, day by day into this
Cloister* six, eight, and at the most, ten Fortresses, Towers, or Ships,
made of boords, covered properly with Paper, or with fine linen cloth,
gylded, and very rich, and sumptuous made, with diverse paintings and
colors, and then they gave fire unto them: they were made strong, both within
and without, and of all sides, with short pieces, like unto Mortiers, which are
a kind of Artillery of iron, short, and having many ringes or cyrcles, only
used in Ships for nail shot, being well appointed, with squibbes, and with
powder for the Cannons, without any lack or want thereof. And as soon as they
put too fire, there presently follows a noise like lyghtning and strange
thunder. These squibbes did flee about in the likeness of Serpen^es, and were
powered out round about the Theater: and to make an end of this brute or noise,
they had in their company, the sounds of Trumpettes and Tabors. These so
fearful noyses were nothing at all pleasant, but rather showed, and
betokened the assault, and taking of Constantinople. Furthermore, you should
have seen the shapes, and figures of men, clothed after the Persian, Italian,
and Allemaigne fashion: also the shapes and figures of Elephantes, Camelles,
Dogs, Horses* Asses, Wildesowle, and other like creatures, all full of
Cannon sho^te and powder, unto the which they put fire, and then they were all
brought to nothing.

These sportes lasted and continued, until two of the clock, and sometime (at
the commandment of Amurathe) until three of the clock after midnight.

The Turk me thinks herein, went about to follow and i^itate, the proud
King Solmonee: which striued to work against the lyghtening, and thundering of
the Gods, as the Poets make report. But as they ^eigned, that Jupiter knew well
how to correct and chasten, the intolerable pride of Salmone^: so in mine
opinion, this man here, being more arrogaunt, and much worse and wickedder
then Salmonee, now stryketh upon the true lyghtening of the true God, and
being cast down into hell with his supporters, and maintainers, receives the
chastisementes, there prepared and made ready for him, and due unto him of so
long time.

Moreover, because that the act of Circumcizion was done by night: behold,
and mark well wherefore I have deferred until now, to speak of the
Ceremonies, which then were observed, the which I will touch breefelie and in
few words: The seventh day of June, Amurathe, caused Proclamation to be made,
that they should bring into the Park aforesaid, all those as were to be
Cyrcumcized: with promise by him made, to give unto every one, a gown, a
shyrt, and a hundred pieces of money, which were worth about ten pence a
piece: and at this cry or Proclamation, there was gathered together such a
multitude, of young children, servants, lacques, and slaves, which came most
part, rather for the desire of gayning the gifts, then upon any devotion at
all: so that they lacked and needed above thirty Surgeons to dress them, and
yet they were occupied about them all that day, and most part of the night:
And in the same night, after the sportes and pastimes were all ended, and about
two of the clock in the morning, Mahumet, the son of Amurathe, the young
Prince of sixteen years old, was Circumcized, not openly, but in his
fathers Waredrope, and in the presence of his said father, and of the (...)
Officers and Seignio^^, by Mahumet Bass^; the (...) Counselor of that State.

You have here (fre^ndly Reader) the discourse of the foolish Ceremonies of
that miserable Nation, which is in danger to ^eare and suffer the eternal
names of (...) but before I make an end, I will add and speak one word more,
touching and concerning that as happened, and chanced at the end of the
sports, and which troubled us all, that were at the Feast. First of all, were
the weddings of the Daughter of Amurathe made, who was married to the Admyrall
of Turkey: these weddinges were royally feasted for the spars of five days.
Then by chance it fell out so, that Sulthane, the wife of Amurathe did not go
her full time all out: and the tumult grew between the Ianissaries, and the
Archers of his Guard, the which did rise in tumult, the one against the other,
in his presence, and within the Park, with such fury and ^^erce anger, that
without any respect of their General or of the great Bassa, or of Amurathe
himself, they came to handy blows, in such sort, that two Ianissaries, and
four Archers were left dead, and stretched abreade even in the same place.
Amurathe now being sore afraid, and amassed thereat, and very much doubting
the Ianissaries, which are marvelous unhappy and wicked people, caused his
Castle to be made fast, and thoroughly furnished round about. You se^ now him,
which was in hope, to have swallowed up (as it were) all the whole world,
stand trembling and quaking for fear, even in the midst of his own guard,
Under the color of I wot not what brute or noise, and had much ad^^ to
warrant or save himself under the shylter, or surety of any walls. And now
to make an end, the wedding being all finished the one and twenty day of June,
the day before the which he retired, and went in the morning into his Castle
with his Son, being conducted and guided by the Bassas, and with three
hundred other Gentlemen* This is it, as I had to say, touching the sportes and
sightes at Constantinople, wherein I have been as brief, and used as much
diligence, as possibly I could: and if it does not like you (good Reader)
yet think not evil of me, although I am not ashamed to write it: but rather
blame you him, which durst attempt to do all* these things, and take well in
worth, my endeavor herein. Vale.

FINIS.
T. H.

I do send unto you the Confession of Gennadius, the Patriarche of
Constantinople, exhibited to Mahumet, the 11. Emperor of that name, immediately
after that Constantinople was taken, who required the same of him: and this I
received of Theodosius Zygomalius, the chief Notarie of this present
Patriarche Jeremy. Thus fare you well in all felicity, at Constantinople, the
9. of Iulie.
WE believe that God is the creator of all things, whatsoever they be, and
that they were of nothing: and that he is neither a body, nor has a body: but
lives intellectuallie: and he is a God, very good and perfect of mind, or
substance, and most wise: not made, or compounded: he is without beginning,
and has no end: he is in the World, and above the world: he is not in one
place, and he is in every place. These are the properties of God, by the which
he is separated from his creatures and such other like.

He is (...), and good, and true, and whatsoever things his works have in a
part, excellent, he has them all alone, and by a more excellent manner: And
his creatures have these same perfections, because he gives them to his
creatures, and because he is good, in like manner his creatures are good:
because he is wise, they are wise: because he is true, they are true: and
whatsoever are such like: saving only, that God has them in a principal
place, the creatures by perticipation.

We believe, that in GOD there are three properties: which are as the
beginninges, and fountains, of all the other his properties: and God lives by
these three properties, ever (...)inglie in himself: and before that the world
was builded by him, and by them he builded the world: and by them he governs
it. And these three properties, we call them three persons: and because these
three properties, do not divide the only and most simple substance of God,
therefore be is God, and with these properties he is one God, and there are not
three Gods.

We do believe, that the word and spirit, do spring but of the nature of
God, as from the fire, light and heat: and as the fire, although there be
nothing, that can be lyghtned, and be made warm by it: notwithstanding, the
same fire has always light and heat, and sends out light, and heat. So,
before the world was builded, the word was, and so was the spirit, natural
powers of God, because God is a mind, or substance, as it was said before:
and these three, the mind or substance, the word and spirit, is one God, as
the soul of man is the mind: and a word intellectual, and an intellectual
will, and notwithstanding these three in deed are one soul. Moreover, we
call the word, the wisdom of God, and the power: and his Son, because he is
the son of his natural substance, and as we call the son of the nature of
man, the son of man: and as the cogitation of this mind is: so is it in
these divine things. Furthermore, we name the will of God, the spyrite of God,
and love: We call the mind the Father, because he is not begotten, and
without a cause, the cause of the son and of the spirit. Because therefore
God does not under stand only his creatures, but more he knows and
understands himself, and for this cause he has the word and wisdom, by
the which he understands himself properly. Likewise, neither he wills and
God loves only his own works, but he wills and loves himself much more:
therefore the word and spirit go forth or proceed out of him
everlastingly: and these twain with God are one God.

We believe that God has builded the world by the word of his wisdom, and
of his power, and by the spirit of his good will, he foreseeth and governs,
and moves every nature to good, according to the order of every nature: and
for this cause we believe that when God will convert men by his only mercy,
from the deceit of devils and worshipping of Idols: because in a little place
of the Jews, in the which he was worshipped and believed to be one God
according to the Law of Moses, the rest of the whole world worshipped the
creatures wickedly, and many Gods, because that they are none, in the place of
one and him true, and every man lived according to their sensual apitites, and
not according to God: then God restored man by his word, and by his holy
spirit, and therefore the word of God put upon him the nature of man, that as
man, he might be conuersaunt with men, and as the word of God and wisdom
should teach men to believe in one true God, and to lead their life according
to that Law, which he has given, and again, as a man, that he might give a
reason of his life, and example of his doctrine: He first kept the Law, which
he gave unto men: as the word of God and power, he might restore, the most
comely goodness which he would. For it could not be, that by the power of
one man, the whole world should be converted to God: and thus the omnipotent
and invisible God, has sown the truth by his word in Jerusalem: By his
spirit he illuminated and confirmed his Apostles, that they should sow the
truth throughout the whole world, and that they should contemn death
through the love of God, who had sent them, and by the love of the salvation of
the world, according to the ensample of Jesus, who dyed willingly, according to
that which was of man, that the world might be saved.

Thus we believe one God in Trinity, the Father, son, and holy spirit, as
our Lord Jesus has taught us, and we believe that he is true, because he is
the truth it self: and his Disciples has taught us more at large: thus we
do understand of the power of his wisdom.

We believe that the word of God, and man, whom the that word of God put on,
and the life of Christ in his flesh was the life of man most holy, but the
wisdom of the power and works of him, was the power of God.

We believe, that as the soul and body is one man, so the word of God of one
part, and of ye other part. The soul and the body, are two distinct natures
perfectly in one man, so is the humanity and deitye in Christ, two distinct
natures, knitte together according to Hypostases and personally, neither is the
word of God changed into flesh or into the soul of Christ, neither is the
flesh of Christ, or his soul converted into the word of God, but the word of
God was and is in Christ the word of God, by a marvelous disputation,
humanity, humanity: and that the humanity have not taken the deity of the
word of Christ, but the deity of the word of God has taken man's nature,
which consists in that, for as much as it was taken.

Whatsoever thing is in God, and of God naturally, is God, because there is
nothing accidental in God: and therefore we name and believe the intellectual
word of God, to be God: and because this word of GOD was in Christ, for that
cause we confess Christ to be God and man: man, because he consists of
soul and body: God, because of the word of God, which is in him.

we believe, that the word of God is in Christ, and in the world, and in
heaven, and in God, and in the Father, wherefore the word of God is infinite,
as God is infinite, begetting him, that is as much to say: thinking, and has
an infinite power. But in God after one manner, and in Christ after an other
manner, and in the world, after another manner.

We believe, that when God does communicate his goodness and his grace to any
creature, nevertheless, it goes not from him, but thereby he is more
magnified, because that the highness of God, is made manifest by the virtue of
his Creatures.

The more excellent that the Creator is, by greater communicating of his
goodness: so much the more the goodness of God, and his love toward men,
and his power is declared.

Wherefore the goodness of God, and his love toward men, is more magnified in
this point, that God himself has come into Jesus Christ, with his
omnipotentcie, then that which he sent into his Prophets one of his graces or
two, and in some one Prophet a lesser grace, and into some other a greater.

We believe that Christ was crucified and dyed, of his own proper will, for
many and great profittes, to the declaration whereof, we should occupy many
words: and he has suffered all these things, according to that which was of
man in him.

As for the word of God, it is neither crucified, neither dies, neither ryseth
again: But he rayseth up the dead as he raises up his own flesh which he
bare. We believe, that Christ, after his resurrection was assumpted up into the
heavens, and shall come again with glory, to judge the quick and the dead.

We believe that men's souls are immortal, and that the bodies of holy men,
shall rise incorrupt, clear, active, neither shall they have any need of
meat, nor drink, nor apparel, nor any other corporal pleasures: and that
Souls immortal.
the souls and the bodies, of them that have believed, and have led their
life virtuously, shall go into Paradise: but the impenitent, wicked, and
Infideles, into punishment: and that the Paradise of the Saints, and the
fruicion thereof, is in heaven: the punishment of the wicked in the earth: and
that the fruition of the Saints is no thing else, then that such souls shall be
persit in knowledge, and shall behold the mysteries of God, which they know
not now, but by faith only.

Wherefore it was necessary that the word of God, and God to be incarnate:
many other things are necessary, when necessity requires, we are ready to
render a reason thereof: after these reasons, the seven certify us of our
Faith.

Moreover, the Prophets of the Jews, have showed before, whom we receive, of
this Jesus, what soever he has done, or whatsoever have been done, and
whatsoever his disciples have done by his power: The like the Oracles of the
Greeks have foreshewed by the gift of God, and the like did the Astronomers of
the Persians and of the Grecians, with the preaching of Jesus.

For all these of the which we have made mention, do agree and are consonant
to the scripture in all things, because that they which have written them,
have had alone Doctor, or teacher, even the grace of God: unless it were so in
something they would have disagreed, and have been dissonant.

Because they have received such a faith and relygion, although new and
miraculous, men with great diligence in eu(...), and with manifold dangers,
as well pri(...), (...)dent and wise: and by this means the malicious deceit
of devils was overthrown. This faith and religion contains nothing
impossible, neither any thing that is dissonant with it self, neither any
corporal thing, but all spiritual: and it is the way which leads men's
souls unto the love of God, and of everlasting life.

So many as have received this faith, and have lived bertuously, according to
the Law of Christ, have obtained great gifts of God, and have done many
miracles, which thin ^es could never have come to pass, if this faith had
been false and untrue. The Kings which made war against this faith, with
great slaughter and punishment throughout the world, many hundred years,
notwithstanding that they had many Gods, profited nothing, but the faith had
the victory, and continues unto this day: when the Lord shall come, he shall
find it: and unless that this faith had been by the will of God, then had it
been easily overthrown. To the same Jesus our Lord, the true God, be glory.
Amen.

Thus we affirm breefly as concerning our Faith.

These were translated into the Arabrik tongue, by Achomad Kadde, a Barr^^n,
whose father was Mah(...) Tzelepe the Scribe.

FINIS.

