THE SECOND PART OF THE REFORMATION OF A CATHOLIC DEFORMED by Master W.
PERKINS.

S. AUGUST. in PSALM. 36. Tanto magis debemus commemorare vanitatem
Haereticorum: quanto magis quaerimus salutem eorum.

The more we seek after the salvation of Heretics: the more we must rehearse
and show their vanity.

Printed with Privilege. 1607.

TO THE READER.
GENTLE Reader, I must needs entreat thy patience to bear with the late
edition of this second part: because it is now more then two years, since it
was given to be printed. But, we that cannot have things done when we will:
must be content to take them when we may. And to tell thee the truth, some part
of this being penned, was also by mischance lost; which is now repaired. Take
it (I pray thee) simple as it is, in good part: and accept of his good will,
that wishes it much better, that it might give thee the greater satisfaction.

Farewell.
THE PREFACE.
CHRISTIAN READER, I suppose it shall please thee better, if I do entertayne
thy studious mind with some serious discourse, then if I went about to court
it, with the ordinary complements of a curious preamble. Wherefore I purpose
(by thy gentle patience) to handle here a matter of merueilous great
importance, which M. PER. toward the latter end of his book, lays out
against us in manner of a most grievous complainte: it is, that we Catholics,
among many other capital crimes by us (as he fableth) defended, do bolster
and uphold the most heinous sin of Atheism. The man is not a little troubled
to devise wherein we do maintain any such point of impiety: For compelled by
the clear evidence of truth, he confessed that we do rightly acknowledge the
unity of the Godhead in the Trinity of persons: yet that he may seem to say
something therein against us, he flies unto the threed-bare rags of their
common slanders of man's merits and satisfactions, and such old stuff: and
streatching them on the tenter-hookes, yet one nail further then his fellows,
strives to draw out of them a certain strange kind of Atheism, in this
manner: The Roman religion makes the meritte of the works of men, to concur
with the grace of God, therefore it overthrows the grace of God. Romans 11.
verse. 6.
Item, they acknowledge the infinite justice and mercy of God, but by
consequence both are denied: for how can that be infinite justice, which may
any way be appeased by humane satisfaction? And how shall Gods mercy be
infinite, when we by our own satisfactions must add a supply to the
satisfaction of Christ? There needs a pretty wit (I ween) to understand how
these points appertain to Atheism. For suppose that we defended, that the
meritte of the works of man concurred with Gods grace, as two distinct agents,
which we do not; for we hold that no works of man have any meritte, unless
they spring and proceed from the very grace of God: but let that be granted,
what kind of Atheism or denying of God were this? or how follows it
thereof, that the grace of God (which is the principal agent, and far more
potent then the other) must thereby needs be cast to the ground and foiled?
this is so silly and simple, that I know not what to term it: for he does
untruly slander our doctrine, and that to no end and purpose. To his second
cavil I answer in a word, that we teach (as he knows right well) the
infinite justice of God to be appeased no other way, then by the infinite
satisfaction of Christ's passion: And that our satisfactions are only to pay
for the temporal pains remaining yet due, after the infinite are paid for by
Christ. Now whether any such temporal pain remain or no, after the sin is
remitted, is a question between us: but to say (as M. PER. does) that we be
Atheists, and do deny God to be God, for that we hold some temporal
punishment of man to be due, after pardon granted of his greater pain, is most
apparently a very senseless assertion. As wide from all reason is his third
instance: That Gods mercy cannot be infinite, when by our own satisfactions we
add a supply to the satisfaction of Christ. For if Christ's most perfect and
full satisfaction, can well stand with Gods infinite mercy; far more easily
may man's satisfactions agree with it, which are infinitely less then Christ's.
But the infinite riches of Gods mercy appears especially, in that it pleased
him freely to give unto us (so mean creatures and wreatched sinners) his own
only dear Son, to be our Redeemer and Savior; and both Christ's
satisfaction and ours are rather to be referred unto Gods justice, then to his
mercy: wherefore very unskillfully does M. PER. compare them with Gods mercy.
Neither is it possible to distill any quintessence of Atheism out of it, more
then out of the former; nay, they both uprightly weighed, are so far of from
Atheism, or derogating any thing from Gods glory; that they do much magnify
and advance the same. For albeit we hold our good works to be both meritorious
and satisfactory: yet do we teach the virtue, value, and estimation of them,
to proceed wholly from the grace of God in us, whereby we be enabled and helped
to do them; and not any part of the dignity and worthynesse of the works, to
issue from the natural faculty or industry of the man that does them. So that
when we maintain the meritte or satisfaction of good works, we extol not the
nature of man, but do only defend and uphold the dignity and virtue of Gods
grace: which Protestants do greatly debase, extenuate and vilify, not
allowing it to be sufficient to help the best minded man in the world, to do
any work that does not offend God mortally. Thus much concerning our supposed
Atheism against God: now of those that be (as he imagines) against Christ
the Son of God: First he argues thus. He that has not the Son, has not
the Father: and he that has neither Father nor Son, denies God: now the
present Roman religion has not the Son, that is Jesus Christ God and man:
For they in effect abolish his manhood, by teaching of him to have two kinds
of existing; one natural in heaven, whereby he is visible, touchable, and
circumscribed: the other against nature, whereby he is substantially according
to his flesh in the hands of every Priest, invisible and uncircumcised.

Answer. M. PER. and all Protestants know right well, that we believe Jesus
Christ to be perfect God, and perfect man, and therefore we have both the Son
and the Father; and his reason against it, is not worth a rush: for we do not
destroy the nature of man, by teaching it to have two diverse manners of
existing or being in a place. When Christ was transfigured before his Apostles,
he had another manner of outward form and appearance, then he had before: yet
was not the nature of man in him thereby destroyed, and after his resurrection
he was (when it pleased him) visible to his Apostles, and at other times
invisible: and yet was not his manhood thereby abolished, as M. PER. would
make us believe: no more is it when his body is in many places at once; or in
one place circumscribed, and in the other uncircumcised. For these external
relations of bodies unto their places, do no whit at all destroy their inward
and natural substances, as al Philosophy testifies: wherefore hence to
gather that we deny both the Father and the Son to be God, does savor (I
will not say of a silly wit) but of a froward will, peeuishly bent to cavil
and calumniate. Secondly, Master PERKINS charge us with disgrading Christ of
his offices: saying, that for one Jesus Christ the only King, lawe-giuer, and
head of the Church, they join unto him the Pope, not only as a Vicar, but as a
fellow, in that they give unto him power to make laws binding in conscience:
to resolve and determine infallibly the sense of holy Scripture: properly to
pardon sin: to have authority over the whole earth, and a part of hell: to
depose Kings, to whom under Christ every soul is subject: to absolve
subjects from the oath of allegiance, etc.

Answer. Here is a bed-role of many superfluous speeches: for not one of all
these things (if we admit them all to be true) does convince us to have
disgraded Christ of his offices, which are these: to appease Gods wrath
toward us: to pay the ransom for our sins: to conquer the Devil: to open
the Kingdom of heaven: to be supreme head of both men and Angels, and such
like. He may (without any derogation unto these his sovereign prerogatives)
give unto his servants; first, power to make laws that bind in conscience, as
he has done to all Princes, which the Protestants themselves dare not deny:
then, to determine infallibly of the true sense of holy Scripture, which the
Apostles could do, as all men confess; and yet do not make them Christ's
fellows, but his humble servants: to whom also he gave power properly to
pardon sins: Luc. 24. Joan. 20. Mar. 16. Matt. 28.
Whose sins you pardon on earth, sbal be pardoned in heaven: and finally, to
them he also gave authority over the whole earth: go into the universal
world. Over part of hell no Pope has authority; and when he does good to any
soul in Purgatory, it is per modum suffragij, as a suppliant and entreater,
not as a commander. Whether he has any authority over Princes and their
subjects in temporal affairs, it is questioned by some: yet no man (not
wilfully blind) can doubt, but that Christ might have given him that
authority, without disgrading himself of it; as he has imparted to him and to
others also, faculties of greater authority and virtue, reserving nevertheless
the same unto himself, in a much more excellent manner. As a King by
substituting a viceroy, or some such like deputy, to whom he gives most large
commission, does not thereby disgrade himself of his Kingly authority, as all
the world knows: no more did our Savior Christ Jesus bereave himself of his
power or dignity, when he bestowed some part thereof upon his substitutes. He
goes on multiplying a number of idle words to small purpose: as that we for
one Christ the only real Priest of the new Testament, join many secondary
Priests unto him, which offer Christ daily in the Mass. We indeed hold the
Apostles to have been made by Christ, not imputative or fantastical, but
real and true Priests: And by Christ his own order and commandment, to have
offered his body and blood daily in the sacrifice of the Mass; what of that?
see that question. Furthermore he says, for one Jesus the all sufficient
mediator of intercession, they have added many fellows to him, to make
request for us: namely as many Saints as be in the Popes Calendar: yea and
many more too. For we hold that any of the faithful yet living, may be also
requested to pray for us: neither shall he in have be able to prove, that
Christ only makes intercession for us, though he be the only mediator that
has redeemed us. Lastly says M. PERKINS, for the only merittes of Christ, in
whom alone the Father is well pleased, (what, was he not well pleased with his
Apostles?) they have devised a treasury of the Churches, containing besides the
merittes of Christ, the overplus of the merittes of Saints, to be dispensed to
men at the discretion of the Pope, and thus we see that Christ and his merittes
be abolished.

Answer. The good man is somewhat mistaken, for we hold not any overplus of
merits in Saints, the which we acknowledge to be by God fully rewarded in
heaven: but we affirm that some Saints and blessed Martirs have suffered more
pains in this life, then the temporal punishment of their own sins
^eserued: Job 6. v. ^
Who therefore might truly say with that just man Job? would to God my sins,
whereby I have deserved wrath, were weighed with the calamity that I suffer:
even as the sands of the Sea, this should be the heauyer. Now part of these
sufferinges of Gods Saints (as being needelesse for their own satisfaction)
are reserved in the Churches storehouse, and may by the high steward of the
Church (to whom the dispensation of her treasure belongs) he communicated to
others, as very reason teaches us; for who is fitter to dispose of any man's
goods, then he to whom the charge thereof is given by his testament? And thus
I hope every reasonable man does find us Catholics to be far of from
transforming Christ into an Idol of man's conceit, as Master PERKINS dreameth:
only we see a misconceited man, laboring in vain to deface Christ's benefits
toward us, to calumniate his chief servants, and to skirmish more against his
own fantasies, then against any doctrine of ours. He lays lastly a third
kind of Atheism against us, for worshipping of God, not with such respect as
is suitable to his nature. For (says he) our worship is mere will worship
for the most part, without any allowance or commandment of God, as Durand in
his Rationale in effect acknowledges: it is a carnal service standing of
innumerable bodylie rites and ceremonies, borrowed partly from the Jews, and
partly from the Heathens: it is divided between God and some of his creatures,
in that they are worshipped both with one kind of worship, let them paint it
as they can, etc.

Answer. Ipse dixit: Pythagoras has pronounced his sentence; yet you need
not believe him, unless you list, because he fableth so formally: does Durand
acknowledge that all our worship is mere will worship, and that it has no
allowance of God? O egregious and impudent deceiuer! For that learned devout
Author Durand, does nothing else in all that book, then set out the Majesty
and declared the meaning of the true worship of God, used daily in our service
throughout the whole year: And therefore does entitle his book Rationale
Diuinorum, the reasons of divine service. And as for bodylie rites, we use but
few, and those very decent, full of reverence, and most fit to stir up and
cherish devotion. We be not spirits, and therefore must serve God by bodylie
ceremonies, although the life and virtue of them proceed from the spirit,
employing all parts of the body, in his worship and to his honor that made
it: neither be they borrowed of Jews nor of the Heathens; albeit they might
perhaps (the one by the commandment of God, the other by the light of nature)
use some such like: but ours were devised by the inspiration of the holy Ghost
(the heavenly guide and directer of the Catholic Church) to move us to serve
God more devoutly, and with greater reverence. Now to say that we give the same
worship to any Saint that we give to God, is a stale jest, that has long
sithence lost all his grace, being found to be nothing else, but a notorious
untruth very often confuted; as by others else where, so by me more then once
in this book: where also these other slanders here cast upon us, are more at
large in their several places discussed: this therefore may serve in this
place for an answer to those imputations of Atheismes, which Master PERKINS
objecteth against us. And for that this crime of Atheism is the most heinous
that can be, as contrariewise, the true opinion of the Godhead and the sincere
worship thereof, is the most sweet and beautiful flower of religion: let us
therefore, here (to hold due correspondence with Master PERKINS) examine the
Protestants doctrine, concerning the nature of God, and their worship of
him; that the indifferent reader, comparing judiciouslie our two opinions
thereof together, may embrace that for most pure and true, that carries the
most reverent and holy conceit thereof. For out of all doubt, there can be no
greater motive to any devout soul, to like of a religion, then to see that it
does deliver a most sacred doctrine of the Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth,
and does withal most religiously adore and serve him: Whereas on the other
side, there is not a more forcible persuasion to forsake a religion before
professed, then to be given to understand, that the Masters of that religion,
teach many absurd things concerning the Godhead it self, and do as coldly
and as slightly worship God almighty; as may be. Mark therefore, I beseech
thee (gentle reader) for thy own souls sake, what evidence I shall deliver in
against the Protestants, touching this point of Atheism, and following the
same method that M. PER. observes, I will first touch their errors against the
most blessed Trinity and Deity: secondly, such as are against our Lord Jesus
God and man: lastly, I will speak one word or two about their service and
worshipping of God: All which shall be performed in a much more temperate
manner, then the gravity of such a matter requires; that it may be less
offensive. Concerning the sacred Trinity, it is by the doctrine of certain
principal pillars of their new Gospel brought into great question. Lib. 1.
Instit. c. 13. ss. 23. 25. Con. rations Camp. page 152.
For John Calvin in diverse places teaches, that the second and third persons
of the Trinity, do not receive the Godhead from the first, but have it of
themselves, even as the first person has. And in this he is defended by M.
Whitaker, and preferred before all the learned Fathers of the first council of
Nice. Out of which position it follows, that there is neither Father nor
Son in the Godhead: for according unto common sense, and the uniform
consent of all the learned; he only is a true natural Son, that by
generation does receive his nature and substance from his Father. We are called
the Sons of God, but that is by adoption and grace: but he only is the true
natural Son of God, that by eternal generation received his substance: that
is, the Godhead from him. If therefore the second person did not receive the
Godhead from the first, but had it of himself, as they do affirm: then
certaynelie he is no true Son of the first, and consequently the first person
is no true Father. For (as all men confess) Father and Son be correlatiues,
so that the one cannot be without the other. Thus their doctrine is found to be
faulty in the highest degree of Atheism. For it overthrows both Father and
Son in the Trinity. And further, if it were true, then does the holy Ghost
proceed neither from the Father, nor from the Son: for it receives not the
Godhead from them at all, as they hold; but has it of himself, and so
proceeds no more from them, then they do from him, and consequently is not
the third person: Wherefore finally they do overthrow the whole Trinity, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Secondly, they may be truly styled
Atheistes, who think any one to be God, that has not in him all singular
perf^ctions, in the most perfect sort that can be, but either wants some of
them, or else has them in a meaner degree then any other: they therefore that
teach our Savior Christ, in his Godhead to be inferior unto his Father;
stand justly charged with Atheism. Such a one is Epi. ad Polo. pa. 940. and
seq.
Calvin who in formal terms does avouch and say, that Christ according to
his Godhead, is less then his Father. And else where he affirms, In ca. 26,
Matt. 64. Co^. Stancar. in locis, ca. de Christo. Co^. Harding, art. 17. in the
confuta. of the Papists slanders.
the Father to hold the first rank of honor and power, and the Son to
obtain the second, which he might have learned of his great master Melancthon,
who taught that the Son according to his divinity, is his Fathers subject and
minister. Further, that in Christ there was something of the nature of God;
some other thing then belike was wanting. Again, that the Godhead of Christ
was obedient unto his Father: with whom our countrymen Jewel and Fulke do
jumpe, who affirm that the divine nature of Christ offered sacrifice unto his
Father. Briefly, all Protestants (who hold Christ according to his divine
nature, to have been a mediator) make his Godhead inferior unto God the
Father. For to be (as a mediator, must needs be) a suppliant unto another: to
pray and offer sacrifice to him, is to acknowledge him to be his better, and
that something lies in his power to do, which the other of himself cannot
do, but by suit must obtain of him. Join here unto that they do expound
most of the textes of holy Scripture, used by the ancient Fathers to prove the
blessed and sacred Trinity, even as the old Arrians did, reproving the ancient
Fathers exposition; which cannot but argue, that they in their hearts (though
they be yet ashamed to confess it) decline apace from those holy Fathers
steps, to favor Arrianisme. This little therefore may suffice to demonstrate,
how the chief pillars of the Protestants religion, do shake the very
foundations of the Christian faith, by their strange glosses and speeches about
the sacred Trinity, and by their diverse derogations to Christ's divinity. But
this shall appear yet much more perspiciously, if we do well weigh what they
teach touching the very nature of the Godhead it self. Whosoever denies God
to be almighty, or presumes to limit the infinite power of God, within the
compass of man's weak understanding, he in effect makes him no God at all, but
some mean creature of a limited strength and power: such be all Protestants,
OEcola^p de verbis Domini. Beza in Neoph. simil. co^t. And. page 15.
who affirm that God can not set a body in the world, without a circumscribed
place; nor any one body in many places at once, with such like: the which
(because they cannot, out of the dullness of their wit, or will not of
frowardness, conceive to be in nature possible) they flatly deny God to be
able to do: yea, some of them were so blind In a conference at Paris.
and bold, as to avouch God, not to be able to conceive or understand, how that
is possible; which notwithstanding very natural philosophy teaches, to have
no repugnance in it self, as in his place I have proved. If they were enemies
to Gods omnipotency alone, it might be somewhat excused, because that might
seem to proceed rather from the weakness of their understanding, then out
of any ill affection toward God: but if they do further oppose themselves
against the goodness, mercy, and justice of God; that must needs discover
very great impiety to lie festring in their bowels. Who sees not, that it does
highly attainte the inestimable goodness of God, and his tender love toward
mankind, to impute the reprobation of man and his eternal damnation, not unto
man's own wickedness and deserts, but unto the mere will and pleasure of God
himself? and yet this is too too common an assertion amangst the Protestants.
In colloq Monpelgar. page 522.
Let Beza one of their brauest champions, speak for the rest: God (says he)
in his secret counsel, has set down an unremovable decree, that he will not
have the greater part of men saved, nor to believe in Christ, and come to the
knowledge of truth; but has created, ordained, and predestined them to
everlasting damnation. Page 336.
To whom M. PER. in this book draws near, affirming it to proceed from
the very will of God, that he shows mercy to some and forsakes others. Mercy
(indeed) God of his mere goodness does power out upon us abundantly: but to
imagine that he of his own will and prime choice, without any foresight of our
sins, does forsake us, and appoint us to hell fire, is heinous impiety, most
contrary unto the very nature of God; whose goodness is so pure and sincere,
that it does good to all things, and wishes evil to none; unless they do
first greatly deserve it. What an ungodly opinion then is it, to hold that he
of his own free choice ordained man (a creature made to his own Image and
likeness) to most grievous and endless torments, without foresight of any
offense of his? As though he should take a singular pleasure, to see a
principal work of his own hands, fry in hell fire.

Another opinion some of them hold, which is yet much more blasphemous then the
other, to wit: that God, who has been always by good men esteemed the author
of all good, and so merely good in his own nature and will, that he cannot
possibly do or think any evil: that this Ocean (I say) of goodness, is
become the author, plotter, promoter, and worker of all the wickedness and
mischief, that is, or has been committed in the world. This is the doctrine
of Zwinglius a great Rabin among the new Gospellers, De prouid. Dei. page 365.
who avouches that when we commit either adultery, murder, or any such like
crime, that it is the work of God, he being the author, moving and pushing us
on to do it. Again, that the thief by Gods motion and persuasion,
murthereth, and is often times compelled to sin. In cap. 1. ad Romans
With him agrees Bucer, sometimes a professor of divinity in the university
of Cambridge; censuring him to deny God flatly, who does not firmly believe,
that God does work in man, as well all evil, as all good. Of the same
accursed crew was Melancthon, who upon the 8. chapter to the Romans, says:
Even as we confess Paul's vocation to have bin Gods proper work: so do we
acknowledge these to be the proper works of God, which are either indifferent,
as is to eat and drink; or that are evil, as the adultery of David, and such
like. For it is evident out of the first to the Romans, that God does al
things mightily (as Augustine speaks) and not permissiuely: so that the
treason of Judas is as properly the work of God, Li. 1. Inst. c. 18. ss. 1.
as the calling of Paul. But the principal proctor and promoter of this
blasphemy is Calvin, who of set purpose bestows a whole chapter of his
Institutions, to hell, to prove and persuade it. There he avouches boldly,
that the blinding and madness of Achab, was the will and decree of God: that
Absolon indeed defiling his fathers bed with incestuous adultery, committed
detestable wickedness; yet this was Gods own work: briefly, that nothing is
more plain, then that God blinds the eyes of men, strikes them with
giddines, makes them drunk, casts them into madness, and hardneth their
hearts. And whereas the poor Papists were wont to interpret such textes of
Scripture, as seem to attribute these things to God, by saying, that God does
indeed justly permit, and suffer such things to be done, but is not the
author of them: this, Calvin will not in any wise admit of, but in the same
place confutes it; saying. These things many refer to sufferance, as if in
forsaking the reprobate, he suffered them to be blinded by Satan: but that
solution (says he) is too fond, and so goes on, proving that God does not
only suffer, but actually effect and work all the evil, that any man
commits: yea, he adds that which is more horrible: that God does work
this evil in man, Ibidem sess. 17. 2.
by Satan's service as a mean; yet so as God is the principal worker of it,
and the Devil but his instrument. Is not this blasphemy in the highest degree,
to make God a more principal author, and worker of all wickedness, done in
the world, then the Devil himself? this is much worse then flat Atheism: for
it is the lesser impiety of two to hold that there is no God at all, then to
believe that God works more effectually all mischief, then the infernal
spirits do. But some of our Protestants will perhaps say, that they hold not
this opinion: be it so, for I think better of many of them: yet, be not these
men that so teach, as it were the founders of the new Gospel, and men of
chiefest mark among them? Now what force such principal authors (as they
take Melancthon, Zwinglius, Bucer, and Calvin to be) may have, to carry the
rest away into the same errors, I know not. Sure I am, that Caluins
Institutions (wherein this matter is so vehemently urged) is translated into
English, and in the Preface commended to all students of Christian divinity, as
one of the most profitable (the holy Scriptures excepted) for the sound
declarations of truth in articles of religion.

But to proceed on with this discourse: the Protestants do not only impugn
the power and goodness of God: but they do also pervert his justice. For to
omit their last position, that God is the worker of al sin in us compelling
(as Calvin speaks) the reprobate to obedience; and therefore cannot in
justice punish the poor wreatches, for being obedient unto his own will and
working: and not to urge their former assertion, that God of his own will and
decree, has predestined the greater part of men to hell, without any
foresight of their evil deserts: which if it were true, should it not be
intolerable wrong, to torment so rigorously innocents, that never offended
him? To let pass these points (I say) how can they defend the justice of God,
who hold that he has tied us to such laws, as are impossible to be kept by
any man? For Christ (as he testified himself) will condemn men to hell fire
for transgressing of these laws, Math. 7. verse. 23.
by working of iniquity; depart from me you that work iniquity: and what
equity should there be in that sentence, if it had never been possible for
these men to have done otherwise? For no reasonable Judge condemns any man
for not doing of that, which he knew well, lay not any way in his power to be
done. So that nothing is more plain and evident, then that the Protestants
doctrine trotteth apace toward open Atheism: by impugning the power of God:
by defacing his goodness, mercy, and justice, which in our understanding are
the chief properties of his divine substance: and by calling into question the
blessed Trinity it self, which their offspring and progeny the Trinitarians in
Poland do already deny flatly.

Thus much of their Atheismes against God. Now to those that be against our
Savior Christ Jesus: I have before touched their errors concerning his
Godhead; here I will speak of those that be against his Manhood, and
Mediatorship. First, it must needs argue in them a great want of good
affection toward our Savior, that they are so backward in his blessed Mother
the holy Virgins praises, not hearing with patience, any body that would so
much as salute her with the Hail MARY, Luc. 1.
which notwithstanding is recorded in the Gospel? and are besides so ready
upon every little occasion, to speak in her dispraise, that we may with good
reason reprove them, as men either wanting judgment (which they will not
endure of anything) or else void of due respect unto the Son, who are such
adversaries to the Mother: whom if they would not reverence for her own
virtues, which were most rare and singular; yet for her Sons sake (who loved
her so tenderly) they should show themselves better affected toward her, and
more forward in her praises, if they did indeed love and honor her Son, as
they pretend to do.

But let us come to Christ's own person. Whereas the first Adam was (at the
first instance of his creation) replenished with perfect knowledge: and it is
also in holy write said of the second, Ioh. 1. In cap. 2. Lu. v. 52. Collos. 2.
verse. 4.
that the word was made flesh, full of grace and truth: Yet they commonly
teach, that our Saviors soul was subject to ignorance, even as other men's
souls are: and that he was in his youth ignorant of many things. But what and
they spare him not (in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were
hidden) when he came to ripe years, and began now to preach? let us for a
taste, hear some of Caluins sweet observations upon the text of the Gospel;
because the purer brethren complain much, that M. Caluins works are in no
greater request. Christ (says he) Ex Calvin. Turcismo. li. 7. c. 13. Luc. 16.
Math. 7. Ioh. 1.
speaks improperly, Math. 6. verse. 18. he uses harsh and far-fetched
similitudes: he wresteth the Prophets words into a strange sense: he uses
triuiall and vulgar proverbs, as probable conjectures, not as sound
arguments; which he wills us to bear in mind, as a thing often practiced
by our Savior, in Math. ca. 12. verse. 25. Luc. 11. verse. 17. he speaks after
the manner of men, not out of his heavenly cabinette, Math. 11. verse. 21. which
is no less in plain English, then that he spoke untruly as men do. And very
suitable to this he notes else where, In cap. 7. Lu. v. 29.
that Christ could not get any other to be his Disciples, then some certain
poor fellows of the refuse and dregs of the people. Seem not these
execrable notes to issue from the pen of some malicious Jew, or rank Atheist?
yet are they but flea-bitinges in comparison of those which follow. In his
commentary upon these words of our Savior: Father if it be possible, let this
chalice or cup pass from me. Mat. 26. verse. 39.
He observes first, that this prayer of Christ was unadvisedly made: secondly,
that he overcome with grief, had forgotten the heavenly decree, not remembering
for the time, that he was sent to be the redeemer of mankind: thirdly, that he
withstood as much as in him lay, and refused to execute the office of a
mediator. See Calvin also upon these words of Christ: Ioh. 12. verse. 27.
Father save me from this hour: where he says, that Christ was so strooken
with fear, and so pinched on every side with perplexed pensiveness, that he
was forced through these boisterous waves of temptation, to waver and fleet
too and fro in his prayers and petitions. Is not this pitiful impiety?
Whereas our most loving redeemer, of set purpose took that fear upon him, and
most willingly both suffered, and caused that bloody agony and conflict, by
representing unto him self, both the shame and pain of his dolorous passion,
and the causes thereof (which were the innumerable most grievous sins of the
world) that he might in every part both of mind and body, endure what he
possibly could, for the time; and spoke nothing rashly, but repeated that his
prayer over three several times, as is set down in the text it self; to
show us how naturally he (as all other men) did abhor such a cruel and
ignominious death: and yet withal to instruct us, that we should be content
with it, and pray to God for strength to bear it, if it were his blessed will
to put us to the like. This wholesome doctrine and Godly instructions, are by
the ancient holy Fathers gathered out of that prayer of Christ: what a
venomous spider then was Calvin, to suck such poison out of it? if Christ so
wauered, where was his constancy? if he were so frighted (as Calvin falsely
imagines) where was his fortitude? if he strugled so against his Fathers
decree, where was his obedience? if he refused to redeem us, what was become
of his charity toward mankind? if the first motions to evil be deadly
sins in us (as the Protestants hold) what will they make of such tumultuous,
and unbridled passions in him, that had a greater command over them, then we
have? But we are not yet come unto the hight of his blasphemies, which he
powers forth more abundantly upon those our Saviors words: My GOD, my GOD,
why have thou forsaken me! Mat. 27. verse. 46.
saying: when this kind of temptation was proposed to Christ (as though God
being auerted from him, he had been appointed to utter destruction) he was
seized with horror. Li. 2. Instit. c. 16. sess. 11.
And in his Institutes treating of the same subject, says: Christ feared to
have been swallowed up of death as a sinner: And there can be no more
dreadful bottomless gulf, then for a man to feel himself forsaken and
estranged from God, and not to be heard, when he calls upon him, even as if
God had conspired his destruction: even thither we see that Christ was thrown
down, so that by enforcement of distress he was compelled to cry out: my
GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me. In the Paragraffe before, he speaks
more plainly, that Christ did hand in hand wrestle with the armies of hell, and
the horror of eternal death: finally, that in his soul he suffered the
torments of the damned, and al those punishments that are due to wicked men in
hell: He then (belike) was the traitor Judas companion: for the while he was in
the Devils hands to be tormented, be despaired and fared as men do in these
hellish torments. What greater blasphemy can be invented, then to condemn the
King of heaven, that came to redeem us all from hell, even to the very pit
of hell it self? Beza not willing to come behind his master Calvin in this
kind of impiety, whereas Calvin craftily admitted only, In cap. 5. ad Hebr.
verse. 7.
that Christ then despaired, he affirms plainly: that from Christ (strooken
with the horror of Gods curse) escaped the word of desperation. And else where,
that Christ was (with the huge heavy burden of Gods wrath, overwhelmed and
adjudged to the flames of hell: yea, buried and drowned in the bottom of the
infernal gulf: In ca. 27. Math. and 22. Luc.
This man (you see) desires to lodge Christ low enough, that would have him
drowned in the very bottom of hell. This their pestilent venime, they might
have sucked out of their good grandsire Luthers writings, who upon the very
same words, does make this goodly commentary. In Psalm. 22. ver. 1.
What shall we therefore say? Christ to have bin together both the most just,
and greatest sinner: both the most notorious lier, and truest teacher: at the
same instant, both the most highly glorying, and deeply despairing: both happy
in the highest degree, and most miserably damned. Unless we say this, I see
not (says this Oracle of the new Gospel) how Christ was forsaken of God.
See him also upon the third chapter to the Galatians, where he utters yet
more detestable speeches of Christ, to wit: that all the Prophets did in the
spirit foresee him to be the greatest thief, robber, murderer, adulterer,
sacrilegious person and blasphemer, that ever lived. I could cite you diverse
others of the same opinion, but I had rather note their extreme blindness,
who neglecting the ancient Fathers learned expositions of the holy Scriptures,
were led away with such horrible extrauagant conceits of our Savior, upon
so small occasion. For he at that very time hanging on the Cross, declared
himself to be most far of from all such hellish torments: yea, he showed all
possible signs of a most quiet and peaceable mind, praying for the salvation
even of his persecutors (he was not then belike in doubt of his own) promising
also to the good thief that the same day he should be with him in Paradise;
wherefore he doubted nothing of being there himself: recommending his Mother
unto his beloved Disciple, and him likewise to her; and to fulfill the
Scriptures, both saying I thirst, and citing even those very words, that they
are scandalized at, out of one of the Psalms of David: And finally, advisedly
considering all things belonging to his passion, to be accomplished, commended
his spirit unto his Fathers hands; so that there could not possibly be more
calm settled judgment, more valiant constancy and resolution, then there was.
But what meant he then to say, my GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me?
Forsooth nothing else, but to signify, that in all these torments which he
suffered, he had not any comfort or consolation at that time from God, who is
wont to give extraordinary aid and comfort to all those, that suffer for his
names sake: but that Christ might (as he himself desired) be put to suffer all
kind of extremity, all manner of inward consolation was wholely withheld
from him; which it pleased him then to express by manner of complainte in
those most pitiful words: My GOD, my GOD, etc. the more to move us to
compassion. Thus much of their impieties against Christ's person: now to those
that they teach against the office of his mediatorshippe.

They hold first, that whatsoever our Savior did or suffered before his
passion, was of small value for our redemption. For as a noble Protestant said,
the Monks, Molineus in harmonia, part. 51.
Priests, and Papisticall Doctors did err, when they urged Christ's
incarnation and nativity: for all these things profited us nothing; could do
nothing: but only the death of Christ, which alone was accepted of God for our
sins. Secondly, Calvin goes further, and doubts not to say, that Christ's
passion and corporal death would not serve the turn, Li. 2. Instit. ca. 16
sess. 10.
and had profited us nothing at all, had he not in his soul suffered the very
pains of the damned in hell. This doctrine of theirs is not only contrary to
an hundredth places of express Scripture, that do assign our redemption unto
the bloud-shedding and passion of Christ: but it also derogateth very much from
the dignity of our Mediator. For not that which he suffered, made the meritte
of our redemption: but it was his exceeding charity, with which he suffered it,
and principally the very dignity of his divine person, which gave that value,
price, and estimation to his sufferinges, that the very least thing that ever
he suffered in his life, was of infinite value; and therefore sufficient to pay
the ransom of all mankind: yea, to have redeemed a thousand worlds. But let
us proceed on with the Protestants opinion: did Christ's sufferinges of the
torments of hell deserve of God in justice, the redemption of man? not so, if
we may believe one of Foxes Martirs, who held (as he records) that Christ
with all his works could not meritte heaven for us. But for that little credit
is to be given to such a Martyr, Acts and monuments. page 487
and such a Martir-monger, let us hear what some of the learnest amongst them
say. I truly confess (says Calvin) that if a man will set Christ singly and
by himself, against the judgments of God, there will be no room for merit.
And after: L. 2. Insti. c. 17. ss. 1. In abster. calumni. Heshu.
Christ could not deserve any thing, but by the good pleasure of God. Finally,
the deseruinges of Christ depend upon the only grace of God, which is defended
by his disciple Beza against Heshusius: so that briefly, all Christ's
sufferinges in hell and out of hell, in true Protestant reckoning, amount to no
higher a value, then that by the good pleasure and acceptance of God, they
deserved our redemption; therefore in rigor of justice they were not of
sufficient worth to redeem us, but were only of grace, by God accepted for
such. Is not here a fair reckoning? so might any other man endued with grace,
have redeemed al mankind as well as Christ, if it had pleased God to have so
accepted it; seeing no equal recompense was to be expected. But to help him
here by the way, that could not understand how we were saved by the mercy of
God: if Christ's merittes did in justice deserve our salvation, it is to be
noted that both be true, if they be duly considered. For we are saved by
Christ's merits in rigor of justice, he satisfying of God as far-forth fully,
as we offended him: and yet we be saved freely by the mercy of God too; both,
because he has of his mere mercy without any desert of ours, given us Christ
his Son to be our Savior: and also for that he has (out of the same his
mercy) freely applied unto every one in particular that is saved, the merits of
Christ, through which he is saved.

To return to our purpose, and to discover yet more of the Protestants
disgraces offered to our Saviors mediation. Did Christ suffer his passion for
the redemption of all mankind, Co^. Hesh page 39. Sup. Ioh. page 39. In locis
fol. 361. 1. Ioh. 2. verse. 2.
or did he die only for some few of the elect? let Calvin answer you.
Christ's flesh was not crucified for the ungodly, neither was the blood of
Christ shed to cleanse their sins. With him agrees brother Bucer: Christ by
his death did only redeem the sins of the elect. Musculus will bear a part
in that consort: Christ's death is a satisfaction only for the sins of the
elect; all as contrary to the plain text of Scripture, as can be. Christ is a
propitiation for our sins (where he spoke in the person of the elect) and not
for ours only, but also for the whole worlds. Let us go on yet one step
further. What effect does the blood of Christ work in the small number of
these elected brethren? Does it cleanse their souls from al filth of sin,
and power into them the manifold gifts of the holy Ghost, whereby they may
afterward resist sin, Page 31.
and serve God in holiness of life? nothing less. For in the regenerate (as
M. PERKINS with all the rest of them does teach) there remains original
sin, which infecteth every work of man, and makes it a mortal sin. So
that inwardly in their souls these elected Protestants, be void of justice,
and full of all manner of iniquity: marry, they have created in them the rare
instrument of a new devised faith, by which they lay hold on Christ's justice,
and so by real imputation (to use M. PERKINS words) of Christ's justice to
them, they on the soddaine become exceeding just: therefore Friar Luther had
some reason to say, that whosoever was borne again of this Evangelical faith,
was equal in grace unto both Peter and Paul; Supra 1. Pet. 1. In actis disput.
Tigur. Fox Act. fol. 1335. and 1138.
and unto the Virgin MARY Mother of God: Nay, it seems that Luther came to
short, and Zwinglius struck home when he said: that God the Father did no
less favor all the faithful, then he did Christ his own Son. And out of
the confidence of the same liuely-feeling faith, proceeded these speeches of
our new Gospellers in England. And we have as much right to heaven, as Christ
has; we cannot be damned, unless Christ be damned: neither can Christ be
saved, unless we be saved. Christ (belike) could not live in bliss without
their holy company. What audacious compagnions, and saucy Gospellers were
these? yet their reason seems sound in the way of their own religion: for if
they were most assured of the benefit of Christ's own justice to be imputed
unto them, they could not be less assured of their own salvation, then they
were of Christ's own. To conclude this point, consider (good reader) how the
Protestants (who would be thought to magnify Christ's sufferings exceedingly)
do in very deed extremely debase them. For (as you have heard) they esteem
very little of all the rest of his life, besides his passion: secondly, they
make his passion without suffering of hell torments, not sufficient to redeem
us: thirdly, that all those sufferings put together, do not in justice merit
the remission of our sins, but only that of grace and courtesy, God does
accept them for such: fourthly, that when all is done, they deserve favor only
for a few of the elect, and that not to purge those few neither from all their
sins, but only to purchase them an imputation of justice, to be apprehended
by a strong imagination or rather presumption, falsely by them termed faith. Is
not here a huge great mill-post, fairly thwited into a poor pudding prick
(as they say) by them, who after so high exaltations of the all sufficiency of
Christ's suffering, do in fine conclude, that in a very few persons it
works only an imputation or shadow of justice: but it agrees very well and
hangs handsomely together, that by the merits of Christ's sufferings in hell,
(which are mere fantastical) these men should have created in them a
fantastical faith, never heard of before their days, to lay-hold upon a
vain shadow of an imputative and fantastical justice.

But to return unto Christ's mediatorship and merits. Is it not moreover a
great disparagement unto them, to maintain (as the Protestants do) that his
best-beloued spouse the Church, should continue but a small time, at least in
any sight, and should be penned up in corners: yea, and during that time too,
it should not be free from many foul gross errors, in the very foundation of
faith? Furthermore, that he left his holy word (the only rule and square (as
they hold) of Christian religion) to be understood of every man as his own
knowledge and spirit should direct him? and if any doubtful question did arise
there about (as he fore-sawe thousands should do) yet he took no other order
for the deciding and ending of them, but that every one should repair unto the
same his word, and doing his diligence to understand it, might afterward be his
own judge. As this later opinion would argue our blessed Savior, who was the
wisdom of God, to be the weakest and most improuident lawe-maker that ever
was: so the former does mightily blemish the inestimable price of his most
precious blood, making it not of sufficient value, to purchase unto him an
everlasting inheritance, free from all errors in matter of faith, and
abounding in all good works.

To fold up this part, let me entreat thee (courteous reader) to be an upright
judge between the Protestants doctrine and ours, in this most weighty matter
of Christ's dignity, virtues, and mediation; and if thou see most evidently,
that ours does more advance them, why should thou not give sentence on our
side? They make Christ ignorant many years of his life: we hold him from the
first instant of his conception, to have been replenished with most perfect
knowledge. They, that he spoke and taught now and then, as other men did; and
was subject to disordinate passions: We, that he was most free from all such,
and that he taught always most divinely. They make his very death not
sufficient to redeem us: we hold that the least thing that ever he suffered in
his life, deserved the redemption of many worlds. They, that he died only for
the elect: we, that he died for all, though many through their own fault, do
not receive any benefit by his death. They, that thereby we are not purged from
our sins, but by imputation: we, that all are by the virtue thereof inwardly
cleansed. They, that Christ purchased a Church consisting of few, not to
continue long, and subject to many errors: we, that he established a Church,
that should be spredde over all the world, and that should continue to the end
of the world visibly, and always free from any error in any matter of faith.
Finally, they hold that Christ left his holy word to the disputation of men,
not taking any certain order for the ending of controversies, that should
arise about it: we teach, that he has established a most assured means, to
decide all doubts in religion, and to hold all obedient Christians in perfect
uniformity, of both faith and manners. And because I am entered into these
comparisons, give me leave to persist yet a little longer in them. Consider also
(I pray you) who go nearer to Atheism, either we, that think and speak of
the most sacred Trinity, as the blessed Fathers in the first Council of Nice
taught: or they, who directly cross them, and by the nouelty of their phrases,
do breed new, or rather revive old heresies against it. Again, who carry a
more holy conceit of God, either they, who upon light occasion do rashly deny
God to be able to do that, which they do not conceive possible: or we, that
teach him to be able to do ten thousand things, that pass our
understanding. Whither they, that affirm God of his own free choice, to cast
away the greater part of men: or we, that defend him to desire the salvation of
all men, and not to be willing that any one perish, unless it be through his
own default. Either they, that hold him to be the author of all evil done in
the world, and the Devil to be but his Minister therein: or we, that maintain
him to be so purely good, that he cannot possibly either concur to any evil,
or so much as once to think to do any evil. Finally, whose opinion of him is
better, either ours, that hold him to have been so reasonable in framing of
his laws, that he does by his grace make them easy to a willing mind: or
theirs, that avouch him to have given laws impossible for the best men to
keep? If some Protestants do say, we do not maintain diverse of these
positions. I answer that it is, because they do yet in part hold with us, and
are not so far gone, as they do wholly follow their new masters: For if
they did, then should they embrace all the aforesaid damnable positions, being
so plainly taught by their principal preachers and teachers. These therefore
are to warn my dear Countrymen, to look to it in time; and then (no doubt)
but that all such as have a sufficient care of their salvation, considering
maturely whither the current and stream of the new Gospel carries them,
will speedily disbarke themselves thence, least at length they be driven by it,
into the bottomless gulf of flat Atheism.

And is it any great marvel, that the common sort of the Protestants fall
into so many foul absurdities touching religion, when as the very fountains,
out of which they pretend to take their religion, be so pitifully corrupted? I
mean the sacred word of God. Master Gregory Martin a Catholic man, very
skillful in the learned languages, has discovered about two hundredth of their
corruptions of the very text of Gods word: and after him one Master Broughton a
man of their own (esteemed to be singulerly seen in the Hebrewe and Greek
tongue) has advertised them of more then eight hundredth faults there in. And
the matter is so evident, that the Kings Majesty, in that public conference
holden at Hampton Court, in the first of his reign, confesses himself not to
have seen one true translation of the Bible in English; and that of Geneua,
which they were wont to esteem most, to be the worst of all others: and
therefore commanded them to go in hand with a new translation; about which,
fifty of the most learned amongst them in both Universities (as it is credibly
reported) have this three years travailed, and cannot yet hitte upon, or else
not agree upon, a new sincere and true translation. Here is a large field
offered me to exclaim against such corrupters and deprauers of Gods sacred
word: but I will leave that to some other time, because I have been to long
already. But what a lamentable case is this! they hold for the most assured
pillar of their faith, that all matters of salvation must be fished out of the
Scriptures, and cry upon all men to search the Scriptures: and yet are the
same Scriptures by themselves so peruersly mangled, that their own
pew-fellowes cry out shame upon them therefore: whereunto (if it please you)
join, that the Protestants have no assured means to be resolved of such
doubts and difficulties, as they shall find in the same word of God. For they
must neither trust ancient Father, nor rely upon the determination, either of
national or general Council; but every faithful man (by himself) examining
the circumstances of the text, and conferring other like places unto it
together, shall find out the right meaning of all obscure sentences, as they
most childishly bear their followers in hand. Briefly to conclude this point,
a great number of them having Gods word corrupted, for the lantern to their
feet; and their own dim sight, for their best guide: no marvel, though
they stumble at many difficulties in these high mysteries, and fall into very
absurd opinions, concerning the principal parts of them.

Now to make up an even reckoning with M. PER. Atheism, I must come unto
their divine service and worship of God, the third point that I promised to
handle; because he spared not to speak his pleasure of ours. First then,
whereas a true, real, and external sacrifice, is among all external works,
the most excellent service that can be done to the divine Majesty, as shall be
proved in the question of the sacrifice; which also has ever since the
beginning of the world, been by the best men practiced, to acknowledge and
testify, as well the sovereign dominion that God has over us, as our dutiful
subjection unto his almighty goodness: the Protestants to make known unto
the wiser sort, that they are not Gods true loyal people, will not vouchsafe
to perform to him any such special service, as to sacrifice in his honor:
nay they are fallen so far out with this principal part of Gods true
worship, that they do in despite of it, power out most vile reproaches against
the daily sacrifice of the Catholic Church, which contains the blessed body
and most precious blood of our redeemer JESUS Christ. Secondly, of seven
Sacraments (instituted by our Savior, both to exhibit honor to God, and to
sanctify our souls) they do flatly reject five of them: And do further (as
much as in them lies) extinguish the virtue and efficacy of the other two. For
they hold Baptism not to be the true isntrumental cause of remission of our
sins, and of the infusion of grace into our souls; but only to be the sign
and seal thereof. And in stead of Christ's sacred body, really given to all
Catholics in the Sacrament of the Altar, to their exceeding comfort and
dignity, the Protestants must be content to take up with a bitte of bread, and
with a suppe of wine: a most pitiful exchange, for so heavenly a banquet.
They do daily feel (and I would to God they had grace to understand) what a
want they have of the Sacrament of Confession, which is the most sovereign
salve of the world, to cure all the deadly and dangerous wounds of the soul.
Ah how caresty do they daily heap sin upon sin, and suffer them to lie
festring in their breasts even till death, for lack of launcing them in
season by true and due confession! Besides, at the point of death, when the
Devil is most busy to assault us, laboring then to make us his own for
ever, there is amongst them no anointing of the sick with holy oil in the
name of our Lord, (as S. James prescribes) joined with the Priests prayer,
Cap. 5. verse. 14.
which should save the sick, and by means whereof his sins should be
forgiven, and he lifted up by our Lord, and inwardly both greatly comforted and
strengthened: these heavenly helps (I say) and many others, which our Catholic
religion afford unto all persons, and by which rightly administered, God is
highly magnified, are quite banished out of the Protestant territories, and
consequently their religion for want of them, is mightily maimed. They have yet
remaining some poor short prayers to be said twice a week: for fearing
(belike) to make their Ministers surfette of over much praying, they will not
tie them to any daily prayers: Mattins, Euensong, and other set hours they
leave to the Priests, saving that on the Sabbath they solemnly meet
together at the Church, to say their service, which is a certain
mingle-mangle, translated out of the old portaise and Mass book, patched up
together with some few of their own inventions. And though it be but short,
yet it is (the Lord he knows) performed by most of them so slightly, that an
indifferent beholder, would rather judge them to come thither to gase one upon
another, or to common of worldly business, then reverently there to serve God.
Now as concerning the place where their divine service is said: if goodly
stately Churches, had not been by men of our religion built to their hands,
in what simple cotes (trow you) would their key-cold devotion have been
content to serve their Lord? if one Church or great steeple, by any mishap fall
into utter ruin, a collection throughout all England for many years together,
will not serve to build it up again: which makes men of judgment to
perceive, that their religion is exceeding cold in the setting foreward of good
works, and that it rather tends to destruction, then to edification. Again,
whereas our Churches are furnished with many goodly Altars, trimmed up
decently, and garnished with sundry fair and religious pictures, to strike
into the beholders a reverent respect of that place, and to draw them to
heavenly meditations: theirs have ordinarely bare walls, hanged with cob-webs
except some of the better sort, which are daubed like Alehouses, with some
broken sentences of Scripture. Besides, the ancient custom of Christians,
being to pray with their faces toward the Sun rising, to show the hope
they have of a good resurrection, and that by tradition received even from the
Apostles, as witnesses Saint Basil: their Ministers in their highest
mysteries, De Spiritu sancto. 27.
look over their communion table into the South: to signify (perhaps) that
their spiritual estate is now at the highest, and that in their religion there
is no hope of rising toward heaven, but assurance of declining.

I may not here omit, that of late years they have caused the Kings arms
to be set up in the place, where Christ's arms the Crucifix was wont to stand:
the which I confess would have graced their Church better, if it had been
else where placed. But I hope they will give me leave to ask them, how they
durst set up any such Images in their Churches, as be in that arms. For they
have taught hitherto, that it is expressly against the second commandment, and
a kind of Idolatry, not only to worship Images; but also to set them up in
Churches: and yet now (as it were) clean forgetting themselves, they fall
into that fault themselves, that they have so much blamed in others. Neither
will it help them to say, that they reproved only the setting up of holy
pictures, but not of others. For the second commandment (as they expound it)
is as well against the one as the other, forbidding generally the making of any
kind of Image. And is it not a pitiful blindness to think, that the
pictures of Lions and Liberts do better become the house of God, then the
Image of his own Son, and of his faithful servants? And may not simple
people think, when they see Christ's arms cast down, and the Princes set up
in their place, that there dwell men, who make more account of their Princes
honor, then they do of Christ's? And that their meeting in that place (call it
what you will) is rather to serve their Prince, then to serve Christ. But I have
been longer in their place of prayer then I thought.

I come now to the men that are elected to serve the Lord there. Be not many
of them (for the whole corpse I will not touch) such as Jeroboam was glad to
choose, when he made a Schism in Israel: to wit, de extremis populi, qui non
erant de filijs Leui: not lawful successors of the true Priests, but others
of the baser sort of the people, and them commonly that are notable, either for
ignorance or some other odd quality? and must they not also fill their good
patrons hands with some feeling commodity, before they can get a benefice?
And so beginning with simonie, lincked with perjurie (for the poor fellows
must nevertheless swear, that they come freely to their benefice) are they
not like to proceed on holily? As for the vow of chastity, the daily service
and often fasting, which Catholic Priests are bound unto; they by the sweet
liberty of the new Gospel, do exchange into solacing themselves with their
yoke-fellowes: this of the common sort of their Ministers. With their preachers
I will not meddle for fear of offense: yet if any desire to know how they
behave themselves in other countries, they may read the censure of a zealous
learned preacher, one of their own compagnions; who amongst many other things
writes thus of them. Menno l. de Christ fide. titul. de fide. mulieris Cananeae
When you come to preachers, who brag that they have the word of God, you
shall find certain of them manifest liars, others drunkers, some usurers and
foule-mouthed slanderers, some persecutors and betraiers of harmless persons.
How some of them behave themselves, and by what means they get their wives,
and what kind of wives they have, that I leave to the Lord and them. They live
an jdle, slothful and voluptuous life: by fraud and flattery they feed
themselves of the spoils of Antichrist (he means the benefices taken from
the Papists) and do preach just as the earthly and carnal Magistrate desires
to hear, and will permit, etc. So much, and not a little more, speaks one
great Master of the late reformation, concerning his Evangelical brethren.
Are not these goodly lamps of the new Gospel, and likely persons to be
chosen by Christ, to give light to others, and to reform the world? But
peradventure they have in some secret corners, certain devout religious
souls, who in an austere retired life, do with continual tears bewail the
sins of the rest, and make incessant suit unto the Almighty, for a general
pardon of the whole. Would to God they had, but I fear me that they be of
their invisible congregation, or rather none such to be found amongst them. For
those religious houses, which our Ancesters had built for such Godly and
virtuous people, who (forsaking both father, mother, all their kin and
acquaintance, and flying from all the pleasures and preferments, which this
transitory world could yield them) gave themselves wholly to the holy exercises
of humility, chastity, poverty, and all sorts of mortification: these
Monasteries (I say) and all that professed in them a retired religious life,
the Protestants have beaten down and banished, and have not in their places
erected any other, for the singular Godly men or women of their religion; Which
does most evidently argue, that there is in them small zeal, and rare
practice, of any such extraordinary piety and devotion. Surely it must needs
be a strange Christian congregation, that holds them for no tolerable
members of their common weal, whom Christ specially chooses to serve him day
and night; and by whose holy example and most fervent prayers, all other
Christians do find themselves much edified, and mightily protected. So that
briefly, whether you consider the persons that serve God; or the place where he
is served; or the manner of his divine service, the Catholic religion does in
every point surpass the Protestant by many degrees. Thus much in answer unto
Master PERKINS objection of Atheism against us, the which I esteemed fittest
for this Preface, being a matter of so great moment, and therefore most worthy
to be examined and considered of a part, with mature judgment. Now to the
rest of his questions, according to his own order.

OF THE REAL PRESENCE
OUR CONSENTS.
M. PERKINS Page 185.
We hold and believe a presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of
the Lords supper; and that no fained, but a true and real presence.

HITHERTO we agree in words, but in sense nothing at all. For he frames a
strange construction of that real presence: which (says he) must be considered
two ways. First, in respect of the signs; Secondly, in respect of the
communicants: the signs be bread and wine, with which Christ's body and blood
be present, not in respect of place and coexistence, but by sacramental
relation: that is, when the sacramental signs of bread and wine are present
to the hand, they do present to the mind of the receiver, the body and blood
of Christ. So that already M. PERKINS unfeigned, true real presence, is
shrunken into a sacramental relation, and only significatiue presence; such as
may well be of things as far distant the one from the other, as the cope of
heaven is from the center of the earth: a strange real presence surely. The
second kind of presence (says he) is in respect of the communicants, to whose
believing hearts he is also really present. If you ask whether this be not as
odd a kind of presence as the other was? he answers by going about the
bush: saying, that such as the communion is, such is the presence: and by the
communion you must judge of the presence. Ignotum (as they say) per ignotius.
He might shortly have said (if he had meant plain dealing) that by your faith
you must mount into heaven, and take hold on Christ sitting at the right hand
of his Father, and from thence draw his righteousness, and convey it to your
self: so that both sorts of his true real presence, is made without any
nearer meeting of the parties, then heaven and earth do meet together. But
let us give him the hearing: this real communion is made on this manner. God
the Father gives Christ in this Sacrament as really and truly, as any thing
can be given to man, and that not peece-meale, but whole Christ; yet, not the
substance of the Godhead, but the efficacy, merits, and operation are conveyed
thence to the manhood: but the whole manhood, both in respect of substance,
as of merits and benefits, is given wholly and jointly together. And when God so
gives Christ, he gives withal at the same time the spirit of Christ: which
creates in the heart of the receiver the instrument of true faith, by which the
heart does really receive Christ, by resting upon the promise which God has
made, that he will give Christ and his righteousness unto every true believer.
Now then, when God gives Christ and his benefits, and man by faith receives
the same; there rises an union between them, not forged but real, and so
near, that none can be nearer: and being a real union, there is a real
communion, and consequently, a real presence of Christ to the heart of him that
receives the Sacrament in faith. And thus far (says he) do we consent with
the Romish Church.

It may well be that you agree herein with the Romish Church, that is; with
some apish counterfeit of the Roman: but the true Roman Church condemns all
that fantastical kind of receiving, as you your self declare in the words
following. But before we come unto them, let us note by the way some strange
points (of doctrine shall I say) or rather dreaming of our conceited Masters
the Protestants. Who ever yet heard in true divinity, that the Godhead
considered apart by it self, had merits to convey to the manhood, as M. PER.
here teaches? for merits belong to an inferior in respect of his superior, of
whom he meriteth: now the Godhead is not inferior to any, as all but Arrians
confess. Again, how can whole Christ be given to man, as M. PER. first
affirms, if the substance of the Godhead be not given, as presently after he
declares? for the substance of the Godhead is the principal part of Christ,
who is both God and man. Moreover, how is Christ's substance as well as his
benefits, made ours; or really present to our faith, if we be made partakers
only of his righteousness, which may (as every man knows) well be, without
any bodily presence of his? besides, that fiction of his, that faith is created
in our heart, at the same instant that we receive the Sacrament, is very absurd.
For (as all the world witnesses) a man must be endued with faith, before he
go to receive that Sacrament; or else he presents himself most unworthily
unto that holy table. Lastly, if simple men and silly women should not receive
this Sacrament, until they understood M. PER. doctrine of sacramental
relation, of his real union and communion made by special faith in it (as no
man should receive, before he knows what and how he is to receive) then
surely they should never receive it, the manner of it is so intricate, and so
far passing their capacity. I may not omit here, that which I clipped off in
M. PER. discourse, to make it the more perspicuous: to wit, that Christ's
benefits are bestowed upon some by Gods imputation only; upon others they are
bestowed by a kind of propagation, which M. PER. cannot express fitly, but
does resemble it thus. As one candle is lighted by another, and so the light of
one is conveyed unto twenty candles: even so the inherent righteousness of every
believer, is derived from the storehouse of righteousness, which is the
manhood of Christ: this (I say) I could not but let the gentle reader
understand, that he may consider how slippery and unconstant the man is in his
own doctrine. In the question of justification, it is high treason to confess
any inherent righteousness in us. Page 66.
For (as he there says) it does raze the very foundation of religion: there
only he allows of a certain strange real imputation of Christ's justice
unto us; but here (having belike forgotten that ever he said any such word) he
teaches besides that imputative, an inherent righteousness to be co^ueied
from Christ into every righteous man's soul. With whom will this man agree
(trow you) that cannot agree with himself?

Let us now come unto the maine point of our dissent, which M. PER. delivers
thus: we differ not touching the presence it self, but only in the manner of
presence. For though we hold a real presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament: yet, we do not take it to be local, bodily, or substantial; but
spiritual and mystical: first to the signs, by sacramental relation; then
to the communicants, by faith alone. On the contrary, the Church of Rome
maintains a local, bodily, and substantial presence of Christ's body and
blood, by a change and conversion of the bread and wine into the said body and
blood; which they believe to be wrought by the virtue of Christ's words,
pronounced over the bread and wine by a lawful Priest, intending to do that,
which Christ at his last supper instituted and commanded him to do.

Master PERKINS reasons to the contrary be these.

This corporal presence ouerturneth sundry articles of faith. For we believe
that the body of Christ was made of the pure substance of the Virgin Mary, and
that but once: namely, when it was conceived by the holy Ghost. But this cannot
stand, if the body of Christ be made of bread, unless we believe contraries:
that the body was made of the Virgin, and not of the Virgin; made once, and not
once, but often.

We read not in our Creed, made of the Virgin Mary, but borne of her: now
there is great difference between made and borne. For a house is made of a
Carpenter; but is not borne of him: but the word made (which may also in good
sense be used) being fitter to cloak the fallacy; Master PERKINS cared not to
strain a little courtesy with the articles of our belief, and to thrust in
made, in stead of borne. But let this pretty jugling-tricke pass, and to his
argument I answer, that the appearance of this contrariety, proceeds either
out of mere ignorance of our doctrine, or else out of the equivocation of this
word made. For we hold, that Christ's blessed body is but once made, if made be
taken for to be fashioned and formed new from the beginning: so was it but
once made of the pure blood of the immaculate Virgin Mary; but may be again
and again well made present, under this or that form, or on this or that
altar: which has no shadow of contrariety with the other. For every man's body
which is but once made in his mothers womb, may afterward a thousand times
be made present, in one or diverse places. Now when we say with the ancient
Fathers, that of bread is made the body of Christ; the sense is, that the
substance of bread is turned into the body of Christ: so that then there is no
more the substance of bread under the forms of bread, but Christ's body which
succeeds in place of it; and therefore the bread is said to be turned unto
Christ's body, and Christ's body to be made of bread: not that any part of the
bread remains changed into Christ's body, or that Christ's body is a new
created and framed; but because that by that very action (wherewith the bread
is removed out the body is brought into that place) the one is said to be made
of the other; so that here is nothing contrary unto that article of our
belief: borne of the Virgin Mary.

No more is there unto that other specified by M. PERKINS: he ascended into
heaven; and from thence shall he come to judge, etc: for albeit he ascended the
fortith day after his resurrection, and shall at the last day come from thence
to judgment: yet, between those two days he may be where he will; and
wheresoever else he be, it has no direct repugnance with either branch of that
article: and therefore, it does but bewray the insufficiency of the Protestants
skill in the rules of opposition or repugnances; who so confidently auerre such
great contrariety to be, where there is none at all. But Augustine says,
Tract. 50. in Ioanne^. Lib. 9. in Ioannem. Lib. 2. ad Thras. Cont. Eutich. lib.
1. cap. 4.
that Christ according unto his Majesty, providence and grace, is present with
us to the end of the world; but according unto his assumed flesh, he is not
always with us: the same does also Cyril, Fulgentius, and Vigilius testify.

We answer: that Christ (in deed) according unto that visible form of a man,
in which he once lived here with his Disciples, has very seldom been seen
upon earth since his ascension; but according unto that form of assumed flesh,
sits on the right hand of his Father: which answer I take out of Vigilius
cited here by M. PER. For he says, that Christ is departed from us in the
form of a servant, that is: according unto his natural shape of man; but may
nevertheless be very well with us, under the forms of bread and wine in the
Sacrament, which S. Augustine insinuates in the very treatise alleged by M.
PERKINS, saying: that Christ is now with us in four sorts; by Faith, by the
sign of the Cross, by Baptism, and by the Eucharist: where making his manner
of being with us in the Eucharist, distinct from his presence both by faith,
sign, and grace, does show it to be a real bodily presence; which he
teaches most plainly upon these words of the Psalm, adore his foote-stoole;
concluding thereon, Psalm. 98.
that the same flesh which our Savior took of the blessed Virgin Mary, was
then, and is now to be adored in the Sacrament: therefore (notwithstanding his
being in heaven in form of man) he assuredly believed his natural body to be
really present in the Eucharist. So did S. Cyril another of M. PER. authors,
Libr. 12. cap. 31.
who upon S. John avouches, Christ (by his flesh received in the Eucharist) to
sanctify the souls and bodies of all communicants, and to be wholly in every
one of them; to whom I will join their equal S. Gregory of Nisse: who
says, Orat. de Paschate.
like as the Godhead does fill the whole world: even so consecration is made
in very many places, and yet is it but one body; so that by these worthy
writers judgments, Christ's ascension to heaven, does not any whit hinder the
real presence of his body in the holy Sacrament. And to dispatch here together
that which M. PER. repeateth again and again, that a true body cannot be in
two places at once: we plainly hold with the holy Fathers, that one and the
same body, may (by the omnipotent power of God) be in as many places at once,
as it shall please him to set it. That this has no repugnance with true
Philosophy, shall be proved in the next argument.

And here by the warrant of Gods word I will prove, that Christ's body de
facto, has been in two places at once. That since the ascension it sits at
the right hand of God in heaven, both we and they confess: but long after his
ascension, Actor. 9.
he appeared bodily unto S. Paul as he went toward Damasco: ergo, his body
has been in two places at once. Calvin turns himself on both sides, and
seeks all possible means to shift from the evidence of this place, saying
first: In cap. 9. Actor. Act. 22. verse. 15 Act. 26 verse. 16.
that it was some voice only heard from heaven by S. Paul, as at Christ's
baptism; but Christ was not there really. This is said most manifestly against
the plain text: God ordained that thou should see the just one, and hear a
voice out of his own mouth; therefore he was really present: and Christ
says, to this end I appeared unto thee. And S. Paul himself witnesses, 1.
Cor. 3 verse. 1.6 1. Cor. 15. verse. 8.
that he had seen Christ after his resurrection, even as the other Apostles
had done, which was in bodily presence: and in the same Act. 9. verse. 5. 4.
Instit 17. 29.
chap. S. Paul demanded of him that appeared, who art thou Lord? and he
answered, I am JESUS: was not he then present? What can be more plainly set
down, or is more often repeated in the very text of Scripture? yet, the blind
obstinacy of Calvin was such, that not being able to defend but that Christ
appeared, turns himself the other way, and had rather say that S. Paul's
eyesight was so much strengthened and made so sharp, that it pierced through
the heavens, and did see Christ sitting there on the right hand of his Father;
and so Christ did not descend, or was seen out of heaven, but S. Paul's sight
mounted up thither.

Reply. This doctrine is first repugnant to himself, who scoffeth at us for
maintayning that the Saints in heaven can hear our prayers, 3. Instit. 20.. 24.
and asks how they can have so long ears, and so sharp eyes, as to hear
and see so far off? which here notvvithstanding he attributes unto a poor
earthly creature, nothing comparable to the Saints in heaven. But besides that
contradiction, this his answer, is much more absurd then the other. For
whom he imagines to be so Eagle-eyed, that he could see into heaven; Act. 9.
verse. 8.
the text witnesses to be struck stark blind, and not able to see the
broad high-vvay before him. Again, if that vision had been through the virtue
of S. Paul's sight, his companions should not have been partakers of it: Act.
26. verse. 13. Act. 9. verse. 8. Act. 9. verse. 17.
but they did both see the light and also heard the voice, though not so
distinctly as to understand it. Further, there passed many speeches between
them: Who art thou Lord? What will thou have me to do? etc. which does
convince a sensible and bodily presence. Lastly, it is said directly, that
Christ appeared unto S. Paul in the way: not that he had seen him in heaven;
so that nothing can be more certain even by the evidence of Gods word, then
that Christ's body has been in two places at once; as well may it be in two
thousand, or in as many more as it shall please God to employ it: for there is
no greater repugnance in reason for being in many places, then for being in
two at once. S. Chrisost S. Ambros Primasius in cap. 10.
And as you have heard before, that S. Augustine, and S. Cyrill taught him to
be bodily present in as many places, as the blessed Sacrament is administered:
so do the ancient Expositors of the Epistle to the Hebrews affirm, that
Christ's body is offered now on many Altars at the same very moment. And to
cite one of their sentences at large: Lib. 3. de sacerdot.
S. Chrysostom cries out: O miracle! O goodness of God! he that sits
above with his Father, at the very same instant of time, is touched by the
hands of all; and does offer and deliver himself to them, who are willing to
receive him! Homil. 2. ad populu^ in fine.
and Helias left his cloak to his disciple Heliseus: but Christ ascending,
left us his flesh. Helias (in deed) cast his cloak off: but Christ both left
his flesh to us, and ascending took it up with himself. By this you see how
far this most holy and learned Father was, from arguing as our Protestants
are wont to do: his body is ascended, therefore it cannot be in the Sacrament.
Nay (says he) most expressly, it is both there, and here together: through
Christ's power and love toward us.

Master PERKINS second reason. This bodily presence ouerturneth the nature of a
true body, whose essential propriety it is, to have length, breadth, and
thickness: and by reason of these three dimensions, a body can occupy but one
place at once, as Aristotle said, the propriety of a body is to be seated in
some place: they therefore that say the body of Christ is in many places at
once, do make it no body at all.

Answer. We grant it to be the intrinsecall nature of a body, to have length,
breadth, and thickness; so that no body can possibly be without those
dimensions: but we deny it to be essential unto a body, to be seated in some
place. For quantity and vbi, be two distinct predicaments, as the learned
know; quantity being perfect in his own nature, without any relation to the
place: for quantity has an absolute and no respective essence. True it is,
that a body is by nature fit and apt to be seated in a place, which is that
that Aristole teaches of it. As a man naturally is apt to be learned; yet,
actually to be learned, is a mere accident to man, and many men be without
it: even so to be actually seated in a place, is altogether without the nature
of a body; in so much as the greatest body of all others (to wit) the highest
heaven, is without a place, there being no body without it, whose extremity
may enuiron and compass in that heaven being the highest body, as the nature
of a place requires: so that it belongs not to the essence and nature of a
body, actually to be in any place; and consequently, whether it be in a place,
or not in any place; whether it be in one place or in many places, the body
remains still a true perfect body, accomplished with all his substantial
parts. Again, our faith teaches us, that the natural subsistence and person
of a man (which is much nearer to the nature of man, then his seating in a
place) can be separated from man leaving his whole nature entire and perfect,
as it is in Christ our Savior; where the full complete nature of man, is
without his own natural subsistence and person, it being ingrafted and taken
into the person of GOD. How much more easily then, may his blessed body be
without occupying any place, which is far more extrinsecall to him? And
touching the taking up of as great a place, as the biggenesse of the body
requires, we hold upon the same grounds: that it is of no such necessity,
but that the power of God can dispense with it. For if a body may be in no
place at all, it may be in as little a room as it shall please God to enclose
it. Which our Savior also very plainly teaches: when he signifies that it
is possible to God, Mat. 19. verse. 26. Ioh. 20. verse. 26.
for to pass a Camel through the eye of a needle. And Christ himself entering
into the house, where his Disciples were assembled, the doors being shut;
gave us a manifest experiment, that a true natural body needs no space at
all to be seated in, but may (by divine power) pass through other solid
bodies: so that it remains evident to them that have skill in Philosophy,
that there is no such repugnance in a true natural body, but that it may be in
many places at once; or in as little a place as it shall please God to bestow
it. And when any of the ancient Fathers say, that bodies must needs have
places proportionable to them; they mean, that according unto the ordinary
course of nature, so it must be: yet they do not deny, but that God can
otherwise dispose of them.

M. PERKINS third reason. Transubstantion overthrows the very supper of the
Lord. For in every Sacrament there must be a sign, a thing signified, and a
proportion between them both. Good, let it be remembered: but the Catholics
real presence takes all away. For when the bread is really turned into the
body of Christ then the sign is abolished, and there remains nothing but the
outward forms of bread and wine.

Answer. Not so: for there is also the body and blood of Christ as we hold,
and so at the most there is nothing gone but the sign only, as he terms the
bread: but neither is that taken away, and then all remains whole. For not
the substance of bread and wine, but the outward forms of them, are the sign
of the Sacrament. For they alone do no less represent unto our mind and
understanding, the spiritual feeding of our souls by Christ's body, then if
they had the substance of bread under them: as the similitude of fiery tongues,
Act. 2.
without the true substance of tongues, did sufficiently signify the gift of
tongues, bestowed upon the Apostles at the feast of Pentecost. Math. 3.
And it is not necessary to believe, that the Dove which descended upon our
Savior at his baptism, was a true natural Pigeon: but the outward shape of a
Dove, was sufficient to express those Doue-like qualities which were in our
Savior: so the outward show of bread and wine, although the substance be
absent, serves very conveniently to make us remember and understand, that even
then when we receive the blessed Sacrament, our souls are as spiritually fed
with it, as our bodies are wont to be with bread and wine: or which is
signified secondarylie, that as bread is made of many grains of corn, united
and compact into one mass and body; even so all we Christians by receiving
the Sacrament worthily, and by the spirit of Christ dwelling in us, are made
one mystical body of Christ; and should therefore one love and tender the good
of another, as members of the same body are wont to do: All this (I say) the
outward form and show of bread only, does as well present unto our minds,
as if the substance of bread were there present with it.

Again (says M. PER.) it abolisheth the ends of the Sacrament. First, it
makes we cannot remember Christ: who being present bodily in the Sacrament
needs not be remembered, because helps of remembrance are of things absent.

Answ. A man would think (were not his wits somewhat distempered) that he
might be remembered best, that is most present to us: neither is remembrance
only of things absent. For as every one may well remember, when they see one
whom they have seldom seen before; the very sight of him, or his speech, or
some other token which he tells, calls us to remembrance of him, who is
personally then present. But if this were not so: yet, were the end of the
Sacrament accomplished most perfectly. For by Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament, we are admonished to remember, not his body barely; 1. Cor. 11.
but his death on the Cross (as S. Paul expounds it) which death of his is
absent: and by the consecrating of his body apart from his blood, and by the
elevation of it, is represented unto us very lively; and so we are put in mind
and made to remember a thing absent, to wit: the death and passion of Christ.

Moreover, M. PER. says, that an other end of the Sacrament is, to feed the
soul with eternal life: but by transubstantiation the principal feeding is
of the body, and not of the soul, which is only fed with spiritual food.

Answer. Alas, into what straightes was he brought when he wrote this? a man
would think, that if the substance of bread remained still (as in their
counterfeit Sacrament it does) it should rather be food for the body then for
the spirit. For bread (as fools know as well as physicians) does nourish the
body naturally. We then that remove the substance of bread out of the
Sacrament, must needs therefore mean to feed only the soul thereby, and not
the body at all. For Christ's blessed body received in the Sacrament, is
nurriture only of our soul, by his graces bountifully bestowed upon the worthy
receiver; it gives to the body only, a certain seed or pledge of
immortallity, according unto that: Ioh. 6. verse. 54.
He that eats my flesh, etc. has life everlasting, and I will raise him up
in the last day.

M. PERKINS fourth reason. In the Sacrament the body of Christ is received, as
it was crucified, and his blood as it was shed upon the cross, but now the
act of crucifying is past; it is faith alone, that makes Christ crucified to
be present unto us in the Sacrament. ergo.

Answer. We deny his first proposition: for we receive the same body that was
crucified, but not after that bloody manner, as it was there used; but under
the forms of bread and wine, which Christ's own words do importe: take
eat, this is my body, that shall be given for you: he says not (as M. PER.
does) as it shall be given for you; that is not in the same manner, though it
be the same in substance. Yet (as I once said before) the consecration of his
blood in the Chalice, as it were a part from his body, and powered out with the
lifting up of the body after consecration (as it is done in the Mass) with the
breaking and receiving of the holy Host, does lively represent unto the
faithful, Christ's blessed death and passion. But what resemblance has the
eating of bread, and drinking of wine (the Protestants holy communion) with the
crucifying of Christ? Is eating and drinking of so pleasing food, meet to
express Christ's drinking of gall, and most painful torments? by their
feeling faith, they would salve this, but they cannot. For besides faith, there
must be (as M. PER. himself before confessed) a proportion between the sign
and the thing signified; but there is no proportion between eating of fine
bread, and drinking of good wine, with the dolorous cross of Christ. Seeing
then, that in the Sacrament (as M. PER. teaches) Christ's body must be
received, as it was crucified, he must needs appoint something else then bread
and wine, to be the signs of this Sacrament: for they be most improper to
represent Christ's passion.

Again (says he, discoursing very learnedly) That blood which ran out of
Christ's side was not gathered up again; nay, the collection of it was
needless, because after the resurrection, he lived no more a natural, but a
spiritual life.

Ans. Here is a proper piece of divinity. He might as well say (if his reason
were good) that Christ's body is not risen again, because a body also, is as
needles unto a spiritual life. The truth is, that the body with the blood in
the veins of it, is risen again: else were it no true resurrection, which is
only when the very same body numero, with all the same parts and parcels of it,
which it had before, be restored unto their former essence and integrity. Note
by the way, the admirable rare virtue of the Protestants faith, whose property
is (says M. P.) to give a being unto things, which are not. What being good
Sir? that any thing should be extant in the world, which before was not? yes
marry, that that blood should be received spiritually, which is not at al. True
(perhaps) in the Protestants vain imagination: but (in deed) most ridiculous,
to imagine that that can be received either corporally or spiritually, which
is not extant, nor has any being at all. For a thing must be of it self,
before it can be received of an other.

1. Cor. 10. verse. 3.
M. PER. fifth reason. The fathers of the old Testament did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the
rock which was Christ; but they could not eat his body which was not then
crucified, but by faith: the Papists answer, that the fathers did eat the
same meat among themselves: and not that which we eat, that is: all the
Israelites did eat the same spiritual food of Manna, and did drink all of
the water, which issued out of the spiritual Rock, one of them as well as an
other: yet, they had not the same Sacraments, that we Christians have; neither
did they receive the same that we do. But M. PER. will prove that they had:
Because (says he) the Apostles intent is, to prove that the Jews were every
way equal to the Corinthians, and in nothing inferior.

Reply. S. Paul meant and intended nothing less: but in the same his Epistle,
and in many of the rest, expressly teaches the state of the Christians (such as
the Corinthians were) to surpass far the state of the Jews. For the old
Testament is compared to the letter that kills, 2. Cor. 3.
and therefore called the ministration of damnation: the new, to the spirit
that quickneth, and to the ministry of justice: and the old Testament did
engender to bondage, Gal. 4.14 Verse. 1. Ver. 3. and 9 Hebr. 10. verse. 1.
the new to liberty. And there they were as servants; we as heirs: they
serving under the weak and poor elements of this world: we having the spirit
of sons, etc. And the law had a shadow of the things to come, not the very
Image, as we have; so that nothing could be further from the Apostles meaning,
then to make the Jews equal in Sacraments and graces, with the Corinthians
who were Christians. But his intention was (as may be easily seen by that
which goes before and follows) to warn the Corinthians to chastise their
bodies, as he himself did (as he says in the end of the Chapter going before)
and to fly from all vice; and not to rely only upon the extraordinary gifts of
God bestowed upon them. For (says he) the ancient Israelites all, were
partakers of many singular favors of God: as of the eating of Manna, of
drinking of the Rock, etc. And yet, because many of them committed fornication
and lived wickedly, God was not pleased with all of them. Observe also that
not one thing there mentioned by the Apostle was a Sacrament among the Jews;
and therefore are they unskillfully compared with our Sacraments. For a
Sacrament is a set ceremony, to be used ordinarily in the worship of God: but
their passing through the red Sea was but once, therefore no set ceremony:
their eating of Manna, and drinking of the Rock, were but natural refections
to them; yea, their cattle did drink of the Rock as well as their Masters:
which things, though they did prefigure our Sacraments; yet, were no
Sacraments at all, and much less any thing in virtue comparable to our
Sacraments.

M. PERKINS sixth reason. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath: so it may be said, that the Sacrament was made for man, and not man
for the Sacrament; and therefore man is more excellent then the Sacrament, the
end being always better then the thing ordained to the end: but if Christ's
body be really in the Sacrament, then is not man more excellent then it. ergo.

Ans. By the like argument you may as well prove, that the Son of God is not,
nor ever shall be incarnate for the redemption of man: or else (which is most
absurd) that man is better then God, because for us men, and for our salvation,
Christ descended from heaven, and was borne of the V. Mary. The end then, being
always better then the thing ordained to the end (as M. P. argues) either
Christ is not yet borne to redeem man; or else man is better then Christ. See
what goodly arguments they use, to deceive the simple withal! the direct
answer is, that the maine and principal end of Christ's incarnation, passion,
and real presence in the Sacrament, is the glory of Gods justice, wisdom, and
goodness, and of his own mercy and bounty, which are more excellent then
Christ's incarnation and real presence: man's redemption, spiritual feeding
and salvation, are but secondary ends, which are far inferior unto our most
loving redeemers mercy, kindness, and charity, through which he has procured
it.

M. PER. confirms this reason with that which is nothing like it, saying:
Euer^ believer in the supper of the Lord, receives whole Christ God and man,
though not the Godhead (which words imply a manifest contradiction. For how
can God, or whole Christ be received, without the Godhead) but by carnal
eating we receive not wholly Christ, but only a part of the manhood: and
therefore in the Sacrament there is no carnal eating, nor real presence.

Answ. We Catholics do eat al Christ's body wholly. For we part not his body,
but believe that it is whole in every consecrated Host. Moreover, because his
blessed body is a perfect living body, we know also that it has blood in it,
as other bodies have; and is (yet further) joined with his most holy soul:
and so in receiving his body, we receive all his manhood both body and soul.
Over and besides, his Godhead being lincked and joined inseperably with his
manhood; whole Christ both God and man is always received together; so that
every lay Catholic communicating but under one kind, does receive Christ's body
and blood: yea wholly, both all his manhood and Godhead: whereas, in the
Protestants natural communion of bread and wine, there is (in deed) neither
body nor blood, not any piece of Christ, but only in their own fantastical
imagination; so that those their ordinary outcries are most fond: The Papists
rob you of the blood, being one part of the Sacrament: Whereas Catholic
Pastors give to their flock under one kind, both the body and blood; yea, the
very soul and Godhead of Christ, as you have heard. But the Protestants are
the great Thieves in deed, who defraude their unhappy followers of both body
and blood, and give them only sacramental signs and relations, to feed their
foolish fantasies.

Before I come unto M. PER. last reason taken from authority, I think it
fittest to place here certain other objections, which out of place he hudleth
up together, in the answer unto our second argument, where he says: first,
that Christ's body could not be received in bodily manner, before his passion.

We say contrarily, that it could be as well before, as after. When he goes
about to prove his position, he shall be answered.

Secondly, That Christ was the Minister of this Sacrament, and therefore if he
had converted bread into his body, he should have taken his own body into his
hands: which we grant, following S. Augustine upon these words: He was
carried in his own hands. Conc. 1. in psalm. 31.
How this may be understood (says he) of David literally, we find not; but
we find it in Christ: for Christ was carried in his own hands, when
delivering his own body, he said: this is my body. For then he carried that
his body in his own hands.

M. PER. adds yet further, that it should also follow that Christ did eat
his own flesh: for he did communicate also (says he) to consecrate his last
supper in his own person. This may be true, though it have no warrant in the
word. For S. Hierome a holy and most learned Doctor, does affirm it, saying:
Epistol. ad Hedibian quaest. 2.
our Lord Jesus is both the guest and the banquet; he who does eat, and is
eaten: and no greater inconvenience is this in our opinion, then in theirs. For
who more meet to receive. Christ's blessed body, then himself? and what more
foolish, then for Christ by faith to apply himself and his benefits, unto
himself? which (as you have heard before out of M. PERKINS) is to receive the
Lords supper like a good Protestant.

Lastly he avouches, that if we eat Christ's body really, we must needs be
man-slayers: but he forgotte to prove it, dixit and abijt. If other proof
failed him, he might have fled unto the rusty opinion of the old farne
Capernaites, which is mentioned in the Gospel it self. For they (as S.
Augustine expounds it) thought that Christ would cut his flesh in pieces, as
butchers do beef in the shambles, and either raw or roasted, have given it to
be eaten; to some a leg, to other an arm, etc. But we Catholics do eat
Christ's body whole, and that without any detriment or diminution unto that
blessed body, which is not extended under the parts of the sacred Host, so as
one part of his body is under one part of it, and another part under another:
but is after the manner of our soul in the body, the whole body under the
whole Host, and the whole under every part of the Host; and so without any
parting or dividing of his body, it is wholly received of every communicant, and
remains after whole in their bodies, imparting his grace to their souls, so
long as the forms of bread tarry in their stomachs in their proper shapes, and
afterward ceasseth to be there any longer: which is confirmed by those divine
words of the glorious Apostle S. Andrewe, recorded by his most dear
Disciples. Libr. de pass. eius.
When the immaculate lamb is truly sacrificed, and his flesh truly eaten of
the people, he nevertheless remains and continues whole and alive. That
which he peeceth too, of the necessity which we are brought unto by our
doctrine, to hold that our bodies be nourished by naked qualities, which (says
he) is erroneous in Philosophy; is not worth the answering. For neither are we
driven to hold that, unless it be out of the bounty of our own good wills.
For it is nothing material ^o the real presence, whether our bodies be
nourished by the accidents there present or no: neither is it so clear a case
in Philosophy, whether odours (that are naked quallities) do nourish or no? as
they, who have studied Philosophy know. And lastly, all matters of faith are
above the rules of Philosophy: wherefore the real presence of Christ's
blessed body in the Sacrament, being a memorial and monument of all his
merueilous works; it must not be thought strange, if there follow of it, many
things above the reach of natural Philosophy: and yet not so many (perhaps)
as must needs be granted by them, as well as by us; in the resurrection of our
bodies; which (notwithstanding those difficulties in Philosophy) all Christian
men do firmly believe.

Now let us come unto such authorities as M. PER. cites in favor of their
part, which neither are many, nor taken out of the more famous fathers of
either Greek or Latin Church; and which is more admirable, not one of the
authors by him cited, but that in the very same words which he alleges to
disprove the real presence, they do evidently auerre and prove it: so well
known and confessed a truth was this of the blessed Theodorete says, The same
Christ, who called his natural body food and bread, who also called himself
a vine; he vouchsafed the visible signs, the name of his own body: not
changing nature, but putting grace to nature. Here are scarce two words
together; as it is in the author. The former part of his words be: Our Savior
changed names, giving to his body, the name of the sign; and to the sign, the
name of his body, that is: he called his body bread, and bread his body; so
that here is as much for us, as against us: and the latter part of the sentence
is wholly for us. For Christ would (says he) have them that he partakers of the
mysteries, not to attend unto the nature of the things which are seen (that
is bread and wine) but by reason of the changing of names, to give credit to
that change, which is made by grace, that is: they hearing in consecration that
which was before bread and wine, to be then called his body and blood, should
believe that then also bread and wine, were changed and made his body and
blood; that change being wrought by the virtue and grace of his word. To these
words of Theodorete in his first Dialogue, he joyneth other words of his
taken out of his second, yet quoting the same Dialogue. The mystical signs
after consecration leese not their nature: for they remain in their first
nature, figure and form, and may be feine and touched as before. Here M. PER.
should have stopped in the midst of the sentence, as they are sometimes
accustomed to do, and then had he left some show of words for his part; yet,
such as might easily be answered: but when the reason of the remaining of
mystical signs in their former nature and figure, is (as he himself
declares) that they may be seen as before; he does give the learned reader to
understand, that he speaks not of the inward substance of them, but of the
outward appearance, which is the proper object of the senses: which outward
accidence, has a certain kind of essence and nature, as well as the substance
it self. But that which follows in Theodorete puts al out of doubt. For
he adds: The mystical signs may be seen as before: but that which they are
made, is understood. And what is it understood to be made? Marry, even that
which we believe and adore: which can be no other thing, but the true real
body, of Christ Jesus God and man. For in him do we believe, and him do we
adore. See then, how this his first and best author, disproueth plainly his
own position. M. PER. second author is one Gelasius, an old writer I
confess, but where or what he was, De duabus naturis Christi.
it is uncertain. This man says: Bread and wine pass into the substance of
the body and blood of Christ; yet they cease not, but remain still in the
property of their nature: these words be flat against M. PER. and the
Zwinglians doctrine, in that they teach bread and wine to pass into the
substance of Christ's body. The other clause seems to make for the Lutherans:
yet, may be interpreted, that they remain still in some property of their
nature, that is: in the same form, color, and taste, as they did before. M.
PER. goes on. Lib. 4. sentent. did. 11.
Lumbard says, if he be asked what conversion this is, whether formal or
substantial, or of any other kind, he cannot define it.

Ans. Gentle reader turn to the place, and embrace his resolution. For most
formally does he deliver our doctrine; and that proved by the testimony of the
ancient Fathers: albeit, the name of transubstantion were not then in use.

From the Fathers sentences, M. PER. falls to collections of his own, out of
them. First (says he) they used in former times to burn with fire, that which
remained after the administration of the Lords supper, and therefore took it
not for his body: and quoteth for proof of this Hesichius, Libr. 2. in Leuit.
c. 8.
where he shows either over great boldness, if he did not see the place, on
exceeding wilful malice, if he read it. For that ancient writer (out of that
ceremony of burning all that was left of the Pascal lamb) does gather the
clean contrary, to wit: that if we cannot understand how these things which
we see are turned into our Lords body (Into which mystery the Angels (says
he) with their clear sight cannot pearce) then must we cast into the fire of
the holy Ghost, these things; persuading our selves, that to be possible unto
the virtue of the holy Ghost, which seems to us impossible: See what fire
that worthy author speaks of. And in the sixth book and two and twenty
Chapter of the same work, he speaks yet more plainly, saying: That he
receives ignorantly, who knows not the virtue and dignity of this Sacrament,
and who is ignorant that it is the body and blood of Christ in truth; so that
old Hesichius condemns them of ignorance for not beeleuing Christ's body to
be truly in the Sacrament. Secondly (says M. PERK.) by the sacramental union
of the bread and wine, with the body and blood of Christ, they used to confirm
the personal union of the manhood of Christ with the Godhead, against
heretics. Let us admit this to be true: for then it follows necessarily
against himself, that the true body of Christ, is really present in the
blessed Sacrament, as his true Theodoret (whom he quoteth) be well read, you
shall find, that they against whom he writes, objected this common doctrine
of the Church (that bread is turned into the body of Christ) to prove, that the
manhood of Christ was turned into the Godhead; and consequently, that there
were not two natures in Christ, but one. And albeit the consequent was
Heretical; yet the antecedent was Catholic, good, and not denied of
Theodoret, but that there was a real conversion of bread into the true body of
Christ: and therefore did other Heretics (who denied our Savior to have true
flesh) deny also consequently, the truth of the blessed Sacrament, as the same
Theodoret does witness out of S. Ignatius, in these words. They admit not the
Eucharist and Sacrifice, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be the
flesh of our Savior, which was crucified for us, and which the Father of his
benignity raised again.

Libr. 17. cap. 25.
M. PERKINS further objecteth, that Nicephorus reports, that young children
were sent for from the scoole, to eat that which remained of the Sacrament:
which (says he) was a sign, that they thought it not to be Christ's body.

Not so: for he so reports it, that any man may see, that he believed it to
be the very body of Christ. For first he says, that those children were pure
and incorrupt, not fallen from their state of innocence. Secondly, that they
were fasting. Thirdly, he affirms in plain terms, that they received the
immaculate body of JESUS Christ God and Man. Finally, he proves it so to be,
and that by miracle. For one of the children who had received that morning,
being by his father a malicious Jew, afterward cast into a glasiers furnace
most fiery hot, and shut in there for three days space was miraculously
preserved alive, and found there without any hurt at all, by virtue of the
blessed Sacrament which he had received. What strange blindness then was this,
to allege this against the real presence, which so admirably does confirm
it? We know that in certain places, some used to give the blessed Sacrament
unto children: yea, unto sucking babes, being also dipped in the chalice; which
rather proves our opinion. For they thought it necessary for all that would be
saved, to receive this holy Sacrament. Now these infants, could have no such
act of faith (as the Protestants doctrine requires) to make their communion:
therefore, at that time they held the same kind of real presence which we
do; which is made by lawful consecration of the Priest, and not by the faith
of the receiver. And that you may perceive, that I speak not only by guess,
take the profession of one of those authors whom M. PER. alleges, Amalarius
by name, who says in the work cited by M. PER. Lib. 3. de Eccl. offic. cap.
24.
Here we believe the nature of pure bread and wine (mixed with water) to be
converted into a nature endued with reason, to wit: into the nature of the body
and blood of Christ: can any thing be more plain against them? Finally, M.
PER. collecteth out of one Nicholas Cabasilas, his exposition of these words
of the Mass, Sursum corda, lift up your hearts: that (the people being willed
by the Priest to lift up their thoughts from the earth, and to think on
things above) Christ is not really present with them; but only on the right
hand of his Father. To which we answer, that when those words were spoken,
Christ's body (in deed) is not there really present, for they are in the
preface before the Canon and consecration: but is made present afterward, by
the words of consecration. Secondly, that he might (notwithstanding those
words were spoken after the consecration, as they be before) be there present.
For being admonished to call our minds and hearts from earthly things, and to
lift them up to consider heavenly: what more divine and heavenly subject can we
meditate upon, then our Savior Jesus Christ there present, and the holy
mysteries of his incarnation and passion there represented, and the infinite
mercies and goodness of God, powered out on us through him, and by means of
this holy Sacrifice? and thus much in effect, does the answer unto those
words signify (We lift up our hearts unto our Lord) to attend upon him at this
time specially, in these his holy mysteries. Observe, that we are not bidden to
lift up our eyes to behold the sun, or to contemplate the stars in the
sky; and so you may see, that the Protestants ignorance in the words of the
holy Mass, does little avail them or help their bad cause. Thus at length we
are come to an end of M. PERKINS reasons against us, now to those that he
makes for the Catholic party, which are both few in number, and very barely
propounded; but by the help of God, I will do my endeavor to supply his
negligence therein.

The first, is taken out of these words of our Savior. Ioh. 6. verse. 51.
The bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. Here is a plain promise made by Christ Jesus (that fails not of
his word) of giving us his flesh to eat, and that very flesh which on the
Cross was to be given for the redemption of the world: these words be so
evident, that they who heard them, made no doubt of the sense of them; but were
astonished at it, and said: How can this man give us his flesh to eat? they
doubted not but that Christ had said, that he would give them his flesh to
eat, his speeches were so plain for it; but yet believed they not, that he
could do it. Now what replied Christ unto their doubt? that he would give
them only bread to eat in remembrance of him? which would surely have
satisfied them thoroughly, because nothing was more easy to do then that. But
truth is not to be concealed, for fear of Pharasaicall scandal: and therefore
he told them very roundly, That unless they did eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood. They should not have life in them. And he that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting. And yet more
expressly: My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood drink in deed. How should
he have made the matter more plain?

To this M. PERKINS answers, first; That Christ speaks of a spiritual
eating by faith: because the very point that he intends to prove, is; that to
believe in him, and to eat his flesh, is all one.

This answer is absurd: For even in their own doctrine, there is a great
difference between believing in Christ, and receiving the communion; for many
do believe in Christ when they do not receive the communion: receiving being
(as they teach) a seal or confirmation of believing. And to say, that Christ
there makes no difference between believing in him, and eating of his flesh,
is flat against the text. For saying that he would hereafter give them his
flesh to eat, he does declare, that he speaks not of believing in him,
which he would have them to do presently; and many of them did believe in
him before, who could not digest his doctrine of the Sacrament.

Again, it is altogether unlikely, that our Savior would have used such
strange offensive speeches (as the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his
blood) to signify only, that they must believe in him: and that he seeing them
so much scandalized at those his hard and unusual phrases, that they were
ready to forsake him; would yet, not once in plain terms interpret them,
for the saving of so many souls: wherefore, it remains most manifest, that
by eating of his flesh, he meant something else, then believing in him. And M.
PER. other shift, that in all the sixth Chapter of S. John, Christ speaks not
one word of eating his flesh in the Sacrament, is so contrary unto the evidence
of the text it self, and unto the exposition of all ancient Fathers, that it
deserves no answer; especially, when neither by reason or authority, he
goes about to fortify it. But I muse why he did omit, their ordinary
objection out of the same place: The flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit
that quickneth. It may be (perhaps) because he knew that the words being
rightly understood, make more against the Protestants then for them. For the
flesh there, must be taken either for Christ's flesh, or for our flesh: if for
Christ's flesh, Tract. 27. in Ioanne^.
then (says S. Augustine) How can it be, that it profits nothing? when he
said before: unless yo eat my flesh, you shall have no life in you. What
therefore means this, it profits nothing? Marry (says he) it profits
nothing as they understood it. For they took they should eat it, as it is
torn and cut in pieces, being dead and sold in the shambles; and not as it is
quickened with the spirit, which he does illustrate with the comparison of
knowledge, which being alone, does puff up (scientia enim inflat) but being
joined with charity, does edify. Even so (says he) when the spirit is coupled
with the flesh, then does it profit very much, or else the word would not
have been made flesh, and have dwelled among us. With S. Augustine agrees S.
Cyril upon that place; In cap. 6. Ioannis.
but more literal seems to be the interpretation of S. Chrysostom, followed
by Theophilact and others, upon this place: that by the flesh, is to be
understood our fleshly and natural reason, which in these mysteries of faith,
does rather hinder then help us. For man's wit of it self, cannot comprehend
how bread may be turned into Christ's body; not how so great a body can be
in so little a room, etc. but informed with faith and Gods grace, it is then
well assured, that whatsoever Christ says is true, and that nothing is
impossible to him, how contrary soever it seem unto flesh and blood. For,
his words (as it follows in the text) be spirit and life, that is: be of
divine force, and give life and being unto what he pleases. And thus much of
our first reason: Now to the second.

Christ taking bread into his hands, gave it to his Disciples, saying: 1. Cor.
11. Math. 26 Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
this is my body which is given for you: and giving them the Chalice, said:
drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament, which shall
be shed for you. These our Saviors words are so plain, that it was not
possible in so few words to express more perspicuously, that it was his true
natural body, which he delivered unto them; it being the very same which was
to be nailed on the Cross the morrow after.

But M. PER. answers, that they are not to be taken properly, but by a
figure, the body there being put for a sign or seal of his body.

Reply. This is a very extrauagant exposition of Christ's words, and such a
one, as if it were admitted for current, vvoulde serve to subvert and
overthrow, all the articles of the Christian faith. For example, when it is
said, that the word was made flesh, the Manachees heresies against Christ's
true flesh, might be maintained, by saying, that the flesh there, is put for a
figure of the flesh: so might the Arrian heresy, if when Christ is called
God, it were allowed them, to expound and take it, for a sign or seal of
GOD; and so of all other articles of our belief: wherefore, there must be most
apparent proof, for the drawing of Christ's words into so strange a sense,
before it be admitted of any reasonable man. But M. PER. and the Protestants
are so far off, from producing any such invincible evidence for their odd
interpretation, that they cannot allege any probable cause of it: hear, and
then judge.

Genes. 17. verse. 10. Exodus 12. verse. 11. 1. Cor. 10.
M. PERKINS says first, That it is an usual manner of the Lord, in speaking of
the Sacraments, to give the name of the things signified, to the sign: as
circumcision is called the covenant of God: and the next verse, the sign of
the covenant: and the Pascall lamb is called the Angels passing-ouer, whereas
(in deed) it was but a sign of it: and the Rock was Christ: 1. Cor. 5. verse.
7.
the passe-ouer was Christ.

Answ. It may be, that sometimes speaking of Sacraments by the way, some
figurative speech may be used: but we say, that when any Sacrament is first
instituted and ordained, that then the words are to be taken literally,
without any such figure. For example, in the Sacraments (specified by M. PER.)
Circumcision was commanded in these words: Genes. 17. verse. 11.
You shall circumcise the flesh of your prepuce, that it may be a sign of the
covenant between you and me. These be the words of the institution of that
Sacrament, and not one of them but must be literally taken. For the true flesh
in deed, was to be circumcised and cut off, and no figure of the flesh or
sign of cutting, would serve the turn. In like manner, where the Sacrament of
the Pascall lamb is instituted, Exodus 12. verse. 3.
all must be understood literally, as a natural lamb really killed, roasted
and eaten: and not a figure, sign, or seal of it: even so our blessed Savior
instituting a Sacrament in these words, This is my body: the words must be
taken literally, and not figuratively; and consequently, the reason which M.
PER. brings for him, bears strongly against himself, because it is and
ever has been Gods fashion, when he instituteth Sacraments, to institute them
in their proper terms, which must be taken literally, as by his own examples
has bin proved: Now to his sentences. Circumcision is both a covenant, and
the sign of a covenant, and that properly; although not of the same covenant.
For it was a covenant tendered by God unto Abraham, and by him accorded unto, to
circumcise himself and all his seed of the male-kinde: and the very same
covenant was also a sign and badge of Gods peculier favor unto them, and
their special obligation to serve him; and a mark in them, of the chosen
people of God: so that that speech (circumcision is the covenant) is not
figurative, but literal. Neither is the lamb called the Angels passing by or
over, in the place cited by M. P.; but rather the Jews eating of it hastily:
and walking, was a sign of the Angels speedy passing by them. The lamb is
sometimes called the passe-ouer: not because it was the sign of it, but for
that it was the sacrifice, celebrated in remembrance of it: so Christ is
called our passe-ouer or Paschall lamb; because he is the lamb of God,
sacrificed to take away the sins of the world: so that not in one of these
sentences, is the thing signified put for the sign, but rather the contrary.
And when S. Paul says, that the Rock was Christ: it is to be understood
properly, because he speaks of the spiritual Rock, saying: And they did
drink all of the spiritual Rock, which was Christ properly. The material
rock, out of which the streams of water gushed, did (in deed) prefigure
Christ on the cross, out of whose side issued blood and water: but the
spiritual Rock (that is) the Rock figured by that material, was really
Christ himself: so that finally he has not brought us one place, where the
name of the thing signified is given to the sign: but suppose he could bring
any, would it thereupon follow, that this place of the institution of the
Sacrament, must be expounded by the same figure? how absurd and ridiculous is
this manner of reasoning? In one or two places of Scripture the name of the
thing signified, is given to the sign. ergo. In what place soever it pleases
the Protestants, it shall be so taken; albeit, in a thousand other places, it
must needs be taken otherwise.

But M. PERKINS says secondly, That the Papists themselves confess, the like
figurative phrase to be in the institution of the cup, when it is said, This
cup is the new Testament in my blood: that is (as M. PER. interprets it) a
sign, seal, and pleadge of the new Testament.

Answ. We say that the institution of that part of the Sacrament, is as
plainly delivered by S. Mathewe and S. Mark, as the other. For they have in
express words: This is my blood of the new Testament: which plain and
clear speech does sufficiently declare, how S. Lukes more intricate and
obscure words, are to be understood; it being great reason, that that which is
plain and easy to understand, should interpret that which is hard; and not
that which is obscure, to be made an exposition of that which is lightsome and
clear, as our wranglers (who love darkness more then light) would persuade us.
For the better understanding of S. Lukes words you must observe, that a
Testament is taken in two sorts: either for the will and ordinance of the
Testator; or else for the written instrument, whereby the will is known and
performed. Now this holy Sacrament, may truly be called a testament in both
senses. For it is both a special ordinance, to be observed and practiced by
Christ's will and institution, during the whole state of the new Testament:
and therefore truly called by S. Luke. The new Testament, being a principal
part of it. Over and besides, it is a singular means and instrument, a more
effectual then a written will, to convey and derive unto us, our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus legacy, by the worthy receiving of it, that is: his grace
in this world, and glory in the next; and for this cause it is said of S.
Mathewe, to be the blood of the new Testament; and not the seal or sign of
it. And thus finally, the gentle reader may see, that M. PER. can show no
sufficient cause, why Christ's words should be expounded by such a strange
figure: whereupon it follows evidently, that they are to be taken according
unto their native literal sense. For so must all holy Scripture be understood,
unless there be apparent reason to the contrary. Notwithstanding, because this
matter is of very great moment, as being one of the highest mysteries of our
faith, I will insist and stand somewhat, upon the circumstances of it. First,
confer all the places together, where the institution is rehearsed, and you
shall find in them all, Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body: and not in any one of them, This is a figure of my body; as
the Protestants teach.

Secondly, S. Luke and S. Paul add: The body which shall be given for you;
which enforce us to understand it to be his true natural body, that was
crucified for us, and not a figure of it, which was not crucified for us.

Luc. 22. Cap. 13.
Thirdly, Christ said: With a desire have I desired to eat this passe-ouer with
you. And S. John adds: That Christ knowing that his hour was come, that he
should pass out of this world to his Father; whereas he loved his that were in
the world, unto the end he loved them: and when supper was done, etc. Knowing
that the Father had given him all things into his hands, and that he came
from God, and goes to God; and so forth: This Preface (I say) being made
before the institution of the Sacrament, shows that Christ vehemently longed
to come to it, and intended to leave unto his loving Disciples now at his last
farewell, a monument and token of his divine power and love toward them. If
after all this, he should have left nothing unto them, but an order of eating a
morsel of bread, and drinking a suppe of wine, in remembrance of his death;
there had been no congruity in it. For many much meaner men then he, had left
far greater remembrances, and pleadges of their love behind them. Wherefore
the words must be taken as they sound; and then, no creature ever left, or
could possibly leave, the like token and pleadge of his power and love to his
friends, as his own body and blood, to be the divine comfort and food of
their souls. And this does that most eloquent Father S. John Chrysostom, both
note and dilate, Homil. 83 in Math.
saying: Lovers when they depart from them, whom they love, are wont to leave
with them (for a remembrance of their hearty affection) some such jewel or gift
as they are able: but no other creature saving Christ, could leave his own
proper flesh. Homil. 2. ad populu^ Antioch.
And in an other place: Elias departing from his disciple Eliseus, left him his
mantle: but our Savior Christ did leave unto us his own body.

An other motive to persuade, that Christ's words are to be taken literally,
is gathered of this, that they be a part of Christ's Testament, and contain a
legacy bequeathed unto us Christians; which kind of words are always to be
interpreted, according to their proper signification. And it should be the most
foolish part in the world, when a father does by his last will, bequeath
unto one of his sons a farm, or any certain portion of good, to plead that
the words were to be expounded figuratively, and that he meant only to leave
his son a figure of a farm, or some sign of a portion; which yet the
Protestants do plead in this most divine testament of our Savior Christ
Jesus. Thirdly, you have heard before also, how that in the institution of all
Sacraments, the speeches are to be taken literally; and much more in this,
which is the very marrowe of Christian religion, and wherein error is most
dangerous: therefore, most requisite it was to have been delivered in such
terms, as were to be understood literally. Lastly, albeit Christ oftentimes,
spoke unto the multitude in parables and obscurely, because of their
incredulity: yet, unto his Disciples (whom he would have to understand him)
he commonly spoke plainly; or else; was accustomed to interpret unto them his
harder speeches; according to that: Math. 13. verse. 11.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, to them
it is not given, and therefore in parables speak I to them. But Christ here
gives no other interpretation, then that it was the same, His body, which
should be nailed to the Cross: neither did the Disciples ask after any
exposition of them; which is a plain sign, that they took them literally,
the holy Ghost putting them in mind of that, which Christ had taught them
before, of this admirable Sacrament, in the sixth of S. John: That he would give
them his flesh to eat; and that his flesh was truly meat, etc.

Hitherto I have prosecuted two reasons for the real presence: one out of the
promise of it; the other out of the performance, and institution of it: which
are all that it pleased M. PERKINS to produce in our favor, though he had
multiplied reasons for his own party, and enlarged them very amply; but has
as cuttedly proposed ours, and loded them also with very many replies:
wherefore, somewhat to supply his default herein, I will add four more for
us: that for a doozen of his, we may be allowed to have half a doozen. The
first of them which is the third in order, shall be gathered from the figure of
this Sacrament thus. The figure or shadow of any thing, is always inferior
unto the thing it self (as the Image of a man is not to be compared to the man
himself, nor the shadow to the body) but if in the Sacrament there be but
bread, signifying the body of Christ, then should the figure of it be more
excellent then it self: wherefore, to avoid that inconvenience it must needs
be granted, that the body of Christ is there really present, which far
surpasses all the figures of it. The minor proposition is to be proved: First,
to omit all other figures of the blessed Sacrament, it is manifest, that
Manna (reigned down from heaven to feed the Israelites in the desert) was
one of the principal; as our Savior signifies, comparing Manna and the food
which he would give us, Job. 6. ver. 49. and 58. 1. Cor. 10.
together: and S. Paul plainly teaches it, calling it a spiritual food, and
numbering it among the figures, which the Hebrews had of our Sacraments; and
the proportion between the things themselves, with the consent of all
ancient Interpreters, does convince it: but Manna far surpassed the
Protestants communion. For first, being a figure of Christ, it prefigured him
as theirs does: Psalm. 77.
then it was made of Angels, and came down from heaven: theirs comes out of
the oven, made by a baker. Again, Manna was so agreeable unto their taste,
Sap. 16.
that it was in taste unto every one, even the most delitious and dainty meat,
that he could desire: theirs is but ordinary: wherefore, they must needs
confess, either that Christ's body is really present in the Sacrament; or else
that the figure of it far surmounted it, the thing it self. The good
fellows to avoid this inconvenience, are content to yield unto the Hebrews,
as good and virtuous Sacraments as ours be: but that also is most false.
Collos. 2. verse. 17. Gal. 4. Job. 6. ver. 49. and 58. De ijs qui initiantur
misterijs cap. 9. 1. Cor. 10. verse. 16.
For S. Paul compares theirs to shadows, ours, to the body: he calls
theirs, weak and poor elements. And to omit here other testimonies cited
before, Christ himself, expressly prefers the food which he has given us,
before Manna: whereupon S. Ambrose discourses thus. Consider now, whether be
more excellent the bread of Angels, or the flesh of Christ, which surely is the
body of life: that Manna was from heaven; but this is above heaven: that of
heaven, this the Lords of heaven: that subject to corruption if it were kept
till the morrow, but this free from all corruption.

Fourthly, the Real presence of Christ's body is proved out of these words of
S. Paul: The Chalice or cup of benediction, which we bless, is it not the
communication of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is it not
the participation of the body of our Lord? If we receive and do participate
Christ's body and blood, they are certainly there present. And the expossition
of S. Chrysostom upon the same place, has stopped up our adversaries
starting-hole, who are wont to say that we (indeed) do receive the body of
Christ, yet not there present; but by faith we mount above the skies: and
receive it there. But what says this holy and learned Doctor void of
partiallity? Homil. 24 in praeoratione ad Corinth.
marry, that of these words, this is the sense and meaning: That which is in
the Chalice, is the very same that flowed out of Christ's side. Note that the
blood of Christ is in the Chalice, and so we need not run so far off to
seek it: and says further, that we are made partakers of it, with the like
real and close conjunction, as the word of God and the nature of man, were
joined together: which was not by faith or imagination only; but actually and
substantially. With whom accords S. Cyril: who out of the same words of
S. Paul proves, that Christ's body is united with us, not only by faith or
charity; but bodily and according unto the flesh, saying: When the virtue of
the mystical blessing is in us, Lib. 10. in Joan. 13.
does it not make Christ to dwell in us bodily, by the participation of the
flesh of Christ? Here by the way observe, that the Apostle calls the blessed
Sacrament bread; either because in exterior appearance, it seems so to be (as
Angels appearing in the shape of men, are in holy write commonly called men: so
the body of Christ, being under the form of bread, is called bread) or else,
for that bread in Scripture (according to the Hebrewe phrase) signifies al
kind of food. So is Manna called bread, which was rather like the dew: Joan.
6. verse. 32. Psalm. 77.
and so may our Saviors body, which is the most substantial food of our
souls, be called bread, although it be nothing less then ordinary bread.
Lastly, it is such bread, as our Savior in express terms has christened
it, when he said: And the bread which I will give you, is my flesh, Joan. 6.
verse. 51. 1. Cor. 11. verse. 29. Verse. 27.
for the life of the world.

Our fifth argument is taken out of S. Paul: He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body
of our Lord: and is guilty of the body and blood of our Lord: whence I argue
thus. Unworthy receivers, who are destitute of that faith, whereby they should
receive Christ (according unto the Protestants opinion) or else they should not
receive unworthily: such unworthy communicants (I say) do receive the body of
Christ, albeit unworthily; therefore, it is not the receivers faith that makes
it present, but it is there present by the words of consecration, whether the
party believe it or no: or else, how should the man eat his judgment, for
not discerning Christ's body, and be guilty of his body? the Protestants
answer first, That he is guilty of the body, because he receives it not then,
when he should, for lack of faith: But this gloss is clean contrary to the
text, that says expressly. That they receive it by eating and drinking of it;
but yet unworthily: and all ancient Interpreters do so expound it. Let one S.
Augustine serve in steed of the rest, who says: De baptis. contr. Donatist.
lib. 5. cap. 8.
That like as Judas (to whom our Lord gave the morsel) gave place to the
Devil, not by receiving that which was evil, but by receiving of it euilly:
even so, every one receiving our Lords Sacrament unworthily, does not make it
evil, because he is evil; or receive nothing, because he receives it not to
salvation. For it was the body and blood of Christ, even to them of whom the
Apostle says, He that eats unworthily, eats his own damnation. By which
notable sentence of so worthy a Prelate, the other cavil of our wrangling
young-Masters, is also confuted. For they (perceiving that their former shift
would not serve their turns) fly unto a second; that (forsooth) the unworthy
receiver is guilty of Christ's body, because he abuses the sign of it: for
the dishonor done to the picture, redoundeth to the person himself.

Reply. When we complain of them for dishonouring of Images, and tell them that
they thereby dishonor the Saints, alleging this sentence; That the dishonor
done to the picture, redoundeth to the person: then they will not allow of it,
which now they are glad to take hold of. To the purpose, we say first, that
the Sacrament is no picture of Christ, no not in their own opinion, but a
sign only: and great difference is there between disfiguring a man's own
picture, and abusing of some sign or signification of him: neither is the
disfiguring or breaking of a man's picture, so heinous a fault, if it be not
done expressly in contempt of the person; which formal contempt, is not to be
found in many unworthy receivers. Lastly, the Israelites that eat Manna, or
drunk of the Rock unworthily, were not guilty of Christ's body and blood,
although those things were signs and figures of them: therefore, if there were
nothing, but a sign of Christ's body in our Sacrament, no man should be
guilty of so heinous a crime, for unworthy receiving of it: but being by the
verdict of S. Paul, made guilty of damnation for not discerning Christ's body,
it must needs follow, that Christ's body is there really present.

To these arguments collected out of holy Scriptures, let us join one other of
no less authority taken from miracles done in confirmation of the real
presence. For a true miracle cannot be done to confirm any untruth: or else
God (by whose only power they are wrought) should testify an untruth, which is
impossible. One miracle, of preserving a young boy alive in a glasiers hot
burning furnace, I have before rehearsed out of Nicephorus, cited by M. PER.:
two others I will choose out of hundreths, because they be recorded in famous
Authors, and my purpose is to be brief. Ex vita per Joan. Diac. lib. 2. cap. 4.
The first, out of the life of S. Gregory the great, surnamed by venerable Bede
the Apostle of England. This most honorable Bishop administering the blessed
Sacrament, came to give it unto the woman who had made those Hosts which he
had consecrated. She hearing S. Gregory say (as the manner was and is) The body
of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy soul unto everlasting life, smiled at
it: wherefore, the holy Bishop withdrewe his hand, and did not communicate
her, but laid that Host down upon the Altar: Mass being done, he called the
woman before him, and demanded before the people (whom she might have
scandalized) what was the cause, why she began to laugh in that holy and
fearful mystery? she muttered at the first, but after answered, that she
knew it to be the bread, which she her self had made, and therefore could
not believe it to be the body of Christ, as he called it. Then the holy man
prayed earnestly to God, that in confirmation of the true presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, the outward form of bread might be turned into flesh,
which was (by the power of God) done presently; and so was she converted to
the true faith, and all the rest confirmed in it. The other miracle is of
record, in the life of that devout Father S. Bernard. Lib. 2. cap. 3.
This holy man, caused a woman (who had been many years possessed with a
wicked spirit, that did strangely torment her) to be brought before him, as he
was at Mass; and then holding the consecrated Host over the woman's head,
spoke these words. Thou wicked spirit, here is present thy judge, the
supreme power, is here present; resist and if thou can: he is here present,
who being to suffer for our salvation, said: Now the Prince of this world
shall be cast forth; and pointing to the blessed Sacrament, said: This is that
body that was borne of the body of the Virgin, that was streatched upon the
Cross, that lay in the Sepulcher, that rose from Death, that in the sight of
his Disciples ascended into Heaven: therefore, in the dreadful power of this
Majesty, I command thee wicked spirit, that thou depart out of this handmaide
of his, and never hereafter presume once to touch her. The Devil was forced to
acknowledge the Majesticall presence, and dreadful power of Christ's body in
that holy Host, and to get him packing presently: wherefore, he must needs
be greatly blinded of the Devil, that knowing this miracle to be wrought, by
the virtue of Christ's body there present, will not yet believe and confess
it. But now let us vvinde up all this question, in the testimonies of the most
ancient and best approved Doctors.

S. Ignatius the Apostles Scholar, says: I desire the bread of God, Epist.
15. ad Romans
heavenly bread, which is the flesh of the Son of God.

S. Iustine declaring the faith of the Christians, in the second hundredth year
after Christ, vvriteth to the Emperor Antonine, thus. Apol. 2.
We take not these things as common bread, nor as common wine; but as Christ
incarnate by the word of God, took flesh and blood for our salvation: even so
are we taught, that the food (wherewith our flesh is by alteration nourished)
being by him blessed and made the Eucharist, is the flesh and blood of the same
Jesus incarnate.

S. Ireneus Iustins equal proves, both Christ to be the Son of God, Li. 4.
con. Haeres. cap. 34.
the creator of the world; and also the resurrection of the bodies, by the
real presence of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrament: so assured a
principle, and so generally confessed a truth was then, this point of the real
presence.

Homil. 5. in diverse.
Origin that most learned Doctor says: When thou take that holy food, and
that incorruptible feast; when thou enjoyest the bread and cup of life; when
thou do eat and drink the body and blood of our Lord: then (lo) does our
Lord enter under thy roof. Thou therefore humbling thy self, imitate this
Centurion and say: O Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my
roof, etc.

De coena Domini.
S. Cyprian: The bread that our Lord delivered unto his Disciples, being not in
outward show, but in substance changed; was by the omnipotent power of the
word, made flesh.

Catech. 4. mist.
S. Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem, does most formally teach our doctrine,
saying: When Christ himself does affirm of bread: This is my body, who
afterward dares to doubt of it? and he confirming and saying, This is my
blood. Who can doubt and say, this is not his blood? And a little after does
prove it, saying: He before changed water into wine, which comes near to
blood; and shall he be thought unworthy to be believed, that he has changed
wine into his blood? wherefore, let us receive with all assurance, the body and
blood of Christ: for under the form of bread, his body is given us; and his
blood, under the form of wine.

Orat. 2. de Paschate.
S. Gregory Nazianzene, speaking of the blessed Sacrament, says: Without
shame and doubt, eat the body and drink the blood, and do not mistrust these
words of the flesh, etc.

S. John Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, persuades the same thus:
Homil. 83 in Math.
Let us always believe God, and not resist him, though that which he says,
seem absurd to our imagination: which we must do in all things, but
specially in holy mysteries; not beholding those things only, which are set in
our sight; but having an eye unto his words. For his word cannot deceive us;
but our senses may most easily be deceived: wherefore, considering that he
says, This is my body; let us not doubt of it at all, but believe it. Again,
Hom. 61 ad populu^
what shep-heard does feed his flock with his own flesh? Nay, many mothers
give out their children to be nursed of others: but Christ with his own flesh
and blood, does feed us. Ite^ hom. 3. in epist. ad Ephesians.
It is his flesh and blood, that sits above the heavens; that is humbly
adored of the Angels. And Homil. 24. in 1. ad Corin.
he that was adored of the wisemen in the manger, is now present upon the
Altar. Hom. 83 in Math. and 60. ad populum.
And not by faith only, or by charity: but in deed and really, his flesh is
joined with ours, by receiving this holy Sacrament.

S. Ambrose: Libr. 4. de Sacrament. c. 4.
Thou may (perhaps) say, that my bread is but common bread; this bread is
bread in deed, before the words of the Sacrament: but when consecration
comes; of bread, it is made the body of Christ. And if you demand further,
how there can be any such virtue in words? he does answer, That by the word
of God, heaven and earth were made, and all that in them is: and therefore, if
Gods word were able of nothing to make all things, how much more easily, can
it take a thing that already is, and turn it into an other?

S. Hierome: Let us bear and believe, that the bread which our Lord brake,
Epistol. ad Hedib. quaest. 2.
and gave to his Disciples, is the body of our Lord and Savior. Epist. ad
Heliodoru^ Cont. Aduers. legis and Prophe lib. 2. c. 9.
And God forbid (says he) that I should speak sinistrously of Priests, who
succeeding the Apostles in degree; do with their holy mouth, consecrate and
make Christ's body.

S. Augustine: The mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ, giving us
his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink; we do receive it with faithful
heart and mouth, although it seem more horrible to eat man's flesh, then to
kill it; and to drink man's blood, then to shed it. Again, In psalm. 65. and
93
The very blood that through their malice the Jews shed, they (converted by
Gods grace) do drink. And upon the 98. Psalm, he does teach us to adore
Christ's body in the Sacrament, with Godly honor; where he says: Christ
took earth of earth, for flesh is of earth: and of the flesh of the Virgin
Mary he took flesh; in which flesh he walked here upon the earth, and the same
flesh he gave us to eat.

S. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, in the declaration of the eleauenth Anatheme
of the general Council of Ephesus: does in few words express the ancient
faith both of the Sacrifice and Sacrament, thus: We do celebrate the holy,
lively, and unbloody Sacrifice, believing it to be the body and blood, not of a
common man like unto one of us: but rather we receive it, as the proper body
and blood of the word of God, that quickneth all things, which he does often
in his works repete. In his Epistle to Nestorius in these words: Epist. ad
Nestoriu^.
We do so come unto the mystical benediction, and are sanctified; being made
partakers of the holy and precious blood of Christ our redeemer: not receiving
it as common flesh (which God defend) nor as the flesh of a holy man, etc. But
being made the proper flesh of the word of God it self. And upon these
words, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? he says: Lib. 4. in
Joan. c. 13 Lib. 10. in Joan. c. 13
Let us give firm faith to the mysteries, and never once say or think, how
can it be? For it is a Jewish word. And else where preventing our Protestants
receiving by faith alone, he adds: We deny not, but by a right faith and
sincere charity, we are spiritually joined with Christ: but to say, that we
have not also a conjunction with him according to the flesh; that we utterly
deny, and do avouch it to be wholly dissonant from holy Scriptures.

Damascene: Lib. 4. de fide ortho. cap. 14.
Bread and wine (with water) by the invocation of the holy Ghost, are
supernaturally changed into the body and blood of Christ: bread is not the
figure of the body, nor wine the figure of the blood (which God forbid) but
it is the very body of our Lord, joined with the Godhead: See how formally
this holy and learned Doctor, about nine hundred years ago confuted the
opinion of Zwinglius.

In ca. 26. Math.
So does Theophilact also, about the same time writing thus: Christ did not say,
this is a figure: but this is my body. For albeit it seem bread unto us; yet
is it by his unspeakable working transformed.

If I would descend a little lower, I might allege whole volumes, written
by the learnest of those times, in defense of the real presence. For some
thousand years after Christ, there started up one Berengarius of condemned
memory, who was the first, that directly impugned the truth of Christ's
bodily presence in the Sacrament: but he once or twice abjured it afterward,
and died repentantly.

And thus much of this matter.
OF THE SACRIFICE.
M. PERKINS Page 204.
Of the Sacrifice in the Lords supper, which the Papists call the Sacrifice of
the Mass.

TOuching this point, first I will set down, what must be understood by the
name of Sacrifice. A Sacrifice is taken properly, or improperly. Properly, it
is a sacred or solemn action, in which man offers and consecrateth some
outward bodily thing unto God, to please and honor him thereby: improperly and
by the way of resemblance, all the duties of the moral law are called
sacrifices.

M. PERKINS definition of a Sacrifice taken properly, is not complete: for it
may be applied unto many oblations, which were not sacrifices. For example,
diverse devout Israelites offered some gold, some silver, some other things to
honor and please God withal, Exodus 25. and 35.
in the building of a Tabernacle for divine service, according to his own
order and commandment. These men's actions were both sacred and solemn, and
some outward bodily thing, by them was offered and consecrated unto God, to
please and honor him thereby: therefore, they did properly offer Sacrifice
(according to M. PER. definition) which in true divinity is absurd, or else
women and children might be sacrificers. Again, if his definition were
perfect, I cannot see how they can deny their Lords supper to be a Sacrifice
properly. For they must needs grant, that it is a sacred or solemn action:
and they cannot deny, but that in it a man offers and consecrateth unto God
some outward bodily thing (to wit) bread and wine; and that to please and
honor God thereby: so that all the parts of M. PER. definition agreeing to it,
he cannot deny it to be a Sacrifice properly. We (in deed) that take it to be
a profane or superstitious action, highly displeasing God, as being by man's
invention brought in, to shoulder out his true and only service; do upon just
reason reject it, as no Sacrifice: but the Protestants that take it for divine
service, must needs admit it to be a proper Sacrifice; and so do they fall by
their own definition, into that damnable abomination (as they term it) of
maintayning an other proper Sacrifice in the new Testament, besides Christ's
death on the Cross.

Wherefore, to make up the definition perfect, it is to be added: first, that
that holy action be done by a lawful Minister, and then that the visible thing
there presented, be not only offered to God; but be also really altered and
consumed, in testification of Gods sovereign dominion over us. We agree in the
other improper acception of a Sacrifice, and say; that al good works done to
please and honor God, may be called sacrifices improperly: among which the
inward act of adoration (whereby a devout mind does acknowledge God to be the
beginning, middle, and end of all good both in heaven and earth, and as such a
one, does most humbly prostrate, honor and adore him) holds the most
worthyest rank; and may truly be called an invisible and inward Sacrifice: The
outward testimony and protestation thereof, by consuming some visible thing, in
a solemn manner and by a chosen Minister, is most properly a Sacrifice.

OUR CONSENT.
MAster PERKINS would gladly seem to agree with us in two points: First, That
the supper of the Lord is a Sacrifice, and may truly be so called as it is, and
has been in former ages. Secondly, That the very body of Christ is offered in
the Lords supper. How say you to this, are we not herein at perfect concord?
a plain dealing man would think so, hearing these his words: but if you
read further, and see his exposition of them, we are as far at square as may
be. For M. PER. in handling this question will (as he says) take a Sacrifice
sometimes properly and sometimes improperly, starting from the one to the other
at his pleasure, that you cannot know where to have him. So when he says in
his first conclusion, That the supper of the Lord is a Sacrifice, he
understands improperly: yet it is (says he) called a Sacrifice in three
respects. First, because it is a memorial of the real Sacrifice of Christ on
the Cross. So a painted Crucifix may be called a Sacrifice, because it is a
memorial of that Sacrifice: but M. PER. adds, Hebr. 13. verse. 15.
That it withal contains a thanksgiving to God for the same: which
thanksgiving is the Sacrifice and calves of our lips.

May he not seem worthy of a calues-head to his breakefast, that being in a
serious dispute of a Sacrifice, would say that the thanksgiving for a
Sacrifice, may truly be called the very same Sacrifice it self? for so a
thanksgiving for a house, may truly be called a house; and the thanksgiving
for a horse, a horse it self: and to say that the ancient Fathers so spoke (as
M. PER. does) is to make them babes and too too unskillful how to speak.
Secondly, (says he) it may be called a Sacrifice, because every communicant
does there present himself an acceptable Sacrifice to God, to work in the
practice of all dutiefull obedience. You should have said, that the receiving
of the Lords supper worthily, might rather be called a Sacrifice, then the
supper it self, if you put the reason of the Sacrifice, only in the receivers
conceit and devotion, which is very different from the supper it self.
Thirdly, (says he) The Lords supper is called a Sacrifice, in respect of
alms given to the poor, which was joined with it: and in this regard also
the ancient Fathers have called the Sacrament, an unbloody Sacrifice; and the
table, an Altar; and the Ministers, Priests; and the whole action, an Oblation;
not to God, but to the congregation; and not by the Priest alone, but by the
people.

I pray you take not the ancient Fathers for so simple, as to think the
Sacrament to be a Sacrifice, because some alms might happily be (then and
there) given to the poor: For they teach that a Sacrifice, is a sovereign
service done unto God alone, and not to be offered to any mortal creature.
Libr. 20. cont. Faustum c. 21
Witness one S. Augustine for the rest, who says: To that worship which is
proper to God alone, does appertain the offering of Sacrifice. We do in no
sort offer any such thing, or command it to be offered, either to any Martyr,
or any holy soul, or Martyr, etc. And what a dotage is it, to dream that
Priests and Altars take their names of that, that alms is given by laymen to
the poor at Mass time, wherein there is neither congruity, nor likelihood at
al: nor has he any author to warrant it. For alms by the Apostles order, was
left unto the disposition of Deacons; Act. 6. In exhor. ad castitatem. Conc.
14. and Conc. Carth. 4. cap. 4.
and Priests commonly did not meddle in it: at least, it never was any
essential point of their vocation: Which was (as Tertullian briefly defines)
to teach, to minister the Sacrament, and to offer Sacrifice. Now Deacons might
not in any case offer Sacrifice, as the whole Church in her purity defined, at
the Council of Nice: wherefore, there is no color to say, that the unbloody
Sacrifice, Priests, and Altars, were so called in respect of alms given to the
congregation. we deny not, but that devout people offered at Mass time,
either bread and wine toward the Sacrifice, or money toward the relief of
the Priest, and maintenance of the Altar: but that was not called the
Sacrifice of the Mass by the Fathers, but distinguished from it expressly.
Witness that very place, cited by M. PER. out of S. Augustine; who (comforting
his friend pitifully lamenting the captivity of three virgins, Epist. 122
taken prisoners and led away captive by Infidels) cites the example of
Azarias, and his fellow captives in Babylon, of whom honorable mention is
made in Daniel. Cap. 3.
Whereupon he says, These virgins be in captivity now, as were then those
Israelites in a heathen country, where they could not sacrifice unto our Lord
after their law, because Jerusalem was the only place where they might offer
Sacrifice: So (says he) these virgins now cannot, either carry an offering to
the Altar of God; or find a Priest there, by whom they may offer it to God.
These be his words? by which he is so far from saying, that women did offer
Sacrifice at the Altar, (as M. PER. falsely translateth, far oblationem ad
altar Dei) that he plainly teaches the contrary, the place of their
captivity affording them, neither Altars nor Priests. Now both those captive
Israelites in Babylon, and these captive virgins, might and did devoutly fast
and pray, and might also to their power give alms; and yet (as testifies S.
Augustine) they could not offer Sacrifice, because they wanted a convenient
place, Priests, and Altars: whereupon it follows most evidently (even by the
testimony which M. PER. alleges for himself) that the giving of Alms, and
other godly devotions of laymen, do not make Priests and Altars, or give them
their names; but be most distinct things from them, as shall more amply be
showed hereafter out of the ancient Fathers, who make the Sacrifice of the
Mass, a most proper kind of Sacrifice? yet unbloody, because there is no
blood shed there, but the body and blood of Christ are offered under the forms
of bread and wine: not (as M. PER. says in his second conclusion) in figure
only and representation; but also really and most truly. We deny not the
Sacrifice of Christ's body in the Mass, to be a representation of Christ's
suffering on the Cross; but affirm it to be such a representation, as
contains withal, the same real body there vnbloudily sacrificed; which S.
Augustine fully testifies in these few words. Libr. 20. con. Faust. cap. 18.
Christians do celebrate the memory of the Sacrifice (already performed on the
Cross) by the very holy Oblation and participation of the body of Christ: we
say therefore with the same author, by M. PER. alleged, That Sacraments have
the resemblance of things, whereof they are the Sacraments; but say further,
that besides the resemblance, they contain also the things which they
resemble. As baptism has by washing the body outwardly, a resemblance of
washing the soul inwardly from sins; and withal does when it is ministered
truly, wash and purge it from all sin. So that it is a foul kind of
reasoning in the matter of Sacraments, to argue thus as the Protestants use; It
is the sign or the representation of such a thing; therefore the thing it
self is not there present: whereas the contrary is most certain; that it is
the sign of such a thing, ergo. the thing it self is there present; because
all Sacraments of the new Testament, do contain and work that which they
signify, as shall be more amply proved in his proper place. Neither do we
deny, but that by a true faith in Christ and his passion (so it want not
other necessary parts of Christian religion) a man is made partaker of the
merit of it. But what is that against the Sacrifice of the Mass? one truth
does not disprove an other: but we shall hear the man (perhaps) argue more
substantially anon, when he draws nearer the matter. Thus much of our fained
consents, which M. PER. puts down to pervert the ancient Fathers plain
sentences, for the Sacrifice of the Mass, and to make his poor abused
followers believe, that when they approve the Sacrifice of the Mass (as they
do very often, and that in most express terms, as you shall hear hereafter)
that then they mean some other matter. Much more sincerely had he dealt, if he
had confessed with his own Rabbis, that it was the common belief of the
world, received by the best Schoolmen: That in the Mass a Sacrifice is
offered to God for remission of sins, as Lib. 4. Instit. ca. 18.. 1.
Calvin does deliver; which De captiuit. Babylon. c. 1.
Luther grants to be conformable unto the saying of the ancient Fathers. And
one Li. cont. Carolostadianos.
Alberus (a famous Lutheran) speaks it to the great glory of his Master
Luther, that he was the first since Christ's time, who openly inueighed
against it: this yet, is more ingenious and plainer dealing, to confess the
truth, then with vain colors to go about to disguise it. And that the
indifferent reader may be well assured, how Luther (an Apostata Friar) could
come unto that high pitch of understanding, as to soar unto that, which none
sithence Christ's time (neither Apostles nor other) could reach unto before
him: let him read a special treatise of his own, Cocleus and Vlenbergius.
Entitled of Mass in corners, and of the consecration of Priests; which is
extant in the sixth Tome of his works, set out in the German tongue and printed
at Ienes, as men skillful in that language do testify. In his works in ^^tin
printed at Wittenburge of the older edition, it is the seventh Tome, though
somewhat corrected and abridged: there (I say) the good fellow confesses,
that entering into a certain conference and dispute with the Devil, about this
Sacrifice of the Mass, Luther then defending it, and the Devil very gravely
arguing against it; in fine the Master (as it was likely) overcame his Disciple
Luther, and so settled him in that opinion against the Sacrifice of the Mass,
that he doubted not afterward to maintain it, as a principle point of the new
Gospel, and is therein seconded by the whole band of Protestants. This is no
fable, but a true history, set down in print by himself, through Gods
providence; that all the world may see from what authority, this their
doctrine against the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass proceeds. And if they
will believe it (notwithstanding they know the Devil to be the founder of
it) are they not then most worthy to be rejected of God, and adjudged to him,
whose Disciples they make themselves vvittingly and of their own free accord?

Now to the difference.

OUR DIFFERENCE.
M. PERKINS Page 207.
THey make the Eucharist to be a real, and external Sacrifice offered unto
God, holding that the Minister of it, is a Priest properly, in that he offers
Christ's body and blood to God, really and properly under the forms of bread
and wine: we acknowledge no such Sacrifice for remission of sin, but only
Christ's on the Cross once offered. Here is the maine difference, which is of
such moment, that their Church maintayning this, can be no Church at all: for
this point raseth the foundation to the very bottom; which he will prove by
the reasons follovving, if his aim fail him not.

Observe, that in the law of Moses there were three kind of proper
Sacrifices; one called Holocaust, or whole burnt offeringes; the second an
Host for sin, of which there were also diverse sorts; the third an Host of
pacification. Holocaustes were wholy consumed by fire, in recognizance and
protestation of Gods Sovereign dominion over us: Hosts for sin were
offered (as the name improteth) to appease Gods wrath, and to purge men from
sin: Hosts of pacification or peace, were to give God thanks for benefits
received, and to sue for continuance and increase of them.

Now we following the ancient Fathers doctrine, do hold the Sacrifice of the
Mass, to succeed all these sacrifices, and to contain the virtue and
efficacy of all three, to wit: it is offered both to acknowledge God to be the
supreme Lord of heaven and earth, and that all our good comes from him: as
witnesses this oblation of his dear Sons body, who being the Lord of
heaven and earth, willingly suffered death to show his obedience to his
Father. Secondly, it is offered to appease Gods wrath, justly kindled against
us sinners, representing to him therein, the merit of Christ's passion to
obtain our pardon. Thirdly, it is offered to God, to give him thanks for all
his graces bestowed upon us, and by the virtue thereof to crave continuance and
increase of them. These points of our doctrine being openly laid before the
eyes of the world, M. PER. seems to reprove only one piece of them, to wit:
That the Sacrifice of the Mass, is no true Sacrifice for remission of sins:
and not joining issue with us, but upon that branch only; he may be thought to
agree with us in the other two, to wit: that it is a proper and perfect kind
of whole burnt offering, and a Sacrifice of pacification; at least, he goes
not about to disprove the rest, and therefore he had need to spit on his
fingers (as they say) and to take better hold: or else, if that were granted
him, which he endeavors to prove, he is very far from obtaining the
Sacrifice of the Mass, to be no true and proper kind of Sacrifice. For it may
well be an Holocaust, or Host of pacification, though it be not a Sacrifice for
sin. But that all men may see, how confident we are in every part and
parcel of the Catholic doctrine, we will join issue with him, where he
thinks to have the most advantage against us: and will prove it to be also an
Host for remission of sins, and that as well for the dead, as for the living;
which is much more then M. PER. requires: and by the way I will demonstrate,
that this doctrine is so far off from rasing the foundation of Christian
religion; that there can be no religion at all, without a true and proper
kind of Sacrifice, and sacrificing Priests. But first I will confute M. PER.
reasons to the contrary, because he places them foremost.

Hebr. 9. v. 15.16. and ca. 10. verse. 10.
The first reason: The holy Ghost says, Christ offered himself but once;
therefore not often: and thus there can be no real offering of his body and
blood, in the Sacrament of his supper; the text is plain.

True, but your arguing out of it is somewhat vain. For after your own
opinion, it is the Priest that does offer the Sacrifice of Christ's body in the
Lords supper: and therefore, though Christ offered it but once (as the Apostle
says) yet Priests appointed by him, may offer it many times. Do ye perceive
how easily your Achilles may be foiled? the good man not looking (belike) for
this answer, says nothing to it, but frames another in our names, which is
also good and true, to wit: That the Apostle there speaks of the bloody
Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, which was but once offered: which lets
not, but that the same his body, may be under the forms of bread and wine
sacrificed often, by the Ministry of Priests in the Mass: Yes, but it does
(says M. PER.) For the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (he will not for
twenty pound say it was S. Paul) takes it for granted, that the Sacrifice of
Christ is only one, and that a bloody Sacrifice: for he says Christ does not
offer himself often, Hebr. 9.
as the high Priests did, etc. All this is true, that Christ suffered but once
upon the Cross; but it is nothing against the former answer, in which it is
not said, that Christ offered himself twice upon the Cross; but that the same
his body is daily, by the Ministry of Priests, offered vnbloudily under the
forms of bread and wine, upon the Altar: which being so plain and sensible, a
man might marvel at their palpable grossness, if they cannot conceive it. I
think rather that they understand it well enough; but not knowing what
reasonably to reply against it, do make as though they understood it not:
Whereupon, this man (not having said one word to the purpose against the
answer) yet concludes (as though he had confuted all that we have in holy
Scripture for this Sacrifice) That the Scriptures (forsooth) never knew the
twofold manner of sacrificing Christ: and then goes on triumphing, That every
distinction in divinity not founded in the written word, is but a forgery of
man's brain. Had he not need of a mess of good broth, to cool his hot
hasty brain, that thus runs away with a supposed victory, before he has
strooken any one good stroke? but he says further (clean besides the drift of
his former argument, as his manner is, sometime to drop down a sentence by
the way, Hebr. 9. verse. 22.
which seems to make for him) That without shedding of blood, there is no
remission of sins: meaning (belike) that if our Sacrifice be unbloody, then
it does not remit sin.

Answer. If no remission of sin be obtained now, without shedding of blood:
how have they remission of their sins by only faith? what, does their faith
draw blood of them? The direct answer is apparent in the Apostles words,
who says: That all things almost, according to the law are cleansed with
blood: and that there was no remission of sins (in the law of Moses)
without shedding of blood. What a shameful abusing of a text was this, to
apply that to us in the state of the new Testament, which was plainly
spoken of the state of the old Testament, and of Moses law?

His second reason: The Romish Church holds, that the Sacrifice in the Lords
supper, is all one for substance, with the Sacrifice offered on the Cross: if
that be so, then the Sacrifice in the Eucharist must either be a continuance of
the Sacrifice begun on the Cross, or else an alternation or repetition of
it. Let them choose of these twain which they will. If they say, it is a
continuance of it, then they make the Priest to bring to perfection, that which
Christ begun: If they say it is a repetition, thus also they make it
imperfect. For to repeat a thing often, argues that at once it was not
sufficient; which is the reason of the holy Ghost, to prove the sacrifices of
the old Testament to be imperfect.

I answer, that when an argument consists of division, then if any part or
member of the division be omitted, the argument is naught worth, as the learned
know: so fares it in this fallacy. For the Sacrifice of the Mass is neither
a continuance of the Sacrifice on the Cross, not for M. PER. frivolous reason
(for not all things are bettered, but many made much worse by continuance)
but because the one is not immediately lincked with the other, there going much
time between them. Neither is it (to speak properly) a repetition of the
Sacrifice of the Cross, because that was bloody, this unbloody; that, offered
by Christ in his own person; this, by the ministry of a Priest: that, on the
Cross, this, on the Altar: that, to pay the general ransom, and to purchase
the redemption of all mankind, this, to apply the virtue of that unto
particular men: So that although there be in both these Sacrifices, the same
body and blood of Christ in substance; yet, the manner, means, and end of
them, being so different, the one cannot conveniently be called the repetion of
the other: but the Sacrifice of the Mass is a lively representation of the
Sacrifice on the Cross, and the application of the virtue of it to us. This is
the third member of the division, either not known, or concealed by M. PER.
the better to color and cloak the deceit of his second false argument. Now
to the third.

The third reason. A real and outward Sacrifice in a Sacrament, is against the
nature of a Sacrament, and specially the supper of the Lord: for one of the
ends thereof, is to keep in memory the Sacrifice of Christ. Now every
remembrance must be of a thing absent, past, and done: and if Christ be daily
really sacrificed, the Sacrament is not a fit memorial of his Sacrifice.

Answer. Christ's Sacrifice offered on the Cross, is long sithence past and
done, and therefore absent: wherefore, it may well have a memorial; and there
can be no other so lively representation of it, as to have the same body (yet
in another manner) set before our eyes, as has been more then once already
declared, which may serve to answer the later proposition.

M. PERKINS confirms his former thus: The principal end of a Sacrament is,
that God may give, and we receive Christ and his benefits. Now in a real
sacrifice, God does not give Christ to us, but the Priest offers up Christ to
God: therefore, one thing cannot be both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice.

Answer. One and the same thing may well be both, but in diverse respects. It
is a Sacrifice, in that it is an holy Oblation of a sensible thing unto God, by
consuming of it in testification of his Soueraignity: It is a Sacrament, as it
is a visible sign of an invisible grace, bestowed then upon the receiver. So
was the Paschall lamb first sacrificed to God (as shall be proved hereafter)
and after eaten in a Sacrament. In like manner, the holy body and blood of
Christ, are (under the visible forms of bread and wine) offered up first to
God, by the sacred action of consecration, and after broken and eaten, in
recognizance of his supreme dominion over all creatures: which is a Sacrifice
most properly taken. Again, it is instituted by Christ to signify and work
the spiritual nuriture of our souls by receiving of it: and so it is a
Sacrament.

M. PERKINS fourth reason. The holy Ghost makes a difference, Hebr. 7. verse.
24.
between Christ, the high Priest of the new Testament, and all the Leuiticall
Priests; in this, that they were many, one succeding another: but he is only
one, having an eternal Preest-ood, which cannot pass from him to any other.
Now if this difference be good, then Christ alone in his own person, must be
the Priest of the new Testament, and no other with, or under him: If they say
that the whole action is done in the person of Christ, and that the Priest is
but his Minister, and an instrument under him (as they say in deed) I say
again, it is false, because the whole Oblation is acted by the Priest, and he
that does all, is more then a bare instrument.

Answer. To begin with that, which he says last (because I must stay longer
on the first) he bewrays his ignorance in the matter of the Mass, when he
says; that the Priest acts the whole Oblation in his own name, and not as
the minister of Christ: for the principal part of both Sacrifice and
Sacrament, consists in the consecration, as we hold; which the Priest wholly
executes in the name and person of Christ. For consecrating he says, This is
my body, speaking in the person of Christ; and not in his own person, saying,
this is Christ's body: in like sort he consecrateth the Chalice, This is the
Chalice of my blood. So that nothing is more certain, then that the Sacrifice
of our Lords supper is offered by the Priest, as the Minister and instrument
of Christ: wherefore M. PER. pithagorically (I say again) is convinced to be
most untrue. Now to the former part of his mistaking the Apostles discourse,
which is far more profound then the Protestants take it to be: for his
purpose is to prove, that Consummation (as he there speaks) was not by the
Leuiticall Priesthood, that is; Cap. 7. verse. 11.
that the Priests of Moses law could not offer up such a Sacrifice to God, by
virtue whereof Gods justice could be satisfied, and the redemption of all
mankind purchased. For if any of the high Priests could have performed that,
there needed not to have been many Priests, or any one successor to an other,
because the former should sufficiently have done that already, which the later
went about to do: wherefore, the Apostle concludes that it was necessary,
that an other Priest should rise according to the order of Melchisedecke, whose
one oblation should be so precious in Gods sight, and of such infinite value,
that it should need, neither to be offered twice, nor to have the supply of
any other Sacrifice: which we willingly grant, and teach daily; but carry
alvvaies in mind that the Apostle there, treats only of that complete
Sacrifice, which procured the general redemption of all men, and paid the
just price unto God, for the sins of the whole world: of which sort, we
acknoweledge that Sacrifice which our Savior offered on the Cross, to be the
only Sacrifice, fully satisfying the rigor of Gods justice, for the offenses
of all the world, and as plentifully purchasing all kind of graces, to be
bestowed upon all degrees of men; so that it needs not to be repeated it
self, or to have any supply from any other Sacrifice. But all this does no
more prove, that our Sacrifice of the Mass is not a true and proper Sacrifice,
then that the Leuiticall sacrifices were no sacrifices. For S. Paul's scope is
not to prove, that there were not, or should not be any more sacrifices but
one: but that there can be but one such an absolute and perfect sacrifice, as
Christ's was on the Cross. Well then if that one sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, be so complete and absolute, what need is there of any other
sacrifice? great need, and that for three causes. First, to represent and
keep better in mind that singular sacrifice, which can by no means be so
lively represented, as by the sacrificing of the self same things in
substance, albeit after an other manner. Secondly, to convey and apply the
virtue of that on the Cross, unto all obedient Christians. For it is to be
observed, though Christ paid in his body the ransom of all sinners, and
purchased Gods grace for them: yet, no man was thereby only freede from his
sins and received into grace; but every one must use the means ordained by
Christ, to be made partaker of that heavenly favor. The Protestants hold faith
alone to be the only means: but we more truly say, that the Sacraments and
Sacrifice of the Mass, are principal conduict pipes, to convey the streams of
Gods grace into our souls, as shall be proved hereafter. The third cause, why
we must have a sacrifice, to be offered daily in the state of the new
Testament, is; that men may meet solemnly at it, to do their fealty and
chief homage unto God: which shall also in this question be proved more at
large. Thus have we briefly showed, how there is one absolute sacrifice, and
how after the same, there yet remains an other; which may be the better
understood, if we consider, that the virtue of Christ's sacrifice on the
Cross, did work the salvation of men, even from the beginning of the world:
Apoc. 13. verse. 8.
whereupon, Christ is called a lamb, slain from the beginning. Now most
evident it is, that notwithstanding the al-sufficiency of Christ's only
sacrifice on the Cross, as well then in force, as now, there were both in the
law of nature, and of Moses, diverse other sacrifices, of which some were to
purge from sin: why therefore, may there not as well be one other since his
passion? If their sacrifices then, when Christ's sacrifice on the Cross was
as present, and in as full force with God, could stand well with it,
without any derogation unto the full virtue of it: why cannot ours as well
also do so now? Hebr. 10. verse. 14.
If you say, That Christ by one oblation has consummated or made perfect, them
that be sanctified: therefore now there needs no more. I answer (as before)
that Christ by that same one oblation, obtained at his fathers hands, a
general pardon for all mankind, and all grace to be bestowed upon them, even
from the beginning of the world, in such sort as he thought best: and that his
one oblation, does no more exclude other Sacrifices since the time of his
passion, then it did other oblations before, which all are as dependents on it,
and means to keep it fresh in memory, and to apply the virtue and meritte of
that one oblation, unto all men.

I urge yet further for the Protestants, to supply M. PERKINS negligence, and
that this hard point may be the better understood; and add out of S. Paul:
Ibidem verse. 18.
Where there is remission of these (iniquities) now there is no oblation for
sins.

True, such an oblation as Christ offered on the Cross; so virtuous, to wipe
away all iniquities; so precious, to pay a general ransom: but there may be
an other auailable to entreat and deserve, that the virtue of the former
general, may be derived unto men in particular; because, although those sins
and iniquities were unto Christ pardoned in general: yet, at his death, or by
it only, those sins were not remitted and pardoned unto any man in
particular; so that it was meet and requisite, that besides the Sacrifice to
purchase that general redemption, there should be an other, to apply the
virtue of it in particular. And thus much of this argument: not that it
deserved (as it was proposed nakedly by M. PER.) any more then a flat denial;
but to explicate this difficulty, and to interpret some obscure places of S.
Paul omitted by M. PERKINS.

M. PER. fifth reason. If the Priest do offer to God Christ's real body and
blood, for the pardon of our sins; then man is become a mediator between God
and Christ.

This illation is too too ridiculous. Is he Christ's mediator, that asks
forgiveness of sins for Christ's sake? then are al Christians mediators
between God and Christ: for we all present unto God Christ's passion, and
beseech him (for the meritte thereof) to pardon us our sins. I hope that we
may both lawfully pray unto God, and also employ our best endeauours, that
Christ may be truly known, rightly honored and served of all men, without
incroaching upon Christ's mediation. These be services we owe unto Christ, and
the bounden duties of good Christians, wherein it has pleased him to employ
us, as his servants and ministers; not as his mediators. But Master PERKINS
adds, that we request in the Cannon of the Mass, That God will accept our
gifts and offerings (namely Christ himself offered) as he did the Sacrifices
of Abell and Noe (he would have said Abraham, for Noe is not there mentioned.)
True, in the sense there following; not that this Sacrifice of Christ's body,
is not a thousand times more grateful unto him, then was the Sacrifices of the
best men: but that this Sacrifice which is so acceptable of it self, may be
unto all the partakers of it, cause of all heavenly grace and benediction; and
that also, through the same Christ our Lord, as it there follows in the Canon.

His sixth and last reason, Is the judgment of the ancient Church, which is the
feeblest of all the rest; for that he has not one place, which makes not flat
against himself: Conc. Tol. 12. cap. 5.
hear and then judge. First (says he) A Council held at Toledo in Spain,
has these words. Relation is made unto us, that certain Priests, do not so
many times receive the grace of the holy communion, as they offer Sacrifice:
but in one day, if they offer many Sacrifices to God, they suspend themselves
from the Communion.

Is not this a fit testimony to prove, that there is no Sacrifice of the Mass?
whereas it teaches the quite contrary, to wit: that there were at that time
Priests that did offer Sacrifice daily; but were complained on and reproved,
for that they did not themselves communicate of every Sacrifice which they
offered. M. PER. bids us mark, that the Sacrifice then, was but a kind of
service, because the Priest did not communicate. But why did not he mark, that
they were therefore reprehended? as he well deserves to be, for grounding his
argument upon some simple Priests abuse or ignorance.

Mileuit. cap. 12.
Secondly he says, That in an other Council, the name of Mass is put for a
form of prayer. It has pleased us, that prayer, suppliations, and Masses,
which shall be allowed in the Council, be used.

Answ. Very good: It is indeed that form of prayer, which the Catholic Church
has always used, set down in the Missals or Masse-bookes; so that the
Council by him alleged, does allow of Mass, Priests and Sacrifice: But
(says he very profoundly) Masses be compounded; but the Sacrifice propitiatory
of the body and blood of Christ, admits no composition. This is so deep and
profound an observation of his, that I can scarce conjecture what he means.
The Mass (indeed) is a prayer composed of many parts; so (I ween) be all
longer prayers: but in what sense can that be true, that the Sacrifice of
Christ admits no composition? If he mean the passion of Christ on the
Cross, it was a bundell of Mirhe and heap of sorrows, shames, and pains
tied together, and laid upon the most innocent Lamb sweet JESUS: If he
signify their Lords supper, does it not consist of diverse parts, and has it
not many compositions in it? let the good man then explicate himself better,
that one may guess at his meaning, and then he shall be answered more
particulerly. But Abbot Paschasius shall mende all (he should by his Title of
Abbot seem rather likely to mar all) he says, Because we sin daily, L.
de corpore and sanguine Christi.
Christ is sacrificed for us mystically, and his passion is given us in
mystery. Very good: in the mystery of the Mass, Christ is sacrificed for us;
not as he was on the Cross bloudily, but in mystery (that is) under the forms
of bread and wine: which may serve to answer all that he cites out of
Paschasius; specially considering, that in that whole treatise, and one or two
other of the same Author, his principal butte and mark is, to prove the
real presence and Sacrifice. In the first Chapter of the book cited by M.
PER. he has these words: Our Lord has done all things in heaven and earth,
as he will himself, and because it has so pleased him, though the figure of
bread and wine be here (that is) in the Sacrament: notwithstanding it is to be
believed, that after consecration, there is nothing else, but the flesh and
blood of Christ; which he also expressly proves there at large. And in an
other treatise of the same argument, he has these, among many such like
words. Christ, when he gave his Disciples bread and broke it, did not say,
this is a figure of my body, nor in this mystery there is a certain virtue of
it: but he said without dissimulation. This is my body, and therefore it is
that which he said it was, and not that which men imagine it to be. Did I not
tell you that this Abbot was like to help M. PER. but a little? Thus at length
we are come to the end of M. PER. reasons in favor of their cause, let us
hear what he produces for the Catholic party.

The first argument: Christ was a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedecke: but Melchisedeckes order was to Sacrifice in bread and wine,
Psalm. 109. ad Hebr. 5. and 7.
therefore Christ did offer up Sacrifice in forms of bread and wine at his
last supper.

And what Christ then did, that did he ordain to be done to the worlds end, by
the Apostles and their successors: therefore there is now in the true Church, a
true and proper Sacrifice offered in our Lords supper. To separate that which
is certain from that which is in question: first, it is granted by all, that
what Christ did in his last supper, that did he institute to be done by his
Apostles, Priests, and by his Ministers their successors for ever after: Also
that Christ was a Priest according to the order of Melchisedecke; because both
these have evident warrant in the written word. That then which is to be
proved, is, that this order of Melchisedeckes Priesthood, does properly or
principally consist, in the form and manner of his sacrificing. We say yea, M.
PER. says, no; and proves it out of S. Paul, who showing Christ to be a
Priest after the order of Melchisedecke, does make no mention of his Sacrifice;
but compares them together in many other points: as that he was a King of
justice, a Prince of peace, without Father and Mother, Hebr. 7.
or Genealogy; finally, that he took tithes of Abraham and blessed him: and
in these points only (says M. PERKINS) stands the resemblance.

Reply. Not so: for that in none of these things does any special order of
Priesthood consist: what his own name or the name of his City does signify,
are accidental and incident things to Priesthood; to receive tithes and to
bless, belong to Priesthood in deed, but generally to all sorts of
Priesthood, as well to the order of Aaron as to that of Melchisedecke; and
therefore cannot distinguish one order of Priesthood from another: Wherefore,
it remains apparent that the proper order of Melchisedeckes Priesthood, must
be gathered, not from any of those circumstances specified by the Apostle, but
out of the very form and manner of sacrificing, which is (as it were) the
correlatiue of a Priest, and his proper function; as the Apostle in the same
Epistle defines, Cap. 5. verse. 1.
where he says: That every high Priest is appointed to offer Sacrifices for
sins. Now, that both the order of Melchisedecke consisted in sacrificing
bread and wine, and that therein Christ resembled him; let the learned and
most holy ancient Fathers (no partial judges between us, for they knew
neither of us) be our arbitrators. Let us hear first that famous Martyr S.
Cyprian, who upon those words: Thou art a Priest for ever according unto the
order of Melchisedecke, Lib. 2. epist. 3.
writes thus. Which order surely is this, proceeding of that Sacrifice and
thence descending; that Melchisedecke was a Priest of the most high God, that
he offered bread and wine, that he blessed Abraham. For who is rather a Priest
of the most high, then our Lord Jesus Christ? that offered Sacrifice to God the
Father, and did offer the same that Melchisedecke had offered, that is: bread
and wine (to wit) his body and blood. The same he repeateth in his treatise of
our Lords supper, De coena Domini.
saying: That Sacraments signified by Melchisedecke, did then appear, when our
high Priest brought forth bread and wine, and said: This is my body. Can any
thing be more plain?

Epist. 126 ad Euag.
S. Hierome following the sentence of the most ancient Doctors, Iereneus,
Hippolitus, Eusebius, Apollinaris, and Eustathius, defines the order of
Melchisedecke to consist properly in this, that he offered not bloody
sacrifices of beasts, as Aaron did; but in single bread and wine, being a
clean and pure Sacrifice, did prefigure and dedicate the Sacrament of Christ.
The same does he teach upon the twenty six Chapter of S. Mathewe.

S. Augustine in diverse passages of his most learned works, does confirm the
same most plainly: I will cite one. In the old Testament there was a Sacrifice
after the order of Aaron: afterward Christ of his body and blood ordained a
Sacrifice, according to the order of Melchisedecke.

He that desires to see more of this point, let him read Theodorete,
Arnobius, Psalm. 109. In cap. 7. and 10.
Cassiodorus, and all ancient commentaries upon that verse of the Psalm. Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Malchisedecke: and in like sort those
who have written upon the Epistle to the Hebrews; and he shall find it, to be
the general resolute opinion of all antiquity, that Christ in his last supper
did institute the Sacrifice of his body and blood, under the forms of bread
and wine, according to the order of Melchisedecke.

But why then did not the Apostle (treating of this resemblance between Christ
and Melchisedecke) make mention of this point of the Sacrifice? The reason is
in readiness, because it was not convenient. First, it made not to his
purpose, because he does prove, that the order of Melchisedecke was more
excellent then that of Aaron; which could not be proved by the Sacrifice of
Melchisedecke in bread and wine, which were inferior unto Beefes and Muttons,
the sacrifices of Aaron. The second cause, was the weakness of those Hebrews
faith, who were not then sufficiently instructed in Christ's own person, and
in his Sacrifice on the Cross, and therefore incapable of his Sacraments, and
other mysteries thereupon depending; which the Apostle himself forewarneth,
saying: Hebr. 5. verse. 11.
Of Melchisedecke we have great speech and inexplicable, because you are become
weak to hear. Therefore very absurdly do the Protestants argue here ( ab
authoritate negative, as they speak in Schools) thus; The Apostle made no
mention of this point of resemblance, therefore there is none such: whereas he
himself told them before, that there were many profound points concerning
Melchisedecke to be spoken off, which he omitted, because those Jews were not
(as yet) fit to hear them. And in truth, what could have been more out of
season, then to have spoken to them of the Sacrifice of the Mass (which is but
a lively resemblance of Christ's death) who were not then rightly informed of
Christ's death it self? Epist. 126
He spoke (says S. Hierome) to the Jews and not to the faithful, to whom he
might have been bold to utter the Sacrament. And thus much to this first
evasion of M. PERKINS.

Now to the second: That (forsooth) Melchisedecke, did not sacrifice at all in
bread and wine, but only brought forth bread and wine, to refresh Abraham and
his soldiers: and is called a Priest there, not in regard of any Sacrifice,
but in consideration of his blessing of Abraham; as the words teach (says he)
And he was a Priest of the most high, and therefore he blessed him.

Reply. He deserves to be blessed with a cudgel, that dares thus pervert the
word of God. First, he adds to the text this word therefore: again, where
the point in the Hebrewe text is at the end of this sentence, He was a Priest
of the most high, he remoueth it to the end of the next clause, joining that
together which is separated in the text: Thirdly, the reason is frivolous, as
M. PER. points it. For it can be no good reason why Melchisedecke was a
Priest, for that he blessed Abraham: for Abraham was a Priest as well as he;
and often offered Sacrifice, as well as Melchisedecke did. Now it stands
well, to declare why Melchisedecke brought forth bread and wine, because he was
a Priest that used to Sacrifice in that kind; and to honor and thank God for
that victory, he either did then presently or before had sacrificed it; and as
such sanctified food, made a present unto Abraham of it, who needed not,
either for himself, or for his soldiers any victuals, because he returned
laden with the spoil of four Kings: wherefore, the bread and wine that he
brought forth, was a Sacrifice and not common meat. And if further proof
needed, this is sufficiently confirmed by the Fathers already cited, who all
teach, that bread and wine brought forth then by him, were Melchisedecke his
Sacrifice, and a figure of ours. I will yet add one more, out of that most
ancient Patriarch Clement of Alexandria, L. 4. strom versus finem.
who says: Melchisedecke King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, gave
bread and wine being a sanctified food, in figure of the Eucharist.

The Protestants feeling themselves, wonderfully pinched and wringed with this
example of Melchisedecke, assay yet (to escape from it) a third way.

For (says M. PER.) be it granted, that Melchisedecke offered bread and wine,
and that it was also a figure of the Lords supper: yet should bread and wine,
he absurd tipes of no bread nor wine, but of the bare forms of bread and wine.

Reply. The thing prefigured must be more excellent then the figure, as the
body surpasses far the shadow: so, albeit the figure were but bread and
wine; yet the thing prefigured, is the body and blood of Christ under the
forms of bread and wine, sacrificed in an unbloody manner, as bread and wine
are sacrificed without sh^dding blood: and therein principally consists the
resemblance. And thus much of our first argument. Now to the second.

The Paschall lamb was first sacrificed up, by the Master of the family, and
then afterward eaten as a Sacrament: but the Eucharist succeeds in room of
that, as the verity does to the figure; therefore, it is first sacrificed
before it be received.

M. PER. first, denies the Paschall lamb to have been sacrificed: but
yields no reason of his denial, and therefore might without any further ado
be rejected. Yet fore-seing that we might easily prove it, to be sacrificed by
express Scripture (for Christ says to his Disciples: Mar. 14. verse. 12. Exodus
12. verse. 6.
Go and prepare a place to sacrifice the passe-ouer, or Paschall lamb: also
in Exodus Ye shall sacrifice the lamb the foure-tenth day of the Month; and
in many other places) to this has he naught else to say, but that Sacrifice in
those places is taken improperly for to kill only. His reason is, because that
in one place of Scripture, the word Sacrifice is taken (says he) for to kill:
but in more then one hundredth, it is taken otherwise, and that properly. Why
then should we not take it there, as it does usually and properly signify,
rather then improperly? not any reason does he render for it at all: but
because it made so plain against him, he must needs shift it off so well as he
could. But what if in the very place, where he says it is taken for to kill
only, and not for to Sacrifice, he be also deceived? then has he no color to
say, that in any place it is taken otherwise. Surely, the reason that he
alleges for it, is very insufficient. For by Jacobs brethren invited to his
feast, may be understood according to the Hebrewe phrase, men of his own
religion who might well come to his Sacrifice: wherefore, S. Paul calls the
Romans, Corinthians, and men of all nations (that were Christians) his
brethren. But if the Paschall lamb were not properly sacrificed, how could
S. Paul resemble Christ crucified, unto the Paschall Sacrificed? saying: 1.
Cor. 5. verse. 7. Dialog. cu^ Triph.
Our Paschall lamb Christ is sacrificed. Surely, that famous and ancient
Martyr Iustine, who was best acquainted with the rites of that people
(himself being bredde and brought up among them) says most plainly; That the
killing of the Paschall lamb among the Jews, was a solemn Sacrifice, and a
figure of Christ.

Wherefore, Master PERKINS provides an other answer to our argument, and
says: That if it were granted, that the passe-ouer were both a Sacrifice and
Sacrament: yet, would it make much against them. For they may say, that the
supper of the Lord succeeds it only in regard of the main end thereof, which
is to increase our communion with Christ.

What is this a Gods blessing? if that be all the use of it, the Lords supper
may also be no Sacrament at all: for many other things besides Sacraments
increase our communion with Christ. But to the purpose: our Lords supper, and
also the Paschall lamb were instituted, not only to increase our communion
with Christ; but also to render thanks to God for benefits received: as their
Paschall for their delivery out of the land of bondage; so our Eucharist, for
our redemption from sin and hell: and therefore, as they are Sacraments to
feed our souls; so are they true Sacrifices to give thanks to God for so
high and singular benefits. And because I love not to leave my reader in matter
of divinity, naked reasons without some authority; hear what S. Ambrose
speaking of Priests ministering the Lords supper, says: Lib. 1. in Lucam.
When we do offer Sacrifice, Christ is present, Christ is sacrificed: for
Christ our passe-ouer is offered up.

S. Leo is yet more plain, who speaking of the passe-ouer, says: Sermon. 7. de
pass.
That shadows might give place to the body, and figures to the present verily;
the old observance is taken away by the new Testament: one Sacrifice is turned
to an other, and blood excludes blood; and so the legal feast, whiles it is
changed, is fulfilled. Mark how the Eucharist succeeds the Paschall lamb;
the Sacrifice of the Paschall being changed into the Sacrifice of Christ's body.

Our third argument is selected out of these words of the Prophet Malachy.
Cap. 1. verse. 11.
I will take no pleasure in you (says the Lord of Hosts) and I will not
receive a gift from your hands: for from the East unto the West, great is my
name among the Gentiles, and in every place a clean oblation is sacrificed to
my name. Hence we infer, that after the reprobation of the Jews, and calling
of the Gentiles (that is in the state of the new Testament) a clean Sacrifice
shall be offered unto God of the Gentiles, being made Christians; as witnesses
the spirit of God in the holy Prophet: ergo. it cannot be denied of Christians.

M. PERKINS answers, That by that clean Sacrifice is to be understood the
spiritual Sacrifice of prayers: because that the Apostle exhorting us to pray
for all states, has these words; Lifting up pure hands.

What good Sir, are clean hands and a clean Sacrifice all one with you? a
worshipful exposition. This man conferreth places of Scripture very handsomely
together, and would no doubt, write a fair Commentary upon the text, if he
were let alone: but yet, tell me (I pray you) by the way, how Christians can
lift up such pure hands, and offer so clean a Sacrifice, if al their best
works be defiled with sin, and no cleaner then a filthy menstruous cloute as
you do teach? But to confute him directly; our Lord speaks there to the
Priests of the old law, and rebukes them sharply, for their fault committed
in their Sacrifices offered to him: and therefore foretells them, that he
will reject al their Sacrifices, and accept of an other clean Sacrifice among
the Gentiles. Now as Sacrifice in the former part of his speech is taken most
properly, as no man can deny: so must it be in the latter; or else, there were
a great equivocation in that sentence, and no plain opposition of Sacrifice,
to Sacrifice; clean, to polluted. And if he had reprehended the Jews for
their vnpure prayers, then had it been correspondent to have said, that he
would have received clean prayers of others, in lieu of them: but inueighing
against Priests and sacrifices, the very order and proportion of the sentence
necessarily requires, that for those evil Priests, and poluted sacrifices,
he would establish good Priests, and clean sacrifices, according unto the
proper signification of the words. Again, God is not so extremely bent
against the Jews now, but that he would receive the spiritual Sacrifice of
prayer and thanksgiving, even from them, if they do offer it; but he
speaks there of a kind of Sacrifice that he will not receive from their
hands: therefore, that Sacrifice cannot be understood, to be any such
spiritual thing; but a true and proper kind of Sacrifice. And Iustine Martyr
(whom M. PER. cites) is so far off from saying, supplications and
thanksgiving to be the only perfect Sacrifices that Christians have, that in
the very same Dialogue, he applies this prophecy of Malachie, unto the
Sacrifice of the Mass, saying: That even then, Malachie the Prophet did speak
of our Sacrifices which are offered up in all places, to wit: of the bread and
Chalice of the Eucharist; which his equal Ireneus (cited also by M. PER.) does
more amply deliver in these words. Christ took bread, and gave thanks, L. 4.
cont. Haeres. cap. 32.
saying: This is my body, and that in the Chalice be confessed to be his blood;
which the Church receiving from the Apostles, does offer to God through the
whole world, as the first fruits of his gifts; of which Malachie, one of the
twelve Prophets, did prophecy thus: I take no pleasure in you, etc. citing the
place all at large. It is to be noted, that in the Hebrewe text and Greek
translation, there is in the text of Malachie before a clean Sacrifice, this
word incense: Incense is offered to my name, and a clean Sacrifice; the which
the ancient Interpreters do expound of prayer, and make it a distinct thing
from the Sacrifice, there also distinctly put. Orat. co^t. Iud. ca. 9.
S. Augustine does prove out of this place of Malachy, that the Leuiticall
Sacrifices should all cease: and further, that though all their Sacrifices
ceased; yet, there should still remain a true Sacrifice, to be offered by the
Christians to the true God of Israel, and bids them open their eyes and see
it. And in an other place specifieth, what that Sacrifice is, Li. 18. de
ciuit. c. 35 Li. 1. co^t. Aduersar. legis and Prophet. cap. 20. Lib. 4. de fide
c. 14.
saying: Now we see this Sacrifice by the Priesthood of Christ, after the
order of Melchisedecke to be offered: and again, They know who read, what
Melchisedecke brought forth, when he blessed Abraham (to wit) bread and wine,
and they are partakers of it, and do see such a Sacrifice to be offered now
to God, throughout the whole world. Theodoret upon that place of Malachy does
expressly teach, that according to his prophecy, There is now offered the
immaculate Lamb, in lieu of all their Sacrifices. And S. John Damascene
speaking of the blessed Sacrament, says: This is that pure and unbloody
Sacrifice, that our Lord by his Prophet did foretell, to be offered from the
rising of the sun unto the setting.

Thus much of the three first arguments, which M. PER. propounded in our favor
out of the old Testament: but he has skipped over other three which we have
in the new, of which I must needs stand upon one, because it is the ground of
all the rest, the other two I am content to omit for breuities sake: it is
taken out of the words of consecration, and as our fourth argument may be
framed thus.

Christ at his last supper did properly sacrifice unto God, his own body and
blood, under the forms of bread and wine: but what Christ then and there did,
the same is to be done in the Church by his ordinance, until the worlds end:
ergo. There is and always must be, a proper Sacrifice in the true Church. They
do deny, that Christ offered any such Sacrifice in his last supper: we prove
it thus, Luc. 22.
by his own words. For he says, That his body which he gave them to eat,
was even then given for them to God: and that his blood was then presently shed
for remission of their sins. But to offer his body and blood to God, by such
a sacred action, and under such visible creatures to be there eaten, is
properly to Sacrifice, ergo. Christ at his last supper did properly offer
Sacrifice. They answer, that albeit it be said in the present tense, then
given and shed: yet the meaning is, that it should be given only the morrow
after, on the Cross; the present tense being put for the future: and further
add, that in the Canon of the Mass, the verb is put in the future tense.

We reply, that men may not at their pleasure change tenses; or else the Jews
might defend, that our Messiah were not yet borne: and if we prove it, saying;
The Word is made flesh: they may (by this license of changing the present tense
into the future) say, that it is not so yet, but it shall be hereafter:
therefore, to fly unto chopping and changing the text, without any reason or
authority, is rather to shift off, then to defend a cause well. But (say they)
it is in the Mass book, effundetur. God help the poor men, that loving the
Mass no better, are driven yet from the plain text of holy Scripture, to fly
to the Masse-booke for succor: but it will not serve their turn, because
both are true, and agree well together. For Christ's blood under the form of
wine, was presently sacrificed and shed at his last supper; and the same in
his own form, was to be shed the morrow after on the Cross: and again,
under the form of wine also, was to be shed in the same Sacrament unto the
worlds end; so that truly and properly both may be said it is shed, and it
shall be shed: and a good Interpreter of Scripture may not to delude the one,
fly to the other, but defend both, because both be the words of the holy
Ghost. And the Greek text in S. Luke does inuincibly confirm, that the
words are to be taken in the present tense. For it has; that the blood as in
the Chalice, Luc. 22. verse. 20.
is powered out: Touto to poterion to eckynomenon; This Chalice is powered out:
it cannot therefore, be referred unto that pouring out, which was to be made
upon the Cross the day following, but to that that was powered in and out of
the Chalice then presently. This might also be confirmed, by the blood which
was sprinkled to confirm the old Testament; unto which it seems that our
Savior did allude, in this consecration of the Chalice. Exodus 24. verse. 8.
For Moses said: This is the blood of the Testament; and our Savior: Hebr. 9.
verse. 20.
This is the blood of the new Testament. But that blood which dedicated the
old Testament, was first sacrificed to God: such therefore, was the blood of
the new Testament. And to make the matter more clear, let us hear how the
best and most judicious Fathers (who received the right understanding of the
Scriptures, from the Apostles and their Scholars) do take these words of
Christ. Lib. 4. cap. 32. Lib. 2. Epist. 3. In psa. 33 Conc. 2. Hom. 24. in 1.
Cor. Homil. 2. in Post. ad Timoth. Orat. 1. de resur.
You have heard already out of S. Ireneus, That Christ taught at his last
supper, the new Sacrifice of the new Testament. And out of S. Cyprian; Christ
offered there a Sacrifice to his Father, after the order of Melchisedecke,
taking bread, and making it his body. And out of S. Augustine, Christ
instituted a Sacrifice of his body and blood, according unto the order of
Melchisedecke, that is: under the forms of bread and wine: I add unto them S.
Chrysostom, who says; In steed of the slaughter of beasts, Christ has
commanded us to offer up himself. And again: Whether Peter or Paul, or an
other Priest of meaner meritte, do offer the holy Sacrifice, it is the same
which Christ gave to his Disciples, the which all Priests now a days do
make; and this has nothing less then that had. S. Gregory Nissene, Christ
being both a Priest and the Lamb of God; offered himself a Sacrifice and Host
for us. When was this done? Even then, when to his Disciples he gave his body
to eat, and his blood to drink. Isichius: First, Lib. 2. in Leui. c. 8.
our Lord supped with his Apostles upon the figurative Lamb, and afterward
offered his own Sacrifice. All these and many other of the most ancient
Fathers, could find a proper and real Sacrifice in Christ's supper. To omit
S. Gregory's authority, and all other his inferiors for this last thousand
years, whom the Protestants acknowledge, v^holy to have believed and taught
the Sacrifice of the Mass. See Kemnitius in exam. Concilij Trid. page 826. and
827.

I omit some other good arguments, made for us out of the new Testament, to
return unto M. PERKINS, who proposes this as the fourth reason for our party
out of S. Paul. We have an Altar, Hebr. 13. verse. 10.
whereof they may not eat, who serve in the Tabernacle. Now say they, If we
Christians have an Altar, then must we consequently have Priests, and a proper
kind of Sacrifice: for these are correlatiues, and do necessarily depend and
follow one the other. M. PERKINS answers, That the Altar there is to be
taken not literally, but spiritually for Christ himself.

Reply. Observe first, how the Protestants are forced to fly from the plain
text of Scripture, and native signification of the words, unto a figurative
and that without either reason or authority: secondly, I wish that M. P. would
go through with his paraphrase upon the whole sentence; and if by the Altar he
understand Christ, then by eating of it, he will surely expound believing in
Christ, now like a pretty Scholar that has learned to read, let him put it
all together, and say; That we Christians have a Christ, in whom the Jews may
not believe: which is flat contradictory to that which the Apostle in that
Epistle goes about to persuade. Lib. 6. in Leui. c. 21
Isichius an ancient and worthy Author, in express terms does expound these
words, of the Altar of Christ's body, which the Jews for their incredulity
were not worthy to behold; much less to be partakers of it: and therefore the
Apostle, to move the Jews the rather to become Christians, signifies: that so
long as they serve in the tabernacle and continue Jews, they deprive
themselves of that great benefit, which they might have, by receiving the
blessed Sacrament. Now the words following in the text, which M. PER. cites
to interpret this sentence, belong nothing to it; but contain another reason
to induce the Jews to receive Christ for their Messiah, drawn for a
circumstance of their Sacrifices, thus: as the bodies of their Sacrifices, were
burn without the Camp; so Christ suffered without the gate and city of
Jerusalem; and therefore, Christ was the truth prefigured by their Sacrifices.
It has also an exhortation to depart out of the society of the Jews, and to
forgo all the preferment and glory they might enjoy among them, and to be
content to suffer with Christ al contumelies. Briefly, there is not one word in
the sentence before, to prove the Altar to be taken for Christ, but for a
material Altar, upon which the Christian Priests, and offer the body and
blood of Christ in the blessed Sacrament; which may be confirmed by that
passage of the same Apostle: 1. Cor. 10 verse. 21.
You cannot drink the cup of our Lord, and the cup of Devils; you cannot be
partakers of our Lords table and the table of Devils: where a comparison is
made between our Sacrifice and table, and the Sacrifice and table of Idols;
showing first, that he who communicates with the one of them, cannot be
partaker of the other; and then, that he who drinks of the blood of the
Sacrifice, is partaker of the Sacrifice. Now, the comparison were improper, if
our cup were not the cup of a Sacrifice, as theirs was: nor our table a true
Altar, as theirs was out of all doubt. And that shift of Kemnitius is not
cleanely, who says: That they who drink of Christ's cup, are partakers of his
Sacrifice on the Cross, but not of any Sacrifice there present. For S. Paul's
comparison is taken from the cup of a Sacrifice, to Idols immediately before
offered; so that it does convince, our Chalice to be the cup of a Sacrifice,
then presently immolated and offered up.

The fifth objection with M. PER. (which is our sixth argument) is this. Where
alteration is both of law and covenant, there must needs be a new Priest and
a new Sacrifice; Hebr. 7. verse. 12.
which is grounded upon S. Paul's words, who says: That the Priesthood being
translated, it is necessary that a translation of the law be made: but in the
new Testament, there is alteration of both law and covenant; therefore there
are both new Priests and a new Sacrifice. M. PER. answers, that all may be
granted, That there are both new Priests and a new Sacrifice: Marry, no
other Priest, but Christ himself both God and man, who as man is the
Sacrifice, and as God the Altar.

Reply. Who ever heard such a proper piece of divinity? is the Godhead in
Christ the Altar, upon which he offers? then is it not only inferior unto God
the Father, to whom the Sacrifice is offered: but the Godhead in Christ is
inferior to his manhood, as the Altar is inferior unto the Sacrifice and
Priest. Again, the manhood in Christ being separated from the Godhead, it
not a Sacrifice of infinite value; and consequently, not sufficient to satisfy
for all the sins of the world: so that nothing could be answered more
absurdly. But his meaning (perhaps) was, That Christ sacrifycing himself on
the Cross, remains a Priest for ever, and is the only Priest of the new
Testament, in his own person; and that by his only Sacrifice on the Cross,
and by no other.

Reply. Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross, is common as well unto all the
faithful, that lived before his days, even from the beginning of the world: as
unto all that lived since; as effectual and present unto the one, as unto the
other: Apoc. 13. verse. 8.
and therefore is he said to be the lamb slain from the beginning of the
world, so that notwithstanding this answer, the reason remains in his full
force and virtue, that besides that Sacrifice on the Cross, which is common to
all; we must needs have both new and true Priests and Sacrifice, because we
have a new law and covenant: for Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross, is no more
actually present unto us, then it was unto the Jews, and all that were before
him. And as touching the effect and benefit of that his Sacrifice, it was
imparted and communicated, as well unto old Father Abraham, as unto any that
lived, or does live in the state of the new Testament; and consequently, the
Sacrifice on the Cross, is not that peculiar Sacrifice, which goes jointly
with the new Testament. Which argument may be confirmed by this, that there
was never any law or religion in antiquity, without their proper Priests, and
without a true and real Sacrifice: whereupon it follows, that the very
natural light of man's understanding does teach us, that God is always to be
worshipped with Sacrifice. Neither proceeds this nut of the natural
corruption of men, (as Kemnitius is not ashamed to say:) but from the due
consideration of man's bounden duty toward God. For the holiest and best
informed men in the law of nature, as Abel, Noe, Melchisedecke, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, did often and most devoutly offer up Sacrifices unto God: and
in the law of Moses, God himself prescribed unto his people of Israel,
diverse and sundry kinds of Sacrifices; so that it cannot but be a very
impudent assertion to say, that to Sacrifice unto God, issued out of the
corruption of man's nature. And further, the very nature and end of a Sacrifice
does convince, that it is to be offered unto God in all states and times. For
what is a Sacrifice, but the most sovereign honor, that man can externally
exhibit unto the Almighty? by not only using, but consuming some thing of
price, to protest God to be the omnipotent Author of all things, and we his
creatures: receiving and holding our lives, and all our goods (of both soul
and body) of him. And if any ask me, whether it be not sufficient to do this
in heart inwardly, and outwardly to profess it in words? I answer, that it is
not; but ^^^^ust besides thoughts and words, by actual deeds express the
same. And the act of sacrificing, by the consent of the best learned of all
Nations, has been and is approved and declared, for the only outward act of
divine honor proper unto the Deity. Saint Augustine teaches, Li. 2. co^t.
Faustum. cap. 21. and de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. and l. 22. c. 10. and
alibi.
that the erecting of Altars; the consecrating of Priests, and offering of
Sacrifice, be things properly belonging unto God; and that Christians (in
deed) in memory of their Martirs, did these things: but yet, they did them only
unto God; and that the Pagans themselves, did not honor any dead or alive with
Sacrifice; but such as they esteemed to be Gods: so that if we Christians,
should want a true and proper Sacrifice, we should be less religious, then
ever were any people, being destitute of the principal and chiefest part of
true religion. And is it credible, that God should among us only (whom he has
chosen to serve him most excellently) want the sovereign point of his divine
honor? surely no: wherefore, this our doctrine of a true Sacrifice to be
daily offered to God, is so far from ^asing the found^tion of religion to
the bottom (as M. PER. writes) as it vpholdeth the principal pillar of
religion: and they in denying of it, do (as it were) strike of the head of
Christian religion. And who is of so mean wit, that sees not their silly
shift and last refuge of Christ's Sacrifice on the cross, to be but the last
words that men foiled could vse^ for very reason conuinceth, that there must
be a real Sacrifice daily offered by four selected persons, whereat the rest
of Christians must be assembled, and meet to do their fealty and homage, unto
the sovereign Lord of heaven and earth; that God be not defrauded of that his
supreme service. Now it is most manifest, that Christ's Sacrifice on the
cross, was to be done but once, and being now past, can be no such ordinary
^^arbs of calling Christians together to perform any such duty: wherefore,
cannot be that daily Sacrifice which we Christians are to offer. But the
unbloody oblation of his body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, is
the most excellent Sacrifice (after that on the Cross) that ever was; as
containing the self same Host in substance, and being a most lively
representation of his death and passion: and therefore, by Christ's own
institution it was established, as fittest for the perfect state of the new
Testament; and ordained, that it alone should be in steed of all other
Sacrifices, as has before been proved by the testimony of the Fathers. I will
here add one place or two out of S. Augustine, who says: L. 17. Ciuit. c. 20.
The Priest, who is the mediator of the new Testament, does exhibit to us a
table of his own body and blood, after the order of Melchisedecke. For that
Sacrifice does succeed all other Sacrifices of the old Testament. Wherefore,
it is said in the person of our mediator. Thou would not Sacrifice and
oblation, but thou have perfected for me a body: Because that in lieu of all
those Sacrifices and oblations, his body is offered and ministered unto all
communicants. And in his Commentaries upon those words of the Psalm: Psalm. 39.
Thou would not Sacrifice and oblation, etc. What (says he) are we
therefore at this time without a Sacrifice? God forbid. But thou have made
for me a body: which was given in performance of all the other. Cap. 9.
And in his oration against the Jews after he had proved against them, out of
the Prophet Malachy, that all their Sacrifices should cease, he adjoyneth: But
yet do you not think, that because your Sacrifices shall cease, that
therefore no Sacrifice is to be offered. For (says he) God will not be without
a Sacrifice.

He that desires to read more authorities, for the confirmation of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and how it is not annulled, but established by
Christ's only Sacrifice on the Cross, let him read S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, Primasius, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and other ancient Commentaries
upon the eleauenth verse of the tenth to the Hebrews: who there do move and
resolve this difficulty; how notwithstanding the sufficiency of Christ's
Sacrifice on the Cross, we Christians do offer (...) daily Sacrifice.

For the judgment of the ancient Church, I need not to make a distinct
argument, because I have already in all the other reasons, plentifully
alleged it. And might here if need were, produce whole Masses, formally
penned and delivered to posterity, by some of the most reverend, holy, and
learned Fathers: as that of Saint John Chrisostomes, S. Basils, and S. Ambrose,
of which no more question can be made, then of the rest of their works;
albeit Master PERKINS without any reason rejects them: to omit the Lyturgie
of Saint Clement, and of Saint James the Apostle, because they are called in
question. Yet, to finish and make up the Chapter, I will for a work of
supererogation, cite some plain sentences of the choicest Antiquity, to prove
the Sacrifice of the Mass to be very available, not only for the living; but
also for the souls of the faithful departed.

Quaest. 2 ad dulcit. and in Enchirid. ca. 109.
Saint Augustine in two places of his works, has these words: It is not to
be denied, but that the souls of the departed, are relieved by the devotion
of their friends alive; when the Sacrifice of the Mediator is offered, or
a^^es is given for them. And a little after: When the Sacrifice of the Altar is
offered, or alms is given for the souls of the baptized departed: for the
very good souls, they are thanksgiving: for them that dyed (...) very evil,
they are means to obtain mercy: for others that dyed in very evil estate,
though they be no helps to them so dead; yet are they consolation unto the
living.

Catech. 5. Mystag.
S. Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem teaches thus: We do believe, that the
intercession of the holy and dreadful Sacrifice, which is set upon the Altar,
does much relieve their souls for whom it is offered.

Lib. 2. Epist 8.
S. Ambrose, comforting Faustinus for the death of his sister, says: I think
her not to be so much lamented, as to be prayed for; nor her soul to be
grieved with thy tears, but rather to be recommended to God by Sacrifices.

Hom. 69. ad populu^
S. Chrysostom: I^ (...) not vnad^isedly ordained by the Apostles, that is the
dreadful mysteries, there should be made a commemoration of the dead. For they
did kno^e, (...) thereby the souls received much profit, and great commodity.

L. 4. vitae Constant. cap. 71. Lib. 1. Epist. 9.
Eusebius Caesar. records: That Constantine the great being buried, his soul
did enjoy (according to his own desire, when he was alive) the divine
ceremonies, the mystica^l Sacrifice, and the society of holy prayers.

S. Cyprian reports, An holy decree ^o have been made by the religious
Bishops his Predecessors; that whosoever dying, made a Clarke the Guardian and
tutor of his children, should in punishment thereof, be deprived of the benefit
of the Sacrifice; so as no oblation should be made for him, nor Sacrifice
celebrated at his death. By which he gives us to understand, that for the
souls of others well departed, Sacrifice was accustomed to be offered.

To be short, it was defined and declared by the Catholic Church in her
prime-time, that it was an heresy to deny, that Sacrifice was to be offered
for the dead: as Epiphanias does testify in Anacephalaeos^. S. Augustine ad
Quod-v^lt-deum, haeresi 53. Damascene de centam haeresibus. So that nothing can
be more certain, both by the express word of God, and by the record of the
purest antiquity, then that there has always been in the Catholic Church, a
true and proper Sacrifice, and that the same has been day he offered, as well
for the souls in Purgatory, as for the living.

Thus much of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
OF FASTING.
OUR CONSENTS.
M. PERKINS Page 221.
Our consent may be set down in three conclusions. First, we do not condemn
fasting, but maintain three sorts of it, to wit: a moral, a civil, and a
religious fast. A moral fast is a practice of sobriety or temperance. When as
in the use of meats and drinks, the appetite is restrained, that it do not
exceed moderation: and this must be used of all Christians, in the whole
course of their lives. A civil fast is, when upon some politic consideration
men abstain from certain meats: as in our common weal, the law enjoyneth
us to abstain from flesh at certain seasons of the year, for these special
ends; to preserve the breed of cattle, and to maintain the calling of
fishermen.

Observe by the way, that if he mean the fast of Lent (as it is most likely by
his words) he is foully deceived in the special ends of it; which are not
those vvorldly respects by him mentioned, but principally others more
spiritual and heavenly, to wit: First, the punishment of our own flesh, for
the faults committed in overmuch eating the whole year before; as Sermon. 4. de
Quadr. Ide^ ser, 10
S. Leo testifies: secondly, the preparation of our mind, to meditate more
deeply of our Lords death and resurrection: thirdly, to S. Hier. in 3. cap.
Ionae.
dispose and make us more worthy to receive the blessed Sacrament, which every
Christian is bound to receive about Easter. Briefly, to omit diverse other
causes, we fast the Lent to Ignatius ad Philip. Basil. orat. 1. de jejunio.
Nazianz orat. in sanct. laua. Hieron. in c. 58. Esai. Chrisost. hom. 1. in
Genes. Aug. epist. 119. c. 15. Ambros. sermon. 37.
imitate (as near as our frailty does permit) our sovereign Lord and Master,
who fasted forty days: so that to reduce the fast of Lent unto a civil fast,
principally; is to prefer earthly respects before heavenly. We deny not, but
that many times spiritual exercises, do bring with them temporal
commodities; but those are incident and accidentary unto them, not the special
causes of them: and in Countries far distant from the Sea, where are no such
fishermen, the Lent is observed as duly as in our Island, environed with the
Sea.

Now to the third kind of fasting, maintained by M. PER., but seldom
practiced by his followers, which he calls religious: because the duties of
religion (as the exercise of prayer and humiliation) be practiced during the
time of this fast. But he does amiss, to put this for one of the points of our
agreement: for we esteem fasting it self (when it is done, to appease Gods
wrath, and to honor him in our humiliation) to be an essential part of Gods
worship; which the Protestants deny, and say: that fasting is only termed
religious, because during the time of it, by prayers and preaching, and such
like, they worship God: but so the very time, and place it self may be
termed also religious, and many other such odd things; because they do also
concur with acts of religion.

Let us come to his second conclusion, to wit: We join with them in allowance
of the principal and right ends of a religious fast, and they are three. The
first, that thereby the mind may become attentive in meditation of the duties
of Godliness, to be by us performed. The second, that the rebellion of the flesh
may be subdued: for the flesh pampered, becomes an instrument of
licentiousness. The third, and (if he mistake not) the chiefest end of a
religious fast, is; to profess our guiltiness, and to testify our
humiliation before God for our sins: and for this end in the fastes of the
Ninevites, the very beasts were made to abstain. Hitherto Master PERKINS.

We besides the three aforesaid ends, add diverse others: as to punish and
chastise our flesh for former offenses, which is an act of justice: to obey the
Churches commandment, which is a religious obedience; and at this time it may
be an act of professing the Catholic faith, when we observe set fastings, to
make profession of our faith: and to fast, thereby to imitate and please our
head Christ Jesus, is an act of perfect charity.

But let us return unto M. PERKINS third conclusion, which is: We yield unto
them, that fasting is a help and furtherance unto the worship of God: yea,
and a good work also (if it be used in good manner) allowed of God, and to be
highly esteemed of all the servants of God.

All this is good: but whereas he says that fasting in it self, is a thing
indifferent; he abuses the name of fasting, taking it to signify all manner
of abstinence from meat and drink: and so (in deed) it is in it self
indifferent, and may be either good or badde, as if one should abstain from
food to pine himself away. But fasting being properly taken, signifies an
abstinence from meat, according unto some set rule of the Catholic Church,
the better to please and serve God: and so it is of it self, an act of the
true worship of God.

THE DIFEERENCE.
MAster PERKINS: Our dissent from the Church of Rome in the dostrine of
fasting, stands in three points: First, about the set time of fasting:
Secondly, about the manner of abstinence, and what meat is to be eaten on
fasting days: Thirdly, about the virtue and value of fasting. Concerning the
first. The Catholics appoint and pr^scribe set times of fasting as necessary
to be kept: We hold that no set ordinary time is to be appointed, but that the
Governors of the Church, may sometimes upon certain occasions, enjoyne a
religious fast. Our reasons be these. First, when the disciples of John asked
Christ why they and the Pharasees fasted often, but his Disciples fasted not;
he answered. Math. 9. verse. 15.
Can the children of the marriage-chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is
with them? but the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, and then shall they fast: where he gives them to understand, that they
must fast as occasions of mourning are offered. Whence also I gather, that a
set time of fasting is no more to be enjoined, then a set time of mourning.

And this is all the reasons which M. PER. makes for their opinion, except the
record of antiquity, of which afterward. This reason of his, as also the other
testimonies following, are so formal for him and fit for his purpose; that
they do much more prove the clean contrary. For first, (admitting M. PER.
collection, that there must then be a set time of fasting, when there is a set
time of mourning) I infer thereupon, and that expressly out of that text; That
when the Bridegroom is taken from us, then is the time of mourning: but that
has been ever since Christ's Ascension to heaven; for then was Christ our
Bridegroom taken from us: therefore, ever since Christ's Ascension, there was
always or ought to have been, a set time of fasting in the Church. And this
reason, De jejunio
did the ancient Christians with Tertullian yield, of their yearly fasting of
Lent. With whom S. Augustine agrees, saying: Now therefore, Sermon. 157 de
Temp.
because the Bridegroom is taken away from us, we the children of that
beautiful Bridegroom, must mourn; and that for good cause, if we ardently
desire to be in his company: so that the same place, which M. PERKINS
alleges against a set time of fasting, does (taken even in the very sense
that he takes it) demonstrate the flat contrary. He further cites out of
antiquity two testimonies, which make as evidently against himself. The first
out of S. Augustine, who has these words: I diligently considering thereof,
Epist. 86.
in the Evangelical and Apostolical letters, and in all that instrument which
is called the new Testament, do see; that fasting is commanded: but on what
days we ought not to fast, and on what we ought, I do not find it determined
by the commandment of our Lord, or of the Apostles. Hence infers Master
PERKINS, That Augustine was of opinion that there was no set times of fasting.
But the man here as else-vvhere, shows himself to have no conscience: for in
the very same Epistle S. Augustine teaches, that all the Church fasted at that
time, every Wednesday and Friday through the year: and admits S. Peter, and
the rest of the Apostles, to have been the founders of that set and ordinary
fast. And in his Epistle he gives the reason, 119. c. 15. L. 30. co^t. Faust.
c. 3.
why we fast forty days before Easter: and again he says, That the fast
of Lent was by the consent of all men, observed over all the world, every year
most diligently. What (therefore) could be further from this most circumspect
and judicious Doctors mind, then to think or teach, that there was no
certain time of fasting to be observed? true it is, that he found not expressly
in holy Scripture, this certain time defined. And note that repeating the same
words again toward the end of the said epistle, he adds thereto these two
words, to wit: in those Scriptures (which be properly so called) he did not
find it evidently defined, what days we are to fast. Which word evidently,
he adds (as I take it) because that else where he says, Epist. 119 cap. 15.
Sermon. 64. de temp.
that the forty days fast of Lent, has authority at out of the old law, so
out of the Gospel; because our Lord fasted so many days, and by his example
consecrated it, as he says: so that finally, we find with S. Augustine M. PER.
first witness, some days every week of set fasting, and once in the year a
solemn set fast of forty days together.

Cont. Psychicos.
M. PERKINS other Author is Tertullian, in his book against sensual men;
wherein he is so far opposite to M. PER. opinion, that he runs into the
other extremity. The Protestants would have no set time of fasting, not so much
as one Lent: Tertullian pleading for the Mo^tanists would have three Lents
every year; and a far stricter kind of fasting, then the Catholic Church
commands. But the goodman (perhaps) mistaking his Author, would have said;
that Catholics (as Tertullian reports) did argue against his error, and
said: that it was a new doctrine which he taught; and that true Christians
were at their liberty, and not bound to receive such new inventions of
Montanus about fasting, though he vaunted, that he had that doctrine from the
holy Ghost. But in this point we must not hearken unto Tertullian a Patron of
that error: nor believe his reports of the Catholics arguments against him,
which he (after the fashion of Heretics) does frame, and propose odiously.

Li. 5. hist. cap. 17.
But Eusebius says, that Montanus was the first, that made laws of fasting.

See the place (gentle reader) either in the Greek or Latin text, except that
of Basil; and thou shall find there these only words cited out of
Apollonius: That Montanus made new laws of fasting, not that he was the
first that made any laws of fasting; but was noted as an Heretic for making
new laws of fasting. Whence it plainly follows, that there were other old
laws of fasting before his time, which contented not his humor, but taking
pride in his own invention (as all Heretics do) he was not satisfied with
one Lent, but would have three Lents every year: and upon every fasting day,
commanded all his adherents to touch nothing, until the Sun were set; and
then they should eat neither flesh nor fish, nor ought else hot or moist;
but cold, dry, and hard things. For which his over rigorous and stearne kind
of fasting, invented by himself and obstinately defended, he was condemned
for an Heretic; and his new precepts of fasting rejected by the ancient
Christians: and this may serve for a confutation of M. PERKINS reasons for
their party. Now I will briefly confirm ours, which he sets down by
manner of objections. First, Leuit. 16. verse. 28.
in the old Testament there were prescribed and set fastes, approved by God,
which M. PER. confesses, to have been part of the legal worship, and
says: That God commanded those then, but now has left us to our liberty.

Reply. God having commanded fasting as a part of his worship then, (as M.
PER. confesses) it being no judicial or ceremonial part of the law, but
moral, and appertayning to the mastring of every man's own unbridled
concupiscence; he did sufficiently teach al considerate men, that it was
always to be used for part of his worship; for that always men should stand
in need of it, they being always subject to the same rebellion of their
flesh. And though we be freed from all unclean meats of the law, and from
the Jews set times of fasting: yet, the band of fasting remains, because the
reason of it is still in force; and we are subject to the Pastors of the
Church, and bound to obey them, for the time and manner of our fasting.

Our second argument. The Governors of the Sinagogue had full power and
authority to prescribe set times of fasting, and all the people of God were
bound to obey them therein, as appears in the Prophet Zachary, who makes
mention of the fastes of the fourth, fifth, Cap. 7. verse. 5. and Cap. 8. verse.
19.
eight and ninth Months; which were not commanded by the law, but afterward
enjoined by the rulers of the Church. Now then, if the Pastors of that
Sinagogue had such authority, much more have the Prelates of the church now
since Christ's time, who has endued them with much more ample authority, then
the Jews had before Christ. M. PER. answers, that those fastes mentioned in
Zachary, were appointed upon occassions of the affliction of the Church in
Babylon, and ceased upon their deliverance.

Reply. The Prophet in the same place has plainly prevented this answer: for
he says, That they then in the beginning of that captivity, Cap. 7. Cap. 8.
had already fasted seauenty years: and adds, That they should continue
those fastes, until the Gentiles should join with them in faith, which was
for four hundredth years after. Add hereunto, a fast and feast appointed at
the instance of the most virtuous Queen Hester and good Mardocheus, Hest. 9.
verse. 31.
to be always afterward observed by the Israelites, in remembrance of their
preservation.

The third argument. Although in the new Testament, there be no evident
testimony for a set time of fasting (as S. Augustine says) yet there is some
mention made of a set time of fasting: Act. 27. verse. 8.
Whereas now it was not safe sailing, because the fast now was past. True it
is, that some do expound this of the Jews set fast in the Month of
September; but that exposition is not so probable: for after that time of the
year (especially in those hot countries) it is very safe sailing; and
therefore, it cannot so well be understood of that season. Again S. Luke wrote
the acts of the Apostles, rather for the Gentiles then for the Jews, he being a
companion of the Doctor of the Gentiles: and therefore it is more probable, that
he describes the set fast of the Christian Gentiles, which was in the month of
December, now called ember days, when ordinarily Priests and other
ecclesiastical persons were consecrated; as may be seem in the pontiffical of
Pope Damasus, who lived one thousand two hundredth years past. And this season
of the year, agrees well with the text: for about, and after that time, it is
perilous sailing, the seas and winds growing big and tempesteous.

Epist. 86.
The fourth argument, out of S. Augustine before alleged. The Apostles
instituted wensdayes and fridayes to be fasted every week; the which
Epiphanius also confirms: Haeres. 75
and it is touched in the 68. Canon of the Apostles; so that it is an
Apostolical ordinance to fast every week. Besides, the fast of forty days
before Easter called Lent to be an Apostolical Tradition, Epist. 54. ad Marcel.
sermon. 6. de Quadrag.
S. Hierome, and S. Leo, do in express terms declare: and mention is made
of it in the Council of Nice, and in S. Ignatius, the Apostles disciple.
Finally, Aerius the Heretic unto the Arrians heresy, adds this error (as
witnesses Ad Quod vult. haeres. 53.
S. Augustine) that prescribed and set fasts, were not to solemnly observed,
but that every one should fast when he would himself, least we should seem to
be under the law. Behold M.P. very opinion plainly condemned for heresy,
1200. years ago: yea, before that time almost 100. years, it was recorded
for an heresy, by that Godly and learned Bishop Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius.

Before I end this point I may not forget M.P. own objectio^ against him
self, that (forsooth) some reformed Churches of the Protestants (who cannot
err in his opinion) observe set days of fasting. He grants that they do so
indeed, but not upon necessity and for conscience sake, but for politic
regardes: whereas the Church of Rome holds it to be sin, to defer the set
time of fasting, til the next day.

Reply. This answer, first imployeth a notable error, that Protestants are
not bound in conscience to obey their civil Magistrates laws, which S. Paul
expressly condemns, Romans 13. verse. 5.
saying: Therefore be subject of necessity, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake: Wherefore, the civil Magistrates commanding a set fast, the
Protestants must of necessity and for conscience sake observe it; or else, they
commit the sin of disobedience at the least. But besides this absurdity,
there is an other no less, contained in this answer: For I do ask whether
the Protestants law of set fasting be good and allowable or no? If good (as M.
P. grants) then Christians surely are bound to keep it; because they are
bound to obey their Governors in good matters: and consequently, their liberty
of eating may be abridged by their Superiors laws, by their own confession:
wherefore, they must either condemn their own Magistrates laws for naught
worth; or else, whether they will or will not, allow of ours. And that excuse
of the diversity of ends, is not to purpose. For if the Magistrates may for a
civil respect, restrain our liberty: much more may they do it for a
religious; which is of a higher nature, and more forcible to bind our
consciences.

Now to the second point of difference. Where M. P. finds fault with two
petty imperfections in the manner of our fasting, before he comes to the
greatest, to wit: with the permission to drink water, wine, Iudic. 20. verse.
26. and 2. Samuel. 1. verse. 12.
or electuaries upon fasting days; and with the eating of one meal, at, or
about noone-tide: which he disproueth first, because it is contrary to the
practice of the old Testament.

To which we answer: first, that there is no mention made at al, of drinking
wine or water, or of not drinking: wherefore, to that part, it is altogether
impertine^t. And to speak a word by the way, of drinking of wine upon fasting
days; it was wholly forbidden in the East Church, where the countries being
exceeding hot, water alone might be drunken without danger of health. In
other countries somewhat colder, which have no other drink but wine and water,
as it is in Spain, Italy, and in that climate where Nauarra lived: there, wine
is premitted on fasting days, and used in the winter season specially; but
yet, well tempered with water. But in England and in other like places, where we
have beer: there to drink much wine on fasting days, is not tolerable.
Touching the other point, of taking the meal about noone-tide, I grant that
the Israelites, in the two places cited by M. PER. did fast till evening: but
we are not bound to conform our selves to that their fasting. First, because
it was an extraordinary fast, and so being but once used, might easier be borne
for one day. Secondly, men's bodies were in those days stronger, and better
able to bear out a long fast, then they are at these: and therefore, our
discreet and dear Mother the Catholic Church, condescending unto the
infirmity of her tender children, does not exact more then they are well able to
perform, without danger of health. And therefore, albeit in the primative
Church generally, when men were stronger both in spirit and body, the law and
custom was to fast, until three of the clock in the afternoon:
notwithstanding, in these later days, when men are grown weaker; the Church
does not exact any more of us, then to fast until noone, though she like those
better, who (being well able) do fast longer. Now to the maine point of
difference of meats.

The Catholics (says Master PERKINS) allow only white-meate on their fasting
days (yea, they allow not so much neither in Lent, but only fish) and that of
necessity and for conscience sake.

True. All Catholics hold themselves bound in conscience, to obey the laws of
their Superiors in these cases, if they be able; if not, to ask leave of their
Pastors, to eat that which will serve their turn. But (says M. PER. out of
the presumption of his own wisdom) we hold this distinction of meats to be
both foolish and wicked.

Good words Sir (I pray you) for (be it spoken without your disparagement)
far wiser and better men then your self, have been and are of an other
opinion. But he will prove his assertion so mightily, that no man shall be able
to gainsay it. Let us hear him.

First, it is foolish (says he) because in such meats as they prescribe,
there is as much filling and delight, as in flesh: namely in fish, fruits, and
wine.

How proves he this? Neither by reason, nor yet by any authority of either
fool or physician: and therefore we must needs take him for an odd wiseman,
that so lightly upon his own fantasy only, durst condemn the constant
opinion of all Christians of many hundredth years for foolish and wicked. But,
pleases it you to understand (good Sir) that, although there were no
difference in the meats; yet, the commandment of our Pastors (being to
refrain from the one, and not from the other) were sufficient to make a
distinction of meats, and to bind us to abstain from them, without any touch
of folly. For what difference for delight or filling, was there between the
forbidden fruit of Paradise and other fruits? Yet, because contrary to
commandment, our first parents Adam and Eve did eat thereof, they became both
foolish and wicked: therefore, it is no foolish part to observe a distinction
of meats, when it is so appointed by our Governors.

To confute him more fully, let us hear what reason our Pastors had to
prescribe such a distinction of meat, fasting being specially instituted to
bridle and subdue the unlawful desires of the flesh, it was most meet that we
should refrain from eating of flesh on fasting days; because that the eating
of flesh, does more nourish and pamper up our flesh, then the eating of fish.
For flesh, both in it self is more nourishing, as being of a more warm
substance and fuller of ^uyce, then fish: and again, it is more like unto our
substance, and so more apt to feed it; and consequently, to make it (like a
well fed horse) more proud and ready to resist reason: and therefore, our
Prelates had great cause to forbid eating of flesh, when they would have us to
tame our flesh by fasting. If some dainty fish be more agreeable unto some
appetites, then some kind of gross meat; that is not material: For in
comparisons if they be equal, the best of the one must be compared with the
best of the other, and not the worst of one sort, with the best of the other.
Now, overmuch filling of our bellies with meat, as over charging of our heads
with drink, and hunting after dainty cares; are, by the very light of nature
condemned, and so there needed no new inhibition against them: but the only
thing that remained indifferent, was the distinction of meats; wherein the
wisdom of the Church has greatly showed her self: which, to make our fast
more agreeable unto the proper end of it (that is to tame the flesh) has
enjoined us to abstain from flesh. And this was observed and collected out of
the practice of her most wise, holy, and Godly children. For the Prophet Daniel
when he did fast very devoutly, abstayned, as from all dainties; Cap. 10. verse.
3.
so from flesh and wine. S. John Baptist (the perfect pattern of mortification
of fleshly concupiscence) did never eat any flesh: but wild honey, Mat. 3, 4.
Orat. de Amor. pauper.
and locustes were his food. S. Peter (as that worthy Doctor Nazianzene
reports) did commonly eat but a certain kind of pulse. S. Mathewe eat no
flesh, but herbs, fruit, and roots; as L. 2. Paedag. ca. 2.
Clemens Patriarch of Alexandria has registered. S. James (as L. 2. hist. cap.
22.
Eusebius rehearses) never eat flesh, nor drank wine: the like he relates
out of Philo in the same book, Cap. 17.
of those most blessed Christians of Alexandria, governed by S. Mark the
Evangelist. A man may find very many like examples in antiquity: but that
precisely upon fasting days in Lent, we must abstain from flesh, these
Doctors by name do teach: Orat. 2. de jejun.
S. Basil, Hom. 6. in Genesi.
S. Chrysostom, Catech. 4
Cyril Hierom. L. 30. co^t. Faust. c. 3.
S. Augustine, L. 2. cont. Iouinianu^.
S. Hierome. These most Godly and most juditious Fathers, and (with all) best
acquainted with the managing of spiritual affairs, are (I hope) rather to be
hearkened unto, in the matter of distinction of meats, and to be esteemed more
expert therein, then a million of our fleshly Ministers (whose belly seems to
be their God) that may in no case abide to be abridged of the bodily pleasures.
But to proceed.

You have hitherto heard how faintly M. PERKINS has proved this distinction
of meats to be foolish: now you shall see, how he does demonstrate it to be
wicked. It (says he) takes away the liberty of Christians, by which unto the
pure, all things are pure: and the Apostle bids us to stand fast in this
liberty, which the Church of Rome would th^s abolish. Galat. 5.


Answer. The Roman Church taught long before, and much better then you; that
no meats are unclean unto Christians, either of their own natures, or for
any signification as they were in the old Testament: and above one thousand and
two hundred years past, condemned the Encratites (Tatianus disciples) the
Manichees, and Priscillianists for teaching flesh, wine, and many other meats,
to be unclean: but the same Church does also command, that upon some certain
days, when we are to humble our selves in prayer, and to afflict our bodies
by fasting; that then we must abstain from the more delightful and
nourishing food: as flesh, eggs, and white-meate, and be content with one
meal of fish. This commandment of our Governors, does not make the meat
unclean in it self: but unlawful for us to eat of it, for that time only.

But, (says M. PERKINS) It is against Christian liberty to be debarred of
flesh at any time, by any Superior; for God only has reserved unto himself
that power, of forbidding to eat meats: so that without his own express
inhibition, Christians cannot be deprived of any kind of meat.

Behold an audacious assertion, without any ground: For albeit we Christians be
exempted from all unclean meats of Moses law; yet, are we subject to the
order of our Governors, for the manner of fasting; as has bin proved before.
Neither has God so kep^ in his own hands, the disposition of his creatures;
but that he has permitted others, to make diverse sorts of meats unlawful for
Christians to eat: as it is most manifest by the first Council holden by the
Apostles. Act. 15. verse. 29.
For they had full power to command and enjoyne all Christians, to abstain
from all meats offered to Idols, from all strangled things, and from blood.
How plainly then, does it repugne unto the express word of God, to auerre
tha^ God only can forbid Christians any kind of meat? Neither be these
precisely the Apostles words: Gallat. 5.
stand fast and hold this liberty, which he cited out of the Apostle, nor is
there any mention made of fasting, but of circumcision; and generally of the
observation of Moses law. The Apostle does blame the Galathians for yielding
unto the observation of it, and bids them to fly from it, and stand in the
liberty of other Christians, who were freed from the yoke of Moses law; but
not from obedience to their Christian Pastors. How absurd then was it to
allege that against Christian fasting, which does nothing at all concern it?

Now to the other place of the Apostle which M. PERKINS touches by the way,
1 Timothy 4. Cont. Adimantum. cap. 14.
to wit: That certain departing from the faith, and attending unto the spirit
of error, shall teach to abstain from meats, which God created to be
received with thanksgiving. To this Saint Augustine has ansvvered directly
twelve hundredth years a-goe: for having rehearsed those the Apostles words,
he says: He does not describe and note them, who, do abstain from such
meats, either to bridle their own concupiscence, or not to give offense* unto
the weakness of others: but them that do think the flesh in it self to be
unclean, and deny God to be Creator of such meats. Such were the Manichees
(as Saint Augustine witnesses) saying to Faustus a ringleader among them:
Lib. 30. cap. 5.
You deny the creature of God to be good, and say it is unclean, because the
Devil does make flesh of a more dreggy and base matter of evil, etc. So does
Saint Hierome in his second book against Iouinian, expound the same place of
Saint Paul; and before them Tertullian in his Treatise of fasting, saying: Cap.
15.
that the Apostle there condemned before hand, Martion and Tatianus. And the
very reason, which the Apostle gives in the text, conuinceth those words to
be only meant of such as should condemn the meat in it self to be unclean,
For it follows in the text; For every creature of God is good, etc.
wherefore, touching this place I will conclude with these words of Saint
Augustine: L. 30. co^t. Faustum. cap. 3.
If Lent be observed of your selves without flesh, and that not
superstitiously, but according unto the law of God; see (I beseech you)
whether it be not a point of extreme madness, to think every abstinence from
meat to be called of S. Paul, the doctrine of Devils.

But Socrates (a Christian hystoriographer) says, Li. 5. hist. cap. 21.
That the Apostles left it free to every one, to use what kind of meats they
would on fasting days.

What if Socrates say so that was an Heretic, and nothing so well studied in
antiquity, as was S. Hierome, who had read all Authors, Latin, Greek, and
Hebrewe, that were to be had in his time? He affirms expressly, Epist. 54. ad
Marcellum.
that it was a Tradition of the Apostles to fast Lent, and teaches abstinence
from flesh to be an essential part of fasting: as also S. Augustine in the
place last cited, holds it to be a divine law, to fast from flesh in the
Lent. And diverse and many other ancient Fathers, the least of whom is of
twenty times more credit then the Nouatian Heretic Socrates: who also in the
very same place (if his book be not corrupted) shows himself very ignorant
in the fast of the Romans. For he there says, Lib. 5. cap. 21.
That they fasted but three weeks before Easter; and in those three weeks
also, excepted the Saturdayes: both which are very false. For Leo the great,
who lived at the same time, and was Bishop of Rome, and therefore knew the
fastes of Rome better then he, teaches very formally; Sermon. 3. de Quadr.
Epist. 86.
That they fasted then six whole weeks before Easter. Furthermore, that they
fasted all the year long at Rome on Saturdayes, S. Augustine is a most
sufficient witness; so far were they at Rome, from excepting to fast on
Saturday in Lent, as Socrates fableth. Yea, Gregory the great who lived not
long after Socrates, does testify; Li. 3. Dialog. c. 33.
that at Rome all even unto little children, do fast upon Saturday, Easter-eue.

But Spiridion a very holy man in Lent dressed swines-flesh, and set it before
a stranger; eating himself, and bidding the stranger also to eat: Hist. Trip.
li. 1. c. 10.
who refusing and professing himself to be a Christian; therefore (says he)
the rather must thou do it* for to the pure all things are pure, as the word
of God ^eacheth us.

Answ. In time of sickness or extreme necessity, it is lawful (with the
consent and license specially of our Pastor) to eat flesh, either in Lent, or
upon any other fasting day: as all men skillful in cases of conscien^^, do
teach, De obser. jejunij. cap. Consilium.
being thereunto warranted by the Canon law. This was the case of that
stranger with Spiridion, who had not so much as one morsel of bread in his
house, or any other thing, saving some swines-flesh povvdered up; as the text
does plainly testify: and therefore he seeing the poor trauailer very weary
after his journey, commanded some of that salted porke to be dressed to refresh
him. Besides, Spiridion asked first pardon of God, before he set it before the
stranger; and the stranger refused at the first to eat of it, because it was
against the custom of Christians: both which circumstances do evidently
convince, that no flesh was to be eaten in that time of Lent, had not very
necessity with the leave of such a godly Bishop as Spiridion was, made it
lawefull: so that this story, so often alleged by the Protestants against
abstinence from flesh on fasting days; does much rather confirm such
abstinence, then make any thing against it, all circumstances of it duly
considered.

Before I come unto the third point of difference, I will briefly run over
three objections, Ierem. 35.
which M. PER. here makes for us. The first: Ionadab commanded the Recharbites
to abstain from wine which they obeyed, and are much commended for it by God:
much more (therefore) ought we to obey our Superiors commanding abstinence
from some kind of meats. He answers, that this commandment was not given
by Ionadab in way of religion, but for politic regardes.

Reply. This he says only but proves it not. But suppose it were so, it would
not serve his turn: for if he were obeyed for a civil respect, much rather
ought he to have been obeyed for an ecclesiastical and religious.

Dun. 10. verse. 3.
The second objection. Daniell, three weeks together abstained from flesh, and
his example is our warrant. M. PER. answers: that Daniell abstained freely;
but the Popish abstinence from flesh stands by commandment.

Reply. Daniels fast was of his own devotion, and consequently his abstinence
from flesh, free: but our ordinary fasts are by commandment, and therefore by
obedience we are bound to abstain from flesh. Now, we use the example of
Daniell, not to prove that we are bound to fast; but that on fasting days we
should for-goe the eating of flesh, as he did.

But M. PER. adds: If we imitate Daniell in refraining from flesh, why do we
not imitate him also in abstaining from dainties and oyntements.

Answer: They do better that imitate him in one good point though they do
not in all; then they that follow him in none at all. Besides, all curious
dainties are forbidden, not only on fasting days, but at all times, both by
the light of nature, and by our learned Pastors: but because that may be dainty
to one, which is but ordinary and meet for another (their complexion and
education considered) a certain order could not be set for all sorts of
people, touching dainty meats: wherefore, they are left unto the rule of
reason for that point, and to the instruction of their Pastors. Now we
confess with Molanus, that in ancient times, men were much more fervent in
fasting then they be now a-dayes, because the charity of many is grown cold:
but yet (God be thanked) there be many religious persons and also others among
us, that do an hundredth times more devoutly fast, then the Protestants use to
do; who making the liberty of Christians, the occasion of fleshly
licentiousness, have among their followers (wholly in manner) ruinated and
rooted out all austerity of life, and Ecclesiastical discipline.

Thirdly (says M. PER.) they allege the diet of John Baptist, Math. 3. 1.
Tim. 5. verse. 23.
whose meat was locustes and wild honey: and of Timothy who abstayned from
wine. Answer. That abstinence which they used was only for temperance sake,
and not for conscience or merit: let them prove the contrary if they can.

Reply. Valiantly spoken: but why did he not prove his assertion? what was it,
because he could not? the contrary is very easy to be proved. For if that diet
of S. John Baptist was only for temperance, then (belike) if he had eaten meat
as other men did, he had been intemperate, and sinned in gluttony: which if it
be absurd to think, more absurd is it to say; that his continual abstinence,
wa^ only for temperance sake.

Now to the third and last part of our difference. Catholics make abstinence
it self, in persons fitly prepared; to be a part of the worshipping of God:
but we take it to be a thing indifferent in it self: but yet well used, to be
a proppe or furtherance to the worship of God.

It grieueth me to see the doubling and deceit, that this Minister many times
uses. Do Catholics make fasting of it self, without his right end and all
due circumstances, a part of Gods vvorshippe? if he say so (as his words
lead a man to believe) he belyeth us shamefully. For we hold that no work,
be it never so good in it self; yet, if it want either a good end, or any
other due circumstance, it is not good or pleasing to God. The point then in
difference is this, that we esteem fasting duly performed, to be a part of
Gods worship, and to appease wrath toward us, to satisfy for the
temporal punishment of our sins; and finally to be meritorious: which I will
in a word confirm here, referring him that desires to see more, unto the
several Questions before handled, of Satisfaction, and Merits.

First, that God is thereby worshipped, Luc. 2.37
it it set down plainly in holy Scripture. Aurae by fasting and prayers,
served (or worshipped) God, as the Greek word Latreuosa signifies. Romans 12.
verse. 1.
Again, exhibit your bodies (by fasting as the best Expositors declare) a
living Host (or Sacrifice) holy, and pleasing God. And the reason is manifest:
for when we for his sake, do afflict our bodies, both to master the evil
passions of it, and that our mind may more freely and fervently meditate upon
God, it cannot but be a grateful service unto him.

Secondly, that we by fasting and humbling of our selves before God, and
punishing our bodies there-by, for our former faults do appease, and pacify
the wrath of God, may be proved by many examples of the old Testament; but
these two may serve the turn, which M. PERKINS touches. The first of the
Ninevites, upon whom God took mercy at the contemplation of their fasting,
and other works of penance: so says the text; And God saw their works,
Ionae 3. verse. 10.
etc. And had mercy upon them: and therefore, we condemn M. PERKINS
extrauagant gloss of Orleance (as they say) which corrupts so much the
text; That the Ninevites (forsooth) laid hold on Gods mercy in Christ by
faith. For that the Ninevites (being Gentiles) had ever heard of Christ, or
knew the mystery of his mediation, Master PERKINS will never be able to prove.

The second example is of King Achab, who being threatened with great
punishment according to his deserts, fearing the just judgments of God, did
fast and do great penance: Whereupon, God delaide his punishment. And M.
PERKINS does greatly ouer-shoote himself, in affirming that this his
repentance was but hypocrisy; when God himself does say to Elias: 3. Reg.
21. verse. 29.
Have thou not seen Achab humbled before me? Therefore, because he has
humbled himself for my sake, I will not bring evil upon his house in his
days, but in the days of his Son. God says that Achab was humbled for
Gods own sake: and M. PERKINS blusheth not to correct him, and give him (as it
were) the lie, saying; that it was but in hypocrisy: no marvel if this man
be bold with God his Church, that fears not to control God himself. Sermon.
de Laps. Joel. 2.
S. Cyprian testifies plainly, that by fasting we assuage and mitigate Gods
anger, saying: Let us appease his wrath (as he himself admonishes us) by
fasting, weeping, and lamentings.

The third fruit of fasting is, to satisfy for the temporal punishment due
unto our sins, after the remission of the eternal: which very reason
persuades, that they who have offended God, by taking unlawful pleasures of
the flesh, should by suffering some bodily chastisement, recompense for their
former faults. Lib. de je^^nio.
For as says Tertullian: Even as fast the use of meat did vndo^ us: so
fasting may satisfy God: which might be confirmed by the example of King
David, and many others. But M. PER. cries out and says: It is blasphemy to
hold, that any other means should be applied to satisfy for sin, besides
Christ's passion. To this I have answered at large in the question of
satisfaction: here I say in a word, that all mortal sin, and the eternal
punishment due unto sinners therefore, is freely through Christ remitted to
every repentant sinner; but there remains after that remission, other
temporal pain to be endured by the party him self, as well to make him
conformable to Christ his head, as in punishment of his ungrateful fall, after
he was once freely and fully pardoned.

Fourthly, fasting is very meritorious in Gods sight, as Christ says expressly,
when commanding us to fast (not upon vain glory as the Pharasees did, but to
please his heavenly Father) he adds the reward: Math. 6. verse. 18. Dan. 10*
verse. 12.
And thy Father who sees thee in secret, will repay thee.

And to Daniel the Angel says: Because from the first day that thou gave
thy heart to understand, thou did afflict thee in my sight (which was by
fasting) thy words were heard, and I came for thy speeches sake.

S. Paul (that chosen vessel of election) does chastise his body (which was
specially by fasting, 1. Cor. 9. verse. 27.
as S. Chrysostom and the other Interpreters do take it) and brought it under
into bondage, least whiles he preached to others, he himself might become a
reprobate. If one would stand to collect the Sermons of the Holy Fathers, made
in the praise of fasting, he might fill a whole volume: take for a taste these
few words out of S. Basil. Homil. 1. de jejunio.
Moses durst not have ascended into the mountain, unless he had been fenced
with fasting: by fasting he received the Commandments, written in a table by
the Finger of God. A little after: Fasting leads us to God, feasting to
destruction. Samuel was by fasting and prayer obtained of God. What made the
most valiant Sampson invincible? was it not fasting? through which he was
conceived in his mothers womb: fasting conceived him, fasting nourished him,
and fasting made him strong. Fasting breeds Prophets, it strengthens the
mighty, it makes lawe-makers prudent and wise: besides, it chaseth away
temptations, and armeth a man to Godliness; it sanctifies the Nazarite,
perfecteth the Priest. Neither is it lawful to touch the Sacrifice without
fasting, not only in this our mystical and true adoration of God; but in that
also which was a figure of it. Fasting made Elias a beholder of a great vision:
for after he had by forty days fast purged his soul, he saw God, as
farre-forth as it is lawefull for a man. And much more to the same purpose.

The Puritans fast here commended by Master PERKINS is described and proscribed
by the Prophet Esaias 58. verse. 3. and 4.: Behold, in the day of your fast, there
is found your own will: behold, you fast to strife and contention, etc. For
their fast is not prescribed by public authority of the state, but out of
their own private Preachers fancy; and their exercises therefore the greater
part, are inuectiues and raylinges against the Pope and Papists, and (perhaps)
against the state also: to whom that worthy saying of S. Augustine may be
applied. De vtilit. jejunij. cap. 5.
Do thou duly tame thy own members or body, who tearest the members of
Christ? And whereas in such time of common calamity, devout men were wont in
sacke-cloth to humble themselves before God: they meet (I warrant you) clothed
in their best, and that trimmed up curiously; so that they fast to strife, and
to fulfill their own fancy.

Finally (it seems) they fast certain hours the longer, that they may
afterward with better appetite, feed upon a large and dainty banquet, which
is always lightly provided, at the end of their holy exercises of speaking.
Such fasters S. Augustine notes with a blacke-cole, when he says: ^n psalm.
44.
Fasting is not commended in him, who reserueth his belly for a full supper; as
they, who when they have fasted till three a clock after noone, do then or
shortly after, fall with better appetite, to a full meal of the best meat
that they can provide.

Thus much of fasting. Now to the state of perfection.
OF THE STATE OF PERFECTION.
M. PERKINS Page 232.
BEcause M. PERKINS here does not deal uprightly, but under the title of our
consents, puts down their own doctrine, far dissenting from ours, I will
first out of him, deliver their opinion touching the perfection of man, and
then declare ours; that we may with more perspicuity perceive the difference.

He in his first conclusion grants, That all true believers have a state of
true perfection in this life. Which perfection (says he) consists in two
parts: The former is, the imputation of Christ's perfect obedience unto us;
The latter is, a certain sincerity and uprightness, standing in two things:
The first, is to acknowledge our own imperfection; The second, to have a
constant purpose, endeavor, and care to keep not some few, but all and every
Commandment of the law of God. And this endeavor is a fruit of perfection,
in that it proceeds from the regenerate: For, as all men through Adams fall,
have in them by nature the seeds of all sin, the sin against the holy
Ghost not excepted: so by grace of regeneration through Christ, all the
faithful have in them likewise, the seeds of all virtues necessary to
salvation: and thereupon, they both can and do endeavor to yield perfect
obedience unto God, according unto the whole law; and so they may be termed
perfect, as a child is called a perfect man: who though he want the perfection
of age, stature, and reason; yet, he has every part and faculty both of body
and soul, that is required to a perfect man.

Hitherto M. PRR. In whose discourse of perfection, I find many imperfections.
For to omit the imputative part of man's perfection (which I have disproued in
the question of justification.) How can it well hang together, that one and
the same point of man's perfection (to wit: an endeavor to keep all Gods
commandments) is both an essential part of it; and yet but a fruit issuing
out of it* as M. PER. makes it in express terms, and that within the
compass of few lines. For if this good andeauour, be but a fruit of
perfection, proceeding from a man regenerate, as he says in the later place:
the surely the man regenerate was perfect before he had that fruit; and so
can it not be any substantial part of perfection, as he before appointed it.
Further, if he mean that the inward and inherent perfection of the regenerate,
does wholly consist in the seeds of virtue; either he takes the seeds very
improperly for the corn, and perfect virtues themselves: or else, he leaves
his perfect man (as the Heathen Philosophers did a babe newly borne) like unto
a rased pair of tables, altogether imperfect; having nothing written in them,
but an aptness only and capacity to receive much, if it be by diligent
endeavor afterward filled. But it is much to be wondered at, that he is become
so exact a censor, as to require in his imperfect perfect man, A constant
purpose; endeavor, and care to keep not some few, but all and every
Commandment of the law of God. In his 4. reason.
Has he not often before; yea, does he not in this very question take it for
certain, that no regenerate man can fulfill the law? which if it were true,
how can any have a constant purpose to keep it? For (as both Philosophers and
divines do teach in school, and very reason informs every one of mean
understanding at home) no man well in his wits, can have a full purpose and
determination to do that, which he knovveth to be impossible for him to do.
Who ever endeavored to leap over mountains? or had a special care to build
Churches, not knowing any possible means to effect them? M. PERKINS then was
very evil advised to counsel his regenerate man, to have a constant purpose
to endeavor, and care to keep that, which he teaches to be impossible for
him to fulfill and accomplish. Now to the doctrine of the Catholics.

We teach first, that a man baptized and in the state of grace, has in him not
the seeds only of all virtues both moral and divine, necessary for his
sanctification, but the virtues themselves, infused and powered in his soul, by
the bountiful hand of God, through the merits of Christ Jesus our redeemer,
without any desert of ours: whereby man is made able with the assistance of
Gods grace, to overcome his own evil passions, and to fulfill all Gods
Commandments. And this kind of perfection we hold, to be freely bestowed
upon every Christian at his first justification, of which I have treated at
large in that question. A second kind of perfection there is, which
consists in the perfect and complete subduing of all such disordinate
affections; such a complete mortification of them I do understand, as the
frailty of our nature does permit in this life, unto which the best men
(after long exercise of all kind of virtue) do attain. Of neither of these
two states of perfection do we here entreat: but the present controversy is
about a third kind of perfection, which is (as it were) placed between the
other two, more perfect then the first, and not so perfect as the last: but it
is a more speedy and ready way to the later, and consists in the observation
of some such extraordinary works, that be not commanded of God, as necessary
to salvation; but commended, as things of more excellency, and left unto our
free choice whether we will undertake them or no. For example, God
forbids us to commit adultery: but he does not command us to profess
virginity, and to live always a single life; the which yet he recommendeth,
and exhorts us to embrace, saying: Math. 19. verse. 12. Ibidem. verse. 21.
There be some that make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heaven;
adding, He that can take it, let him take it: so he forbids to steal; but
counsaileth only to sell all we have, and to give it to the poor and to
follow him. Out of which and the like places of holy Scriptures we gather;
that there be diverse blessed good works, which are not commanded by any
precept; yet, counseled and persuaded as things of greater perfection, which
are also called works of supererogation, by a name taken from these words:
Lucae 10. verse. 35.
Quicquid supererogaueris, where the good Samaritane told the Inne-Keeper,
that whatsoever he should lay out, over and besides that which he had given
him, should be repayed him at his return. These works of perfection, and
supererogation, the Protestants may not abide, in show (forsooth) of profound
humility, because all that we can do, is nothing in respect of that which we
ought to do: but (in deed) upon envy and malice toward religious men and
women; the luster and fame of whose singular virtue, does mightily obscure and
disgrace their fleshly and base conversation, who commonly pass not the
vulgar sort in any other thing, but in tongue and habit.

M. PERKINS in his second conclusion, allows only unto our Savior Christ,
works of supererogation, because he alone fulfilled the law: wherefore (says
he) his death was more then the law could require at his hands being innocent.

But if I lifted to take advantages as he offers them, I could tell him, that
although the law could exact nothing at Christ's hands, he being God and
above the law; yet, all that ever Christ did was commanded him by his Father:
and therefore by a certain uncertain rule of M. PER. (to wit, That no work
commanded: can be a work of supererogation) he could not do any work of
supererogation, being bound to do all he did, by commandment of his heavenly
Father, whom he was bound to obey.

But to come to the point of our difference: we hold that there be many works
of perfection, unto which no man is bound; nevertheless whosoever shall
perform any of them, they shall have a greater crown of glory in heaven for
their reward. M. PER. goes about to disprove it, by proving that no man can
fulfill the law of God in this life, much less do works of supererogation.
I say that he takes not a direct course to improve our position. For albeit a
man could not fulfill that law; yet, may he do many of those works of
perfection: for a man may lead a chaste life; and yet sometime in a passion
fall out with his neighbor, and hurt him in word or deed, or swear, and so
offend in choler: for this sometime happens; and then the works of perfection
not commanded, being done by such a one, may the sooner purchase him pardon,
and be great helps to him, toward the fulfilling of the law: wherefore,
Master PERKINS erreth in the very foundation of his proofs; notwithstanding we
will hear his arguments, because they serve to fortify an other odd sconce
or bulwark of their heresy, to wit: That it is impossible to keep Gods
Commandments. The first, he propounds in this sort.

In the moral law two things are commanded: first, the love of God and man;
secondly, the manner of this love. Now the manner of loving of God, is to love
him with all our heart and strength: Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Lucae 10.
verse. 27.
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with
all thy thoughts, etc. As Bernard said: The measure of loving God, is to love
him without measure; and that is, to love him with the greatest perfection of
love, that can befall a creature. Hence it follows, that in loving God, no
man can posssibly do more then the law requires: and therefore, the
performance of all vows and of all other duties, come to short of the
intention and scope of the law.

Answer. To love God with all our heart, and strength, etc. may be understood
in two sorts. The first is to love him so entirely, that we love no other thing
with him, in any such degree, as may not well stand with his love: and also
that in Gods service (when his honor shall so require) we are ready to employ
our whole strength, heart, and life; and in this sense every good Christian
does love God, with all his heart, and may do (besides his bounden duty
therein) many other good works: because the precept being affirmative, does
not bind for all times; but only now and then, when occasion so requires.
Secondly, the words may be taken to signify, that we should always (with all
the powers of both body and mind, and that at the uttermost strain) love,
honor, and serve God: and so taken, it is fulfilled in heaven, but cannot be
performed on earth by any mortal creature, with ordinary grace; because we
must sleep and eat sometimes, and do many other things besides, though not
contrary to the same love. In the first sense we are commanded to love God with
all our heart, etc. And in the second, it is no commandment, but only a mark
for us to aim and level at; but no man under sin is bound to attain unto
it.

To that of S. Bernard I answer, that to love God as much as he is to be
loved, is to love him infinitely, which none can do, but only God himself. If
he mean that we must love God without measure: then he is to be understood,
that in the love of God, there be not (as in the matter of other virtues) two
extreamities; too little and too much: only there may be too little, but there
cannot be too much; yet, there is a certain measure or degree, to which every
one is bound to attain: whither, if he have gotten, he loves God with all his
heart, as before has been declared. Now beyond that degree, the perfecter sort
of Christians do mount, and so much the more, by how much they do proceed
in that perfection: yet, in this life they can never attain to love God, so
fervently and so perfectly, but that they may always increase and love him
more and more; and so there is not a prefixed meere-stone, or limit of loving
God: in which sense only, we may truly say; that God is to be loved without
measure: but that is (as I said before) rather a mark that we should shoot
at, and the end of a commandment, then a thing commanded.

M. PERKINS second reason. The compass of the law is large and comprehends
commandments, not only negative but also affirmative, and in the negative be
not only forbidden the capital sins, as murder, adultery, theft: but all
sins of the same kind, with all their occasions, etc. And in the affirmative
are commanded not only the contrary virtues, but all helps and means, whereby
the said virtues may be preserved: thus does our Savior himself (says he)
expound the law. Upon which ground her concludes, that all duties pertaining
to life and manners; come within the list of some moral commandment.

Answer. The Commandments are but ten, and the exposition which our
Savior made, Math. 5. and 6.
contained with in the compass of two Chapters, as he confesses: wherefore,
it is not a thing either impossible or very difficult, to learn and observe
them, with all their necessary branches and clauses. Now to say, That all
duties of life appertain unto them, is both false, and not to the purpose: for
first, it is most evident, that the whole matter of the Sacraments, and
whatsoever else is proper unto us Christians by the doctrine of the Gospel,
and not common unto us with the Jews, is over and above the ten
Commandments. I said also, that the answer is impertinent: for it proceeds
only in duties of life, and we treat here of such points of perfection, which
no man in duty is pressed unto; but only may follow of devotion, for his
advancement in virtue and Gods favor. The other reasons following I have
answered in my former part, yet because some will be unwilling to be so often
referred unto another volume, I will here again briefly answer them.

M. PERKINS third reason. Lucae 17.
When we have done all those things that are commanded us, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.

Can any man tell to what purpose this sentence is cited here? Is it to prove
that we cannot keep the Commandments? but it supposes the flat contrary, to
wit: that the unprofitable servant had done all those things, that were
commanded him; for he must say as it is in the text, When he has done that
which was commanded, etc. Or it is to disprove works of supererogation and
counsel; but it has not one word of them, but speaks only of works
commanded, which S. Ambrose noted 1200. years past, saying: This does not the
Virgin say, De viduis.
this does not he say who sold all (to wit, we are unprofitable servants:) but
looking for a reward, they say with S. Peter, Lord we have left all, what
therefore will thou give us? etc. Math. 19.


But M. PERKINS will confute S. Ambrose: for he says, That things commanded
in that they be commanded, are more excellent then things left at liberty.

What is this to the matter? does Christ speak of counsels left to our
liberty in that text, because commandments be more excellent? what a
senseless reply is this? Of like stuff is his other shift, That counsels
are thought more hard then commandments: and therefore, if a man cannot profit
himself by observing the easier, much less by observing the harder. First,
this is clean besides the purpose; then it is also false. For no men commonly
can profit themselves so much by things easy to be done, as by some other
things hard to be done: for the more excellent that things are, so much the
more difficult are they to be compassed and done, according to the Latin Adage:
Quo difficilius eo pulchrius.

M. PERKINS says: Papists answer secondly, that although we have unprofitable
to God: yet we are profitable to our selves.

Reply. This is reported to the halfes: for we say, that to God in himself, no
profit can arise from us, who needs none of our goods or service; but in the
Ministry of his Church, he has great service and honor done him, by the
industry and diligence of good men: and therefore does S. Paul say expressly: 2.
Tim. 2. verse. 21.
That men cleansed from sins, become profitable servants unto our Lord, which
is venerable Bedes exposition upon this passage of S. Luke.

Verse. 9.
But Master PERKINS says, That they are neither profitable to God, nor to
themselves: because the Master there does not so much as thank that servant.

Reply. Masters in deed do not commonly thank their servants, when they have
done their duties: but yet, they pay them their wages, and give them
preferments also, if they like their service; and so the servant reapeth
commodity and profit by his service; though he be not thanked at his Masters
hands. But we serve so kind a Master, that will before his Father and all the
company of heaven, thank his servants, and say unto them: Math. 24. verse. 23.
Well fare thee, good and faithful servant, because thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will place thee over many, enter into the joy of thy
Lord. A third answer Papists may make unto Master PERKINS, and tell him, that
he has desperately corrupted the text, and omitted a word, which alters
the whole sentence. Christ says not; When you have done all that is
commanded, you are unprofitable servants: but, then say, that you are
unprofitable servants. That is: have you then an humble opinion of your selves,
and think rather upon your own imperfection, then of your vvell-doing; and if
you find all well, thank him that gave you the grace to perform it, and
confess that you have done but your duty: and leave it to your good neighbor,
to praise you if he please; and to God to recompense you: so does S.
Chrysostom interpret this place. But Master PERKINS to prevent this answer,
thought it policy to strike that word out of the text. O worthy cutter of
Gods word!

His fourth reason is: That it is not in the power of man to keep the law:
much less is he able to do any work that is beyond and above the law.

Answer. The antecedent and consequent are both false: that we be able with
the help of Gods grace, to keep the law, is proved in a whole question of
the first part. Page 78.
That we may do some works of supererogation (albeit we failed in some works
of the law) has been proved in the beginning of this question. For though
one work of counsel be harder to do, then one work of the law; yet, is
it of more difficulty to keep thirty precepts of the law, then three
counsels: and again, a man may be more diligent in observing counsels,
then commandments, and so observe them better.

Now to the arguments for the Catholic party. The first is taken out of the
Prophet Esaias: Our Lord says unto Eunuchs that keep his Sabbath, Cap. 56.
verse. 4.
and choose the thing that pleases him, etc. He will give them a place and a
name, better then to the Sons and Daughters, an everlasting name that shall
not perish.

Hence we thus reason. Unto Eunuchs that choose the thing which pleases God
(that is, make choice of a single and chaste life) God will give more grace in
this world, and more glory in the next, De Virg. cap. 25. 1. Cor. 7.
as Saint Augustine also expounds it. Now, no man is bound by the law to
profess virginity, as Saint Paul declares: wherefore, the observation of
virginity is of counsel and supererogation, very pleasing to God if it be
performed: yet, not commanded. Master PERKINS answers: That to such Eunuchs
a greater reward is promised, not for profession of their chastity, but
because they observed the Lords Sabbath, and kept his covenant, which is
(says he) to believe the word of God, and to obey his Commandments.

Reply. This cannot be said: for unto those Eunuchs, A greater reward is
promised then unto other Sons and Daughters, that is: then to others of the
faithful. Now that greater must be due unto them for some thing in them,
which was not to be found in other of the faithful; But to believe the word of
God, and to obey his Commandments, is a thing common unto all that are to be
saved: therefore, it follows necessarily, that for their chastity wherein
they excelled others, they are preferred before others; which is confirmed by
that place, where it is said: Apoc. 14.
That they that are Virgins (because they were Virgins) do sing a song, that
no man else can sing: See S. Augustine cap. 29. de Virg. and in the Chapter of
vows in the former part, where this argument is more largely proved.

The second argument: our Savior Christ says, Math. 19. verse. 12.
That there are some who have made themselves chaste, for the Kingdom of
Heaven; and bids them that can take that course of life, to take it:
therefore, the vow of single life is vvarrantable by the word of God, and
has a special promise of glory in heaven, and yet is not commanded: whence
it evidently follows, that there are works of counsel, over and besides
the Commandments of God, left to the free choice of men. Master PERKINS
answers: That some having the gift of continency, do lead a single life,
that they may with more liberty and less distraction, f^^^her the good state
of the Church of God, or the kingdom of grace in themselves, and others: this
(says he) is all that can be gathered out of this place.

Not all, but so much as out of which, the rest necessarily follows, to wit:
that by profession of chastity, as they do more benefit the Church of God; so
consequently do they more please God; and deserve of him a greater reward: and
that chastity being only counseled and not enjoined by precept, it is a work
of supererogation and perfection.

Math. 19. verse. 21.
The third argument: Christ says unto a young man: If thou will be perfect, go
sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have a treasure in
heaven: and come and follow me. Hereupon we infer, that he who forsakes al
to follow Christ, shall have a treasure (that is) a greater measure of glory in
heaven; and yet, that this is not commanded any man, but commended to them, as
being a work of greater perfection: If thou will be perfect, etc. go sell
all. etc. M. PEE. answer is, that Christ to discover to this man the secret
corruption of his own heart, commanded him to go sell all: and so this is a
commandment of trial, not common to all, but special to him only; as the
sacrificing of Abraham's son was only to Abraham, and not to be drawn for an
example to others.

Reply. First, Christ's words do show manifestly, that this was no absolute
commandment; not so much as to that young man, To sell all: but conditional,
if he aspired unto greater perfection, then the keeping of the commandments.
Ibidem.
For he was first bid to keep the commandments, if he would have life
everlasting, and he answering that he had so done from his youth, Marc. 10.
verse. 21.
and desirous to know what was yet wanting unto him: then Jesus looking on
him, loved him, as it is expressly set down in the text; so far off was he
from misliking or taxing of him: and after said, That if he would be perfect,
he should go and sell all; so that M. PER. idle paraphrase, is flat against
the text. Again, as Christ speech in the beginning to that young man (If thou will have life, keep the commandementes:) is to be extended unto all others,
who if they keep Gods Commandments, shall be saved as well as that young man:
so these his later must be common unto all, that tend to perfection. Moreover,
this exposition is confirmed by the question of S. Peter following in the same
Chapter; Lord (behold) we have forsaken all (we have done that which thou
did counsel unto that young man) what reward shall we therefore have:
which argues, that Christ did not only exhort that young man to forsake all;
but that whosoever should so do, to follow Christ, should be highly rewarded
for it: and that (as Christ himself there promises) He shall therefore
receive an hundred fold, and life everlasting. Cap. 4. verse. 37.
Finally, the practice of the best Christians recorded in the Acts; Who sold
al, and laid the price of it, at the Apostles feet; and the Commentaries of
the Doctors, do most manifestly confute this miserable shift of the
Protestants: for they all teach it both to be a counsel, and that also
general unto whosoever pleases to take it.

The fourth reason. 1. Cor. 7. verse. 25.
As concerning Virgins I have no commandment of our Lord, but counsel I
give, as having obtained mercy of our Lord to be faithful. This counsel he
expressed: I would all men to be as my self; (that is) to live unmarried;
saying also, That he who marries does well, Verse. 38.
but he who marries not does better: Wh whence it follows most plainly,
both that chastity and single life is counseled, not commanded; and that it is
better so to live, then to marry. M. PER. answers with the old Heretic
Iouinian, That it is better in some temporal respect, because single men are
freed from many worldly cares, which married men be clogged withal. But that
most worthy Doctor S. Augustine has rejected this answer many hundredth years
past, saying: They do marueilously dote, who think the goodness of this
chastity, not to be necessary for the kingdom of heaven, but for this present
world: which he confirms by the Prophet Esaias 58. by our Savior Mathewe 19.
and Apocalips 14. which are cited before; and his words I have alleged at
length in the question of vows: wherefore I omit them here. But we need no
other then S. Paul himself in the same Chapter, to teach that single life is
better; as for the avoiding of worldly business, so for pleasing of God: who
making an Antithesis between the Virgin and the married woman, says: Verse.
32.33.34.
The Virgin is careful for the things that appertain unto our Lord, how she
may please God, and be holy in body and spirit: whereas the wife is careful of
this world, and how to please her husband; so that for sanctification of body
and soul, and for pleasing God, virginity (by the express sentence of the
Apostle) is better then marriage: and therefore, they must needs be much
blinded with partiallity, that cannot see it; or obstinately bent against the
truth, that seeing it, will not confess it.

The fifth argument. It is good for me to dye rather, 1. Cor. 9. verse. 16.
then that any man should make my glory void. For if I Euangelize, it is no
glory to me: for necessity lies upon me, etc. What is my reward then? that
preaching the Gospel, I yield the Gospel without cost. Out of which words we
collect, that S. Paul preaching the Gospel on his own charges, without any
cost unto his Auditors, did a work of supererogation; and that therefore he
expected both glory, and reward at Gods hands. M. PER. answers: That
generally it was in Paul's liberty to preach the Gospel freely, or not to do
it: but in Corinth upon special circumstances, he was bound in conscience to
preach it freely, as he did; by reason of false teachers, who would otherwise
have taken occasion to disgrace his ministry, and have hindered the glory of
God: Now it was Paul's duty to prevent that hinderance.

Reply. S. Paul himself has confuted for us, both parts of this answer. The
former (That he was bound to preach freely in that place) in these words: If I
preach, it is no glory to me; so that if he were bound in conscience to preach
freely, he could expect no such glory, as he speaks off; and yet he says*
That he would rather die, then leese that glory and reward: whence it appears
plainly, that he was not bound in conscience to preach there of free cost;
which he also most largely proves from the third verse of that Chapter unto
the three and twenty: By Moses law, by Christ's Commandment, by the example
of all the other, Apostles, and by many comparisons, and reasons; so that
nothing is more clear, then that he might have lived at Corinth, as well as in
other places, on their charges to whom he preached. And by his whole
discourse, a man may easily gather, that the false teachers did (clean
contrary to M. PERKINS imagination) accuse him for not taking his charges, as
the rest did: whereupon, they maliciously gave out, that he was no Apostle,
nor had not the freedom to live by the Gospel, as the Apostles had; to which
in the beginning of the Chapter he answers. Am I not free? am I not an
Apostle? and, my defense to them that examine me is this: have not we power to
eat and drink, as also the rest of the Apostles? etc. Where he proves that
he had power so to do; yet would not use that power, but preach freely: both
for his own greater glory and reward in heaven: and also, that no kind of let
might be given unto the covetous persons and niggardes; who not being liberal
in expenses, he chose rather to live among them at his own cost; then to
burden them, who might (perhaps) not be so vvilling to receive him, if they
must have been at charges to maintain him: or else, to avoid the sinister
report of some malicious, who would not have spared to have bruited abroad^,
that he made gains of the Gospel, although he had sparingly lived by it.
Briefly, to avoid some such let, as he was not in conscience bound to avoid,
because it was not any scandal of the weak, which we are bound to avoid;
but of the wicked and malicious, which may with good conscience be contemned,
as the other Apostles did (yet S. Paul of a superaboundant charity, had an eye
to that also:) so that the other Apostles that did live upon the Gospel, did
very well; but the better, that would not use that his power and liberty.

Our sixth argument is taken from the testimony of the ancient Church. Origin
says: In cap. 15. Roma.
Those things which we do above duty, we do them not by commandment. For
example, virginity is performed not of duty: for it is not required by any
commandment, but is offered above duty.

De habitu Virgini^.
S. Cyprian, speaking of virginity, says: Neither does our Lord command this,
but commend it, and exhort unto it: and whereas in his Fathers house there be
many mansions, you Virgins tend unto the better places, and by cutting-off the
desires of the flesh, you shall obtain in heaven a reward of greater grace.
The like says S. Basil de Virginitat. S. Chrysostom Homil. 8. de penitent. S.
Hierome lib. 1. cont. Iouin. S. Augustine de sanct. Virg. cap. 30. with many
others, which to avoid perplexity I do omit.

OF THE WORSHIPPING OF SAINTS, SPECIALLY OF INVOCATION.
OUR CONSENTS.
M. PERKINS Page 245.
THe first conclusion: The true Saints of God are to be worshipped three ways.
First, by keeping in remembrance their virtues. Secondly, by giving thanks to
God for them, and the benefits that by them God vouchsafed to his Chrurch.
Thirdly, They are to be honored by imitation of their virtues.

The second conclusion. Their true relics (that is) their virtues and good
examples left to all posterity, we keep and respect with due reverence: yea,
if any man can show us the bodily true relics of any true Saint, and can
prove it so to be, though we will not worship it, yet will we not despise it,
but keep it as a monument, if it may be done without offense. And thus far
we agree with the Church of Rome.

ANNOTATION.
How well the Protestants observe and keep the virtues and good examples of
the Saints, I leave it to the virtuous readers consideration. But what devotion
they have to their holy relics, may appear partly by the manifold
limitations this man uses: If they be true relics* if of true Saints, if we
can so prove them (for they are resolute to call all into doubt:) and finally,
If it may also be done without offense (to wit) of their vveake Brethren, and
fellow Heretics (which can never be) then (lo) this considerate and advised
man, Will not despise them. By these exceptions, one may easily epsy the
coldness of their affection toward them. But the practice of their
predecessors (who made havoc, and burnt all the honorable relics of the
best Saints, that they could lay their hands upon, without reverence and
respect) does demonstrate the same wicked spirit to have possessed them, which
of old spurred foreward the Jews and Pagans, to consume into ashes the blessed
bodies of the Martirs, least the Christians should worship them and keep
them most reverently, as they were always accustomed to do, when they could
get them. Yea, if they could but rake out of the ashes, the least pieces of
their burnt bones, they did esteem them more pure then gold, and of greater
value, then precious stones, as in express terms is recorded in the
Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius: Lib. 4. cap. 14.
see what respect men in the purest antiquity, carried toward the bodily
relics of Saints.

THE DIFFERENCE.
Our dissent lies in the manner of worshipping: the Papists make two degrees
of religious worship, etc.

Because the Protestants do seem not to understand the Catholic doctrine,
concerning the worshipping of Saints, but out of their affected ignorance, do
esteem us therefore Idolaters: I hold it expedient to explicate the state of
this question more particulerly.

To begin then with this word worship: it does signify a knowledge or
conceit of an other man's excellency, joined with a reverent respect to the
same person, with some either inward or outward acknowledgement thereof: so
that all worship is due and done unto an other, in regard of some excellent
quality, which we suppose to be in him.

Now there being three most general kinds of excellency, there must also be
three several and distinct sorts of worship, correspondent unto them.

The first and principal kind of excellency, is infinite, and proper to God
alone; who is almighty, infinitely wise and good, the only Creator, supreme
Governor, and final end of heaven and earth, and of al things contained in
them: therefore, to him alone appertains infinite honor and glory, and that
supreme worship, which the Latins (using the Greek word) call Latria Godly
honor. Now to attribute or give this sovereign worship unto any other,
then unto God only, is Idolatry, the most heinous offense that can be.

The second sort of excellency, I make the meanest of all absolute (for of
respective excellency which is in Images, and such like holy things, I have
spoken in that Chapter) and that is to be found only in creatures, endued with
reason and understanding, in regard of some rare quality and endowment, wherein
they excel and surpass others; so that that excellent virtue and quality, do
proceed only out of the natural faculty and perfection of the party; and do
not spring from any supernatural gift: therefore, within the compass of this
sort of excellency, I comprehend all natural perfections, either of Men or
Angels; because all such issue out of one general fountain, of a nature
endued with reason: and to this kind of excellency is due, a moral or civil
obeisance or worship.

There is a third kind of excellency seated between the two former extremes,
far surpassing the natural perfection of any pure creature; and yet
infinitely lesser then the divine Majesty of God, which consists in the
perfection of Faith, Hope, Charity, Religion, and other such like gifts of the
holy Ghost. And to this kind of excellency, is due a different manner of
worship, which the Latins for distinction sake do call Dulia. Note that I
say for distinction sake: for both the words Latria and Dulia; if they be
taken in their first native signification, may be given unto any kind of
worship due to God or Man: yet, to avoid confusion; the learned Divines have
appropriated Latria unto the worship of God; and Dulia, to signify the
honor due to Saints or Angels, in regard of their supernatural perfections.

To come now unto the first point of our difference. The Protestants do
commonly confound these two later kinds of vvorshippe, and do make but one of
both the civil and supernatural; that they may skippe from the one of them to
the other, when they be driven unto their shifts: and yet nothing is more
clear, then that they be as distinct and different the one from the other, as
the grace of God is, from the nature of a reasonable creature. For as moral
and civil worship only, is due unto that excellency which arises out of
the natural power of man, not assisted with any extraordinary grace of God
(such as was in the old Heathen Romans, who for their valiant prowess, and
politic government deserved to be honored and worshipped:) even so the
fortitude of Christian Martir^, the wisdom of Ecclesiastical Prelates, the
power of diverse Confessors in curing all sorts of diseases, and in working
miracles. These (I say) and the like divine prerogatives, cannot but deserve a
far more excellent kind of honor and worship, then the former; as they
are more spiritual and heavenly qualities, springing from a more excellent
root of the grace of God: which surpasses in degree of excellency, the
nature of Angels without comparison, who are but Gods servants by nature,
though of greater perfection then we. By grace they were made adopted sons of
God, and partakers of the divine nature, as S. Peter cites it; 2. Pet. ^.
verse. 4.
so as the Saints also were, who therein were equal to Angels: Wherefore,
Naaman the Syrian, had reason to worship very humbly the Prophet H^liseus;
who (if we consider only civil excellency) was but a mean person in respect
of Na^man, that was a principal commander over all the martial affairs of a
potent King: notwithstanding, he truly weighing another more excellent kind of
power and wisdom in Heliseus, then was in himself; and another kind of
credit which he had, which the God of heaven, of far greater estimation, then
that he had with his king, did very dutifully humble himself before the
Prophet. All which conuinceth, that there is in godly and holy personages,
another kind of excellency above natural reach, to which is due a
supernatural reverence and worship, distinct from Civil: the which
spiritual and supernatural worship we commonly call religious; because it is
given unto holy men or Saints, in consideration of their religious virtues, of
faith, charity, fortitude in defense of religion, and of Ecclesiastical
superiority. The term of religious worship the Protestants utterly mislike,
pretending that all kind of religious worship is due unto God only: but better
men and greater clearkes then they by many degrees, do use it in the very same
sense; as may be seen in diverse of S. Augustines works. L. 20. co^t. Faustum
cap. 21.
Let this one sentence suffice, where he says: That Christian people do
celebrate the memories of Martirs, with religious solemnity. True it is, that
religious worship is sometime (by the said holy father and others) taken more
strictly, for the principal acts of religion, which are proper unto God alone;
and in that sense we deny it to be given unto any creature: but the same word
is also (not seldom) used by them in a more large signification, and applied
unto all things that belong to religion. So we call religious men, such as are
specially chosen to serve God: religious houses, places where God is served:
religious virtues, such as issue out of the root of religion; and consequently
religious honor or worship, that is exhibited unto men for their excellency in
religious qualities, and religious affairs. So that any indifferent man (who
delights not to cavil upon words) understanding our meaning to be very
far off from attributing any jot of Gods honor, unto any Saint or any other
thing whatsoever: cannot be justly offended with our terms of religious
worship given to Saints; when as he is beforehand given to understand, that
we take religious to signify, not that which is proper to God: but those
religious gifts which be in godly men.

Hence also it follows most perspicuously what intolerable wrong they do
us, that call us Idolaters; or say, that we rob God of his honor, and give
it unto Saints. For we say, and repeat it a thousand times over and over,
and declare it as plainly as can be, that it is the most heinous crime in the
world, to give any such sovereign honor, as is due to God only, unto either
Angels or Saints, to wit: to esteem them to be infinitely mighty, wise, or
good; or to be the Creatours or supreme Governors of heaven and earth; or
briefly, to be the authors of any supernatural or natural excellency or
perfection. These and such like points of Divine honor, we ascribe not to any
creature: but say, that the Saints are Gods creatures and servants, and do
receive all that they either be or have, or Gods liberallity; yet we hold it
not to derogate any whit from the due honor we owe unto God, to yield such
honor and worship unto his Saints and servants, as he has made them worthy
of. Nay rather, we do not a little honor God himself, when we worship Godly
men, for his divine gifts bestowed upon them; and when we think, that
(because they have faithfully served him on earth) they are now in heaven in
high favor with him; and can sooner obtain any reasonable suite of him, then
other mortal men, who are subject to many infirmities. Neither do we
diminish any thing at all Christ our Saviors mediation, by making the Saints
our intercessours. For (as shall be hereafter declared at large) we attribute
no point of Christ's mediation to them; but only range and place the Saints
intercession, with the prayers of other good men living on earth, and with our
own, although in a different degree of perfection; theirs being far better
then ours: yet, all are made in Christ's name, and are effectual through the
merits of his Passion.

But one may here object, how then do Catholics affirm and say, that the
Saints are their hope, and refuge, and how can they desire them, To have mercy
upon them, and to help them; which seem to be things proper to God alone,
and to Christ our redeemer? I answer first, that these speeches in good sense
have been used by most ancient, learned, and circumspect Authors, and that
by imitation of the holy Scriptures. For holy Job says: Have mercy on me,
have mercy on me, Job 19. 1 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 18. Cap. 15. verse. 30. 1. Cap. 9.
verse. 19.
at least you my friends. And Saint Paul calls the Thessalonians, His hope,
his joy, and crown of glory; and desires the Romans to help him in their
prayers: and says to the Corinthians that he became all things to all men,
that he might save all; with diverse such like. So that no discreet man ought
to condemn such speeches to the Saints, if they be uttered with a good
meaning, to wit: that they taking compassion of our frailty and misery, do by
their gracious intercession help to procure our pardon, and to obtain at Gods
bounteous hands, through the merit of Christ's passion, all such heavenly
graces as we stand need of* Albeit (as I have said) such terms have been
very well used in all antiquity; yet, in these our captious days I could
vvish, that Catholics would use them very sparingly, for fear of
scandalizing the poor deceived Protestants.

Observe lastly, that by the outward manner and external show of worship,
it cannot be sufficiently discerned, whether it be Divine, Religious, or
Civil: for as we kneel to God, so do we also on our knee honor the King, 1.
Reg. 24. verse. 10.
and his Council; As David did adore King Saul prostrate on the earth. But the
difference consists chiefly in the inward conceit, and disposition of the
mind; and so whether we kneel or no (if we prostrate our hearts before God,
inclining it unto him, as to the Author of all things, infinitely perfect) we
do him Godly honor. So, if we kneel to any Saints, or before any picture of
a Saint in honor of the Saint, acknowledging in our hearts the Saint to be a
very holy creature, endued with many great graces of God, and dearly beloved
of him; we do but duly worship the Saint: as kneeling to the King, and in
our hearts confessing him to be the supreme Governor under God of the
temporal state of his Kingdom, we do but our duties unto our King. To
conclude, it is not the outward fashion of worship, that makes it proper to
God or Man; when as kneeling to one, may be also in dirision of him, as when
Pilates soldiers kneeled to Christ: but the inward conceit and inclination of
the judgment and heart. And therefore, they are very simple that reprehend
Catholics of Idolatry for kneeling before pictures; when as they kneel not to
the picture it self, no more then Protestants kneel unto that part of their
seat, or to the wall that is before them: but they do kneel to God, as to
their sovereign Lord; and to the Saint as to an holy personage, whose prayer
to God for them they humbly request.

Now to the maine point in controversy, M. PER. denies: That any civil
worship in bending of the knee, or prostrating of the body, is to be given to
either Saints or Angels; and much less any religious worship, as namely
invocation, signified by any bodily adoration: for that (says he) is the
honor of God himself, by what name soever you call it. And this is all he
says (for ought I can see) touching the worshipping of Saints.

We on the other side say, that we may both bend the knee, and prostrate the
body to any Angel or Saint in heaven, and with a religious inclination and
obeisance of our hearts worship them, for their excellent supernatural gifts:
and that this kind of worship, is much inferior unto the honor proper to
God; yea, that it is infinitely less, then that as has been already declared.
M. PER. has one only shadow of a reason, why we must not yield any civil
worship unto the Saints: Because (says he) they be absent from us, and we use
not to worship men that be absent. ergo. Which is most easily confuted, and
that two ways. First, if we say (as we will prove afterward) that though
they be far distant from us in place; yet, they see and know all the honor
that we present to them, and so are they morally present, and as so present
may be worshipped. Secondly, that we may truly honor them who are absent
corporally, by lifting up our hearts to them; and so representing them to our
minds, may reverence and worship them as spiritually present, according to
that of S. Paul; I absent in body, but present in spirit: otherwise, 1. Cor. 5.
verse. 3.
we Christians should not vvhiles we lived on earth, adore the humanity of our
Savior Christ JESUS, because he touching his humanity, is absent from us;
which were most absurd: and so is therefore M. PERKINS reason, out of which it
would necessarily follow. And because M. PER. confounds this point of
worshipping of Saints with that of invocation, and hudleth them together, now
talking of the one, then of the other, besides al good method and order, and
consequently makes two Chapters of the same matter: I will here in this former
Chapter only treat of the worshipping of Saints, drawing what M. PERKINS says
of this subject into this Chapter, and refer the matter to invocation unto
the next.

His second reason then against worshipping of Saints, may be that which makes
the third in the 14. Chapter: Christ refused so much as to bow the knee unto
Satan, upon this ground: because it is written, thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

To this S. Augustine has answered 1200. years ago, upon those words of
Genesis: Abraham adored or worshipped the people of the land. Cap. 23. Quaest.
61. super Genesi^.
It may be demanded (says he) how it is written thou shall adore thy Lord
God, and him only shall thou serve; when as Abraham did so honor that kind of
people, that he did adore them? but we must observe that in the same
Commandment, it is not said, thou shall only adore thy Lord thy God; as it is
said, him only shall thou serve, which in Greek is Latreysis, for such service
is due to God only. So that in brief this most learned Father answers our
Protestants, that the service proper to God (called Latria) is to be given to
none but to God: Marry, that worship and adoration expressed in the former
part of that sentence, may be given to others, and that Abraham gave it very
well unto the people of Heth. Now, our Savior had great reason, not to yield
so much as one jote of that meaner worship to Satan; because he excelled him in
nothing; but small reason have our Protestants to reason thus (as in effect M.
PER. does:) Christ would not worship the Devil, therefore Christians may not
worship Saints, as though Saints were no more to be worshipped then the Devil:
a holy comparison and well worthy a hellhound. But he goes forward and
adds, Act. 10.
that Peter would not suffer Cornelius so much as to kneel to him: though
(says he) Cornelius intended not to honor him as God: therefore, neither
Saint nor Angel is to be honored so much as with the bowing of the knee, if
it carry but the least signification of divine honor.

Answer. Do you mark what war this man is at with himself? first he
says that Cornelius intended not to adore Peter as God: after headdeth, that
kneeling if it carry but the signification of Godly honor, is not to be given
to Saints; which conclusion of his we grant, to wit: that no inward or outward
worship (if it proceed from a heart meaning to exhibit divine honor) is to
be given unto any other then to God; and therefore did I declare before, that
by the external kind of worshipping, we cannot discern whether the party
mean to offer divine, religious, or civil honor to him whom he honors,
but that is to be known of the party himself, or by conjecture to be
otherwise collected. To the purpose, if Cornelius meant to adore S. Peter as
some petty God (as S. Hierome gathers out of the text, Lib. contra Vigil.
which has; that he did adore S. Peter falling at his feet, and S. Peter
lifting him up said; arise, my self also am a man:) then is there nothing
against us, who do also forbid all men to adore and give Godly honor unto
any Saint or Angel. If it were a lesser kind of religious worship, which was
due to Saints; then we say with S. Chrysostom upon this place, that S. Peter
out of his humility and consideration of humane frailty, refused that honor
albeit it were due unto his excellent piety and singular authority. The like
answer is to be given unto that place of the Apocalipse, Cap. 19. verse. 10.
where the Angel forbadde S. John to adore him: which M. PER. had forgot to
allege. For either S. John took the Angel to be God, as he spoke in the
person of God; and so by mistaking the person offered him divine honor,
Quaest. 61. ^n Genes. Greg. lib. 27. Moral. c. 11. Bed. Anselm. and alij in
illum locum.
as S. Augustine supposes, and was justly reprehended by the Angel, and
instructed that he was not God, but his fellow servant: or (as many others
ancient and learned Authors think) S. John as one that very well knew what
he had to do, did dutifully worship such an heavenly creature, as Gods
Ambassador to him: for otherwise he was not so dull or forgetful, as to have
the Cap. 22. verse. 8.
second time fallen into the same fault. Neither did the Angel reprehend him,
but after a most courteous manner willed S. John not to do him that honor;
because he knew well how dearly beloved S. John was unto our Savior, and
that perhaps S. John was to have a higher seat in heaven, then he had:
wherefore, he would not take that honor of so great a personage. To these
reasons of M. PER. we may add some few scraps of authorities which he has
swept together.

De vera relig. 53.
Augustine: we honor the Saints with charity, and not by servitude; neither do
we erect Churches to them: And they are to be honored for imitation; but not
to be adored with religion.

Answer. Mark that in both the sentences, he teaches us plainly to honor
and worship the Saints; as we do honor the Saints, they are to be honored:
Marry he adds (as we also teach after him) that no divine and Godly honor be
given them; which he describes in those words, with servitude and with
religion. The Saints (says he even here, as in many other places of his
learned works) are to be worshipped; but not with such worship, as
servants or creatures owe to their sovereign Lord or creator: they are to be
honored but not with religion, being taken precisely for the chief act of
religion which concerns only the honor and worship of God. Churches are not
to be builded to Saints, nor Altars erected to them, nor Sacrifice offered to
them. All this we grant in such sort as S. Augustine himself does declare,
that is: these divine offices are to be performed to no other then to God
alone; yet, all may be done in the memory, and to the honor of Saints. Let
this one place of S. Augustine serve the turn, where he says: Lib. 20. co^t.
Faust. cap. 21.
that Christian people do celebrate the memory of Martirs with religious
solemnity; both to stir up imitation, as also t^^^ they may be pertakers of
their merits, and helped by their prayers: notwiths^^^ding (says he) to none
of the Martirs do we erect Altars, but to the God of Martirs; yet, in the
remembrance of Martirs. For who of the Priests, in the places of their holy
bodies standing at the Altar, has said at any time: we offer unto thee Peter,
or Paul, or Cyprian? But that which is offered, is offered to God (who crowned
the Martirs) at the memories of Martirs; that by the admonition of the very
places, a greater devotion may arise to inflame our charity, both toward them
whom we must imitate; as also toward him, by whose help we may imitate
them. We therefore, worship the Martirs with that worship of love and society,
wherewith holy men of God in this life are worshipped, etc. but them with so
much more devotion, as we are more assured that they have now passed all
peril of this life. Observe (good reader) how many points of the Catholic
doctrine are confirmed by this one passage of so worthy a Doctor.

First, Altars are built at the Martirs bodies. Secondly, Sacrifice is offered
to God at the memories of the Martirs, to increase our love toward them.
Thirdly, Martirs are to be worshipped of us, more then any holy men living.
Fourthly, That with religious honor and celebrity they are to be worshipped:
yet not with any Godly honor, as by Sacrifice, erecting of Altars, or building
of Churches to them; which seem to be the only external acts of religion
proper unto God alone.

M. PERKINS second testimony is taken out of Epiphanius, who commands that
none be adored but God alone. Let Mary be in honor, Haeres. 79.
but let God only be adored. Again, Mary is holy and to be honored, but not
to adoration.

Answer. Who sees not, that this holy Father teaches us to honor and
worship that blessed Virgin Mary and the other Saints? Marry not with
Sacrifice, as he there disputes against them who offered Sacrifice to the
Virgin Mary, or any other such like adoration which is proper to God alone.

A third testimony M. PER. produces against himself out of S. Cyril, when
Julian the Apostata objected against the ancient Catholics (that which
Protestants do against us now a-dayes) that they worshipped their Martirs as
God: Lib. 9. and 10.
Cyril (says M. PER.) answers then plainly (as we Catholics do now) that
Christians (indeed) did honor their Martirs, but not with adoration and Godly
honor. His words are: We affirm not our Martirs to be made Gods, but we use
to bestow all honor upon them.

In primu^ cap. Romans
The fourth and last testimony is borrowed out of S. Ambrose. Is any so mad
that he will give to the Earl, the honor of a King? yet, these men do not
think themselves guilty, who give the honor of Gods name to a creature, and
leaving their Lord adore their fellow servants, as though there were any thing
more left for God.

Answer. S. Ambrose there inueigheth (as S. Paul does) against P^^^^
Idolaters, that gave the glory of God, some to men their fellow servants, some
to fowls, some to serpents, and such like: all which is very far vvide from
the mark of the present question. For he that condemns men for giving Gods
honor to foolish or beastly creatures, does not reprehend them which honor
and worship Gods servants, with such honor only as is due to them. And thus
much in confutation of M. PER. reasons against worshipping of Saints: now to
an argument or two in favor of the Catholic party.

All men are to be honored by the law of nature, with such honor as is
correspondent and due unto their virtue and dignity; which the Apostle
confirms saying: Romans 13. verse. 7.
render to all men their due, etc. to whom honor, honor, etc. but a kind of
religious and supernatural honor and worship is due unto the Saints in
heaven: ergo, we are bound to render that their due worship unto them.

That religious honor is due unto them, is most clear to all that know why
honor is due unto any man. If honor be due unto Nobility of birth, as it is
commonly holden; the Saints are the Sons of God, the most honorable Lord of
heaven and earth. If to be admitted to be one of a Kings privy Council,
makes a man honorable; then the Saints are honorable, 1. Cor. 13. verse. 12.
Apocal. 2. verse. 27.
who (as S. Paul says) do see God face to face, and know him, even as they
are known. If to be advanced unto some high government, make a man
honorable; the Martirs whom Christ does place to rule over Cities and
Nations, are honorable. Briefly, if excellent vvisdome, singular valor, and
such like heroycall virtues, make men honorable, as all men confess; then are
the Saints in heaven most honorable, who so far exceeded in all such
heroycall virtues of which the Philosophers write, all others as far as
heaven surpasses the earth: so that it remains most evident, that the Saints
are to be worshipped. And as their excellent virtues do proceed from a more
noble fountain, then the nature of man (to wit) from the grace of God, and
does therefore without comparison, furmount all moral and civil either virtue
or dignity: so are they with a more spiritual and religious kind of worship
to be worshipped and reverenced. It may be said, that albeit the Saints be so
very honorable: yet, because they be of another region they are not to be
honored by us, that be strangers and foraigners to them: but this objection S.
Paul has long sithence prevented, who says expressly to Christians: Brethren
ye are not guests and strangers, but Cytizens of the Saints, Ephesians. 2.
and household servants of God. If then one Cytizen be to reverence another his
better, and one servant another; then are we to worship the Saints in heaven,
who are our fellow Cytizens and servants: yea, they are members of the same
body of Christ, of which we are, though they be now in triumph for their
lawful fighting here, and we yet in warrefare, to attain unto the same
triumphant estate. Yea, for the dear and mutual affection, which is or
should be between these two parts of the said Church, S. Paul calls that
Jerusalem which is above our Mother: Gal. 4. verse. 26.
and ought we not to reverence, honor, and worship our Mother? thus much of
our former argument grounded in reason.

Now to another taken from example, which alone is more then sufficient to
settle any good Christian in the faith of this point, thus it may be
propounded: Both Jews, Pagans, and Heretics (that is, all sorts of ungodly
and misbeleeuing men) did find great fault with the ancient true Christians
for worshipping of Saints and their Relikes, and called it Idolatry, as the
Protestants do now a-dayes: Contrariwise, the best and most learned Doctors
in that pure antiquity, did maintain and defend worshipping of Saints and
their Relikes, teaching just as the Catholics now do: that they did indeed
honor the Saints with great honor, but did not adore them, or give the
honor proper to God to any other then to God alone; let us hear some proof
of this. When blessed Policarpus S. John Evangelists Disciple was Martired, the
Jews were very importunate to have his body consumed to ashes, Eusebius hyst.
l. 4. cap. 14.
least (say they) the Christians do get it and so leaving the crucified man,
do fall to adore him, so the opinion of the Jews. What answered the
Christians? We (say they) mean nothing less then to forsake Christ; for him
we adore as the true Son of God: but Martirs and all other his true servants
we do worthily reverence and embrace, for their incredible goodwill showed
toward Christ; and do esteem their bones and relikes more rich then
precious stones, and more pure then gold, and do celebrate their memories,
with holy days and great joy. This of the ancient Christians answer to the
Jews, now of their answer to the Pagans. Julian the Apostata with his
followers, charged the Christians with making their Martirs Gods, and that they
adored them: to whom among others Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria answered in
this manner. L. 6. cont. Iulianum.
We make not holy Martirs Gods, neither do we adore them: but we honor them
very highly. And it is not an unworthy thing; nay, it is necessary to honor
them eternally, that have behaved themselves so gloriously. And because that
goodly man (Iulianus) does reprehend us for worshipping of them; w^ tell him,
that we esteem not Martirs to be Gods, yet are we accustomed to vouchsafe them
very high honor. After these Pagans and Jews some old Heretics trotted
apace. Faustus the Manichean Heretic calumniated and falsely slandered the
Catholics of his time, that they had turned their Martirs by worshipping of
them, into Idols. Unto whom S. Augustine that worthy pillar of the Church
answered, Aug. l. 20. co^t. Faust. cap. 21.
as is above rehearsed: That Christians (indeed) did celebrate the memories of
Martirs with religious solemnity, and that they worshipped them with greater
honor then they did any holy man alive; yet, not with that honor which is
proper to God, called by the Greeks Latria. The like did Vigilantius another
dreaming Heretic object shortly after, auouching the Catholics to be
Idolaters, because they adored the bones of dead men: whom that great light of
his age S. Hierome does duly reprehend, Epist. ad Riparium.
answering; That they did not adore Martirs relikes, no nor a^y Angel in
heaven, because they would not give the honor due to the Creator, unto any
creature: but (says he) we do honor the relikes of Martirs, that we may
adore him whose Martirs they be. We do honor the servants, that the honor of
the servants: may redound unto their master, who says: he that receives you,
receives me: now let the indifferent Christian consider, whether he were
better with the Heathens, Jews, and Heretics, to deny the Saints to be
worshipped, and say with them that it is Idolatry so to do: or whether he
had not rather with the ancient holy Fathers, and best Christians to hold,
that Saints departed this life, and their relikes are to be worshipped with
greater honor, then any holy men yet living: yea, that worshipping of Saints
is so far of from Idolatry, and robbing God of the honor proper to him, that
even thereby God is much honored. Surely, we Catholics are nothing dismaide
at their outcries, that call us therefore Idolaters; being well assured, that
they be but the old alarmes and reproaches, that Infidels were wont to cast
upon the best Christians. Now to the third and last argument for us which is
taken from authority.

Iosue 5. verse. 24. Number. 22.
Iosue falling flat upon the ground worshipped an Angel, as soon as he had told
him that he was the Prince of Gods army: this worship being performed by a true
Israelite, and accepted off by the Angel of God (yea more then that, for it
was also commanded) does convince, that more then civil honor is due unto a
Cytizen of heaven: this for the old Testament. For the state of the new hear
the judgment of the most ancient and best learned Doctors.

Iustine Martyr declaring unto the Emperor the faith of the Church, Apolog. 2.
speaks thus: We Christians adore and worship God the Father, and his Son,
who came into the world and taught us these things; and after them do we
truly worship by word and deed, the army of good Angels following his conduct,
and the Prophetical spirits: and this do we copiously teach to all that will
learn our doctrine.

Eusebius Caesariensis teaches the same, and says: Lib. 13. de praep. c. 7.
Sermon. 32. de Sa^ctis.
We do honor the Soldiers of true Godliness, as them who are best beloved
of God.

So does S. Augustine: Therefore dearly beloved Brethren, as often as we
celebrate the memories of Martirs, laying a-side all worldly business, we
ought speedily to repair unto the house of God, to render unto them honor,
who have procured our salvation by the shedding of their blood, who have
offered themselves up to God so holy an Host, to obtain for us mercy at his
hands; specially when almighty God says to his Saints: he that honors you,
honors me; and he that despises you, despises me. Whosoever therefore
(concludes S. Augustine) honors Martirs, honors Christ: and he that
contemns the Saints, contemns Christ; which is word for word taken out of
Sermon. 6. in fine. Orat. de SS. Iuue^t. and. Max. In Theod. Mart.
S. Ambrose.

S. Chrysostom: We do not worship ancient Saints and those of later time, in
different sort; but all of them with the same chearefulnes: therefore (says
he) let us often visit them, and worship their tombs.

Gregory Nyssene, speaking of the worship which the Church does give to
Martirs, says: To what King is such honor done? who are they of the most
excellent among men, whose memory is so solemnly honored? who of the Emperors
in so many men's mouths, are so renowned as this poor Soldier, now enroled a
Soldier; whom S. Paul has armed, whom the Angels have anointed, and whom
Christ has crowned.

S. Gregory Nazianzene defines the worshipping of Martirs, Orat. 1. cont.
Iulianum.
to be an assured mark of our love toward Christ. An hundredth such other
testimonies will the holy ancient Fathers afford us, if we stand in need of
them. But this may suffice to inform any reasonable man, that both by express
warrant of Scripture, and by the practice and doctrine of the purest antiquity,
the Saints of God and holy personages are to be worshipped of us with that
religious honor commonly called Dulia, that is: with that worship which is
due unto the better sort of Gods servants.

OF INTERCESSION OF SAINTS.
OUR CONSENT.
M. PERKINS Page 258.
Our consent I will set down in two conclusions. The first conclusion: The
Saints departed pray to God, by giving thanks to him for their own
redemption, and for the redemption of the whole Church of God upon earth.

The second conclusion. The Saints departed pray generally for the state of the
whole Church.

THE DISSENT.
THey hold that the Saints in heaven do make intercession for particular men:
and that having received particular men's prayers, they present them unto God;
but this doctrine do we flatly renounce upon these grounds and reasons.

Esaias 63. verse. 16.
The Church says to God: doubtless thou art our Father though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel know us not. Now if Abraham knew not his
posterity, neither Mary nor Peter nor any Saint departed know us and our
estate: and consequently they cannot make particular intercession for us.

To this we answer two ways, first with S. Hierome upon the same place:
that to know one is taken there for to like and approve him and his doings,
Psalm. 1.
as it is very often in holy Scripture: Our Lord knows the way of the just.
Item, Christ will answer to them that were workers of iniquity, Math. 7.
verse. 25.
I know ye not; as also to the foolish Virgins, I know ye not, that is, I
like you not: even so Abraham and Jacob could not then know, that is, approve
the doing of those their wicked and degenerate children. Secondly we answer,
that Abraham and the holy Patriarchs were (until Christ had by his passion
paid their ransom) not yet in the possession of heavenly joys; but detayned
in a place of rest, by the learned commonly called Lymbus Patrum. To this
second answer M. PER. replyeth: If they say that Abraham was in Lymbo (which
they will have to be a part of hell) what joy could Lazarus have in Abraham's
bosom? and with what comfort could Jacob say on his death bed: O Lord I have
waited for thy salvation? We rejoyne, that albeit Lymbo be thought to be under
the earth; yet is it as far remote from hell, as the depth of the earth will
give it leave: for the place of Purgatory is between hell and it. Further,
that in Lymbo there was no pain, but a quiet expectation of their deliverance
from thence, and translation into heaven; which brought them great joy:
besides, the good company of many millions of holy souls, that there attended
the same happy hour of their deliverance; of all which Lazarus was partaker
being carried into Abraham's bosom. I will here omit, that M. PER. in this
very question, makes this matter of Lazarus but a parable, and thereby not fit
to confirm any point of doctrine in his own judgment. To the second place I
say, that Jacob might have great comfort to think upon his salvation, which
should be accomplished in Christ's time: for Abraham who was father of them,
Ioh. 8. verse. 56. 2. Reg. 22. verse. 20.
rejoiced to see Christ's days, which he saw, and was glad, as our Savior
himself testifies.

The second reason: Huldah the Prophetess tells Josias, that he must be
gathered to his fathers, and put in his grave in peace, that his eyes might not
see all the evil, which God would bring on that place. Therefore, the Saints
departed see not the state of the Church on earth: this conclusion Augustine
confirms at large.

To this we answer; first, that the Prophetess (when she says, he should
not see the evil of that place) means no more, then that he should be after
his death in such a place of rest and contentment, that it should not grieve
and vex him to see the just punishment of his own Country. Secondly, it may
be said of Josias who dyed long before Christ, as it is of Abraham; that he
was to remain in Lymbo when that evil should happen, and so should not see
it. But Augustine (says he) does confirm this conclusion at large. Why did
not the honest man quote the place of S. Augustine as he is wont to do? was it
because it would lead us directly to the discovery of his deceit? S. Augustine
(indeed) does very copiously handle the question, what knowledge souls
departed have; De cura pro mort. ca. 15. 16.
and resolves: that souls departed, of their own natural knowledge do not
understand what is done by their friends here; but that either by the report
of other souls that come to them, or of Angels that go between; or else by
the revelation of the spirit of God (in whose presence Saints departed do
continually stand) they may very well know, that which is here done: and thus
much of S. Augustine in this place, afterward you shall hear more of him
concerning his opinion of the knowledge that Saints have of our affairs.

The third reason of M. PERKINS: No Creature, Saint, or Angel, can be a
Mediator for us to God, saving Christ alone: for in a true Mediator there
must be three things. First, that the word of God must reveal and propound
him unto the Church. Surely I should think that he must first be a perfect
Mediator, before he be propounded for such a one. Secondly, a Mediator must
be perfectly just, so as no sin be found in him at all. Such be all Saints in
heaven. Thirdly, a Mediator must be a propitiator, that is: he must bring to
God some thing, that may appease and satisfy his wrath for our sins: so did
Moses when he appeased Gods wrath, justly kindled against the sins of the
Israelites in the wilderness: thus might a man quickly answer M. PER.
argument of his Mediator.

But to explicate this matter more clearly and particularly, I say that a
Mediator may be taken two ways. First, he may be called a Mediator, that
does in any sort employ himself between two parties to agree them; whether it
be by persuasion or entreaty; whether by letter or word of mouth: and so is it
commonly taken, and that according unto the proper signification of the word.
Secondly, a Mediator may be taken in an other sense, not for every one that
uses means of atonement; but for him only that to make the agreement
between the parties, is content to pay the debt himself, and to satisfy for all other damages and detrimentes: and in this sense does S. Paul say; 1. Tim.
2. verse. 5.
That we have one Mediator the man JESUS Christ, who gave himself a
redemption for all. Note the latter words, and you shall see this my
distinction of Mediator to be gathered out of the Apostles own words: For
(says he) we have one Mediator, that gave himself a redemption for all, that
is, that took the debts of all our sins upon his own shoulders, and
satisfied fully for all: see here expressed the second kind of Mediator. Now
in the beginning of the Chapter, he desires that intercessions and prayers be
made of the Christians for all men, yea for Heathen Princes: behold the first
kind of Mediator. For Christians that pray for all men, by their intercession
are means unto God for conversion of others, and so may be called Mediators
in a good sense; as Moses says of himself: Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 5. Gal. 3. verse.
19. Act. 7. verse. 35. Iudic. 3. verse. 9.
I was an intercessour and means, or mediator between our Lord and you. And
by S. Paul he is plainly called a Mediator: the law was ordained by Angels,
in the hand of a Mediator. And by S. Stephen he is called a Redeemer: as
Othoniel is termed a Savior. And that in this sense there may be many
mediators S. Cyril testifies, saying: In Ioh. l. 3. cap. 9.
The Mediator of God and man is JESUS Christ, not only because he reconciled
men unto God; but for that he is naturally both God and man in one person. For
by this means God reconciled our natures to him; for otherwise how should S.
Paul have said, Christ to be the only Mediator: for many of the Saints have
used the ministry of mediation; as S Paul himself, crying upon men to be
reconciled to God: and Moses was a Mediator; for he ministered the law unto
the people: and Jeremy was also a Mediator, when he stood before God and
prayed for good things to the people. Related in 2. Council. Nice. art. 4.
What need many words? (says this great Doctor) all the Prophets and
Apostles were Mediators. With S. Cyril accords S. Basil, who hoped for
mercy at Gods hands, and forgiveness of his sins by the mediation of the
holy Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs. And S. Bernard was of the same mind,
Sermon. super sign^ magnum apparuit in coelo.
when he taught that we stand in need of a Mediator, to the Mediator: and no
one more for our profit and commodity, then the blessed Virgin Mary; so that
this mediation and intercession of Saints, is no whit at all injurious unto the
only mediation of Christ: for it is of a far different kind from Christ's
mediation, and of the same sort as the prayers be of other good men living on
earth, who all sue unto God in Christ's name, and hope to obtain (all and every
of them) their petitions, by the virtue of his merits; and therefore all our
prayers and theirs, are commonly concluded thus: Through our Lord JESUS Christ
thy Son, who with thee lives and reigns in the unity of the holy Ghost,
God, for ever and ever. And thus much to M. PER. foundation laid upon the
sands, wherein he so insolently renounced the Catholic doctrine: but that I
do him no wrong, I must here add a coople of other arguments which he
misplaced in the former question, and therefore I reserved them to this.

The former. All true invocation and prayer, made according unto the will of
God, must have a double foundation: a commandment, and a promise. A
commandment to move us to pray: and a promise to assure us that we shall be
heard: for every prayer must be made in faith; and without a commandment, and
promise there is no faith. Upon this infallible ground I conclude, that we may
not pray to Saints departed: for in the Scripture there is no word either
commanding us to pray to them, or assuring us that we shall be heard when we
pray.

Answer. We deny that prayer requires that double foundation of a
commandment to pray, and promise to be heard when we pray: and that upon the
vvarrant of some of the best prayers, that are recorded in holy Scripture. When
Abraham prayed for the saving of Sodom, and Gomorrha, Genesis 18. verse. 25.
and did obtain that if there had been in them but ten just persons, their
Cities should not have been destroyed: we read neither of commandment given
to Abraham to make that prayer, nor any promise before he began it, to be
heard; and this man was the Father of the faithful, and knew much better then
an hundredth M. PERKINS, how and when to pray.

And when mild Moses that most wise conductor of the Israelites, prayed
unto God so peremptorily, that he would either blot him out of the book of
life, or else pardon his people the Israelites, Exodus 32. verse. 32.
had he either commandment so to pray, or promise to be heard? I am sure that
they can show me none at all in the Scripture: Nay, God before entreated
Moses, that he would not pray unto him for them, Ibidem. verse. 10.
but suffer him to punish them according to their deserts, promising to advance
Moses exceedingly, if he would give over his suite; nevertheless, Moses
omitted not to pray most earnestly for the same people, and was heard. Need
we any other proof to overthrow M. PER. rotten foundation? And when Iosue
rather commanded then prayed; Iosue 10. verse. 12.
that the Sun should not move against Gabaon, and it stayed his course for a
whole day space, God obeying unto the voice of man, as the holy Ghost speaks:
what commandment or promise had Iosue for this? and to omit an hundredth other
like, what promise had S. Paul to assure him to be heard, 2. Cor. 12. verse. 8.
when he prayed not once, but thrice that the prick of the flesh should be
taken away from him? none at al (I ween) for his request would not be granted
him. By this the indifferent reader may perceive, how gross the Protestants
judgment is in matters of faith, who take that for an infallible ground of
religion, which is so contrary unto the express word of God, that nothing
can be more. Of faith necessary in prayer shall be spoken, as soon as I have
dispatched an other text of Scripture, misplaced here and misaplyed.

Math. 4. verse. 10.
We are (says M. PER.) commanded to call upon God only: him only shall thou
serve.

This man's eies-sight begins to fail him much, that cannot discern
between calling upon, and serving; when many a Master calls upon his man
whom he does not serve, but is served by him. The text is already expounded
out of S. Augustine: that we must serve God only with Godly honor, as the
Greek words Latreyseis does there notify; notwithstanding which only
service, every servant (I hope) may serve his Master, and every inferior
worship his superior: and so may we do the Saints our betters in all
goodness, with such worship as is due unto their singular gifts. And as we may
pray unto men alive without derogation unto God his only service: so may we
do to the Saints departed.

But M. PER. fearing the weakness of this fortification, secondeth it with an
other out of the Apostle: Romans 10. verse. 14.
How shall we call upon him in whom we have not believed? but we may not
believe in Saints, therefore we may not call upon them.

I answer, that we cannot call upon any man for more then we believe to be in
him; and so much must we believe to be in every man, as we will demand at his
hands. We call upon Christ for salvation, and therefore must we first believe
him to be a Savior: we call upon Saints to pray for us; therefore must we
before hand believe, that they both can and will pray for us, and that they are
able (through the favor and love that God bears them) to entreat much at
Gods hands: see how we must believe in them, upon whom we call for help.
And the very phrase of believing in Saints, is used by the same Ad Philemon. v.
5.
Apostle, not unlike that of the old Testament: Exodus 14 verse. 31.
The people believed God, and his servant Moses. M. PERKINS goes on, patching
up his former argument with that, which has small coherence with it, to wit:
That we have no promise to be heard, but for Christ's sake. Admit it were so,
it makes nothing against prayer to Saints: for they pray for us in Christ's
name, and are heard for Christ's sake.

Finally, M. PERKINS fableth, that we give for our only warrant of invocation
of Saints, miracles and revelations; and thereunto answers, that to judge of
any point of doctrine by miracles, three things must concur. First, the
doctrine of faith and piety to be confirmed. Secondly, prayer to God that some
thing may be done for the ratifying of the said doctrine. Thirdly, the manifest
edification of the Church by the two former.

What of all this good Sir? Marry think what you will, for he infers
nothing; I will therefore apply all this to the purpose, and say first: That
when a miracle is granted by God, to confirm any point of doctrine in
controversy, then every man is as well bound to believe that point of
doctrine, as if it were plainly recorded in the holy Scripture; for it has
God to witness, who cannot deceive. Secondly, that S. Bernard (a most Godly
man, and one whose testimony M. PER. does very often allege) did fulfill all
those three worthy observations of M. PER. in working of miracles to confirm
invocation of Saints; and therefore it is to be believed of all men, even by M.
PERKINS own sentence. For first he propounded invocation of Saints, Lib. 3.
vitae, cap. 5.
as a doctrine of faith and great piety, in the Province of Tolouse in France,
where it was by our Protestants Grandsiers the Albigenses denied. Secondly, he
blessed some certain loafes of bread that were presented to him, and prayed to
God that if invocation to Saints were pure doctrine of faith, that then
whosoever should taste of that bread, might be cured of what disease soever he
was sick. A Bishop that stood by, added; yea Sir, if they receive them with
good faith they shall be healed. S. Bernard replied: I said not so, but
whosoever shall truly taste of them shall be cured, that they may know us to
have the truth, and to be the true messengers of God. And as it there
follows: An huge multitude of sick and diseased persons tasting of that
bread, recovered perfect health. If we had no other argument then this, it
alone were sufficient to persuade any Christian, that to pray unto Saints is
the true doctrine of Christ, which God so expressly would confirm by miracles,
and testify so evidently. What would he believe, that will not believe this?
But (says M. PER.) miracles be to be done for Infidels, and not for them who
believe. True it is, and therefore was this miracle done, to convert or to
confound such Infidels as our Protestants are, who will not believe the
invocation of Saints.

Lastly (says he) our faith is not to be confirmed by revelations, Luc. 16.
verse. 29.
and apparitions of dead men, but by the writings of the Apostles and Prophets.

What is this either to miracles, or invocation of Saints? neither is that
which he says to be drawn out of those words of that parable, as I will
prove when it shall be need. Note by the way, that twice in this question he
himself cites that parable of Dives and Lazarus, for proof of doctrine;
which he afterward denies to be lawful for us to do. What our other
grounds be for invocation of Saints, shall be declared in our arguments
following.

M. PERKINS fifth reason. To pray to Saints departed, to bow the knee to them
while they are in heaven, is to asscribe unto them, that which is proper to
God: namely to know the heart and inward desires thereof, and to know the
speeches and behauiours of all men, in all places on the earth at all times.

Answer. This man does too too broadly enlarge his lies; for neither do all
men at once (much less at all times) pray unto every or any one of the Saints:
but suppose they did; yet, to hear all their prayers together, is nothing so
much as to see that which every Saint does see in heaven, to wit, the one only
substance of God in three persons: for what are all the cogitations of men,
compared unto the immense and incomprehensible nature of God? not so much as
the point of a pin to the whole globe of the earth, and yet every Saint in
heaven does clearly behold God: therefore much more able are they to hear and
see all things that belong unto men. And as the learned Divines know, the
manhood of our Savior Christ does see, know, and comprehend all the deeds,
words, and thoughts of all men, that have lived since the beginning of the
world, unto the end; because it belongs unto him who is judge of all, to
know all; as well to reward the good, as to punish the evil: and yet does no
Divine say, that the manhood of Christ is God, or equal unto God in
knowledge. Now, the Saints in heaven do not see the secrets of our hearts, in
our hearts; but being present to the face of God, do behold in it (as it were
in a most clear glass) all that is pleases the goodness of God to reveal
unto them: and it is incident, and belonging necessarily unto their most happy
estate, to have granted to them, all that in reason they can demand;
otherwise they were not so happy as they might be. Now, what good nature would
not be glad, to pleasure his own fellow members and dear friends; specially
such as crave so much at his hands? wherefore, it cannot be denied of any
considerate man, but that God who satisfies al their just requests does
ordinarily reveal unto his dearly beloved Saints, all the prayers that be
made unto them. Surely S. Augustine in most express terms declares: De cura
pro mort. cap. 15. and 16.
That God can give such power unto his Saints and Martirs, that they may be
present in spirit at every place throughout the world, where there is any
memory of them: or prayer made unto them. He will not take upon him to define,
whether they be actually there present or no, or whether by the ministry of
Angels they be relieved that seek help by the intercession of Martirs: but
makes no question but that they hear all prayers made by whosoever to them,
and obtain very many of their requests. And as S. Gregory says: What do they
not see, Lib. 12. Moral. cap. 13.
who see him that sees all things; yea, contains all things within
himself? Yet M. PER. blusheth not to say, that it is but a forgery of man's
brain, to imagine that the Godhead is such a clear glass, representing all
things; because it should then follow, that the Angels who behold Gods face,
should be ignorant of nothing: but the Angels have learned some things of the
Church (as S. Paul witnesses:) therefore they see not all things in God.

To this we answer, that in God all things are represented, and shine more
brightly, then in their own natural places: yet, does not God communicate and
reveal all things unto every body there present; but his divine nature in
three persons, Christ, God, and Man, with all other natural and ordinary
things, from the cope of heaven to the center of the earth, are seen of every
Cytizen of heaven, though with a different degree of clearenes: but of Gods
counsels concerning the government of the world, so much is only known unto
either Angel or Men, as appertains unto their state, and that when it
belongs unto them: therefore the Angels might well not know many things
belonging to the government of the Church, until they saw it accomplished,
and therefore might be said to have learned some such thing of the Church. But
as we have said before, it properly appertains unto the state of Saints in
heavenly bliss, to know their friends reasonable requests made unto them; or
else their conditions should not be so perfect, but that they might in equity
require the bettering of it: and consequently they could not be so thoroughly
contented, as their estate of perfect felicity in heaven does demand: and thus
much of M. PER. reasons. To which I will here add one argument, commonly used
by the Protestants, though M. PER. (for the weakness of it perhaps) thought
best to omit it: it is taken ab authoritate negative, which Scholars know to
be naught worth. Math. 11. verse. 28.
Christ says, come ye unto me all ye that labor and be burdened, and I will
refresh you; he says not go to the Saints, but come to me. I answer, neither
does he say, do not go to the Saints, and therefore here is nothing against
us. We go to Christ for remission of our sins, which lie more heavy then a
talent of lead upon our backs, and through our redeemers merits do we crave
pardon of them: but to move more effectually this our redeemer, and God his
father to have pity upon us, we humbly desire the Saints (his best beloved
servants) to speak a good word in our behalf, acknowledging our selves
unworthy to obtain any thing at Gods hands, through our own ungrateful
wickedness. Now that our Savior Christ JESUS, does very well like and approve
the mediation of others even to himself, may be gathered out of very many
evident texts of holy Scripture: Math. 8. verse. 13.
for he at the intercession of the Centurion cured his servant: and Math. 9
verse. 2.
seeing the faith of them that brought a man sick of the palsy before him, he
healed the sick man; and Luc. 4. verse. 38.
at his disciples request cured S. Peter's mother in law. And when the woman
of Chanaan sued unto him for her daughter, Math. 15 verse. 23.
he answered her not a word before his disciples had besought him for her: by
which and many such like recorded in the Gospel, every man (that is not
wilfully blind) may well see, that the intercession of others for us does much
prevail, even with our sovereign intercessor and mediator Christ JESUS
himself: now to his authorities.

Lib. 3. co^t. Parmenia. cap. 3.
The first is out of S. Augustine. Christian men commend each other in their
prayers to God: And who prays for all, and for whom none prays, he is the
one and true mediator.

I answer, these words be rather for us, for approving and confessing our
Savior Christ to be the only mediator of redemption, as we have already
declared; they teach that all Christians may commend themselves each to others
prayers: Now, the Saints departed be Christians (I trust) as good as we, or
rather far better; therefore all other Christians may very well (in S.
Augustines judgment) commend themselves unto the Saints holy prayers, because
each one may commend himself to any others prayers. Concerning the word
Mediator, S. Augustine never attributes it unto any, saving only to our
Savior, taking it always in the second signification above named, to which
three things are properly required, according to S. Augustine: first, that he
pray for all, and that none pray for him; which property M. PER. touches, but
misquoteth the place: for it is in lib. 2. cap. 8. cont. Parmenianum. The
second property and the most necessary of all is, that he pay the full price
and ransom of all our sins, and that his redemption may in equal balance,
counterpoise the grieuousnesse of our sins, which is taken out of diverse
places of Scripture. The third which is the ground of all the rest is, that the
Mediator be both God and Man; that participating of both natures, he may be as
it were a natural middle or means to reconcile the two Extremes; and so as
Man, be able to suffer something to appease Gods wrath; and as God, to give to
that suffering of his manhood, infinite value, making thereby Christ's
sufferinges more then sufficient to pay for the redemption of an hundred
worlds if need had been. And these proprieties gathered out of Lib. 9. de
ciuitate, cap. 15. and alibi.
S. Augustine and other Fathers, will put down M. PER. odd devise of
proprieties of a Mediator; all which make nothing against the intercession of
Saints, who be not in that sense to be called mediators, and yet cease not to
pray for us: let us then go on.

M. PERKINS cites secondly another sentence out of S. Augustine, where he
brings in our Savior saying: Tract. 22. in Johan.
Thou have no whether to go but to me, thou have no way to go but by me.

Answer. S. Augustine there alludeth unto those words of our Savior, I am
the way, the truth, and the life: and says, that for life and truth we have
no other way to seek unto, but unto Christ; who according unto his divinity,
is truth and life unto the world. And in this high degree of redemption and
mediation, he was the only way unto his Father: for neither the Gentiles by
their moral virtues, nor Jews by the power of their law, could without him
lead them to God. All this is very good doctrine, but no whit more against
praying to Saints, then against commending of us one to another prayers, or
using any other means of salvation; as S. Augustine upon the like occasion
does himself plainly declare. For upon these words of S. John: If any man
offend, 1. Joan. 2. tract. 1.
we have an advocate with the Father JESUS Christ the just one, where he
puts this doubt: but some man will say, therefore do not the Saints pray
for us? do not the Bishops and governors pray for the people? After he
solueth this doubt concluding, that all the members of Christ's body do pray
one for another, marry the head prays for all: where he most plainly
shows, that the sovereign intercession or mediation of Christ the head, does
not exclude the intercession of Saints departed, no more then it does of any
other yet living.

M. PERKINS cites also one sentence out of S. Chrysostom, who has written
thus: Thou have no need of Patrones to God, De perfect Euangel.
nor much running up and down to flatter and fawn upon others; for though
thou be alone and want a Patron, and by thy self pray unto God, thou shall
obtain thy desire.

Answer. It seems by his words, of running up and down, and flattering of
others, (which Gods Saints will not endure) that he speaks against seeking
unto vainglorious and evil mortal men, to be our Patrones to God, which
were folly. But admit he meant the Saints departed; then let us take his whole
meaning, and not wrest his words to any other sense then he will allow and
like of: he does then often inueigh both against certain rich men (who having
given some little alms to the poor, thought themselves sure of pardon of
their sins, and of salvation, through the poor men's prayers, though they
prayed not themselves;) and also against all such sluggish lazy persons, as
relied wholly upon the intercession of Saints, not praying much for themselves:
upon such as these does S. Chrysostom often call to pray for themselves, and
not to trust wholly unto the prayers of others; persuading them, that it were
better to pray for themselves without Patrones, then leaving all to Patrons
not to pray themselves at all. But the best of all to be, both to pray
themselves, and to employ also good men and the Saints to pray for them; this
is his own declaration in these his words: Homil. 5. in Math.
Let us not like sluggards and slothful companions, depend wholly upon the
merits of others; for the prayers and supplications of Saints for us, have
their force, and that surely very great; but then truly, when we our selves do
withal by our penitence request and sue for the same. And making the like
discourse in another place, he concludes thus: Homil. 1. in 1. ad Thessal.
Knowing these things, neither let us despise the prayers of the Saints,
neither let us cast all upon them.

Now to the arguments for the Catholic party: my first argument shall be to
prove, that we may pray to the Angels in heaven to bless us, and to pray for
us; to whom after our blessed Lady, we assign the first place in our
Lytanie. We have for our vvarrant the authority and example of the holy
Patriarch Jacob, expressly set down in holy Scripture for prayer to Angels,
Genes. 48.15. and 16.
in these words: God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac have walked,
God who has fed me from my youth unto this present day, and the Angel that
has delivered me from all evil, bless these children. What can be more
plain, then that this blessed old Patriarch did pray unto his good Angel
Guardian? Nay (says M. PER.) for by the Angel there you ^^st understand
Christ; for that in Malachie Christ is signified by the Angel of the covenant.
A bonny reason; because that an Angel is once in the old Testament used to
signify Christ, therefore it shall signify him in what place soever it shall
please the Protestants. Neither does an Angel in that one place singly put,
signify Christ; but with an addition, the Angel of the covenant, to
distinguish that Angel from all others: so that there is no appearance or
color of likelihood, out of that place so unlike, to interpret this. It
remains then, that the word Angel be taken properly (as it is most commonly
in holy Scripture) for an heavenly spirit, appointed by God to keep Jacob:
which I confirm by the circumstance of the place; because Jacob prays unto
that Angel, as to one that was then extant and living, that had also before
delivered him from many perils: but Christ was not then borne, nor had any
doings in the world, therefore he did not pray to him. Again, the wise
Patriarch and Prophet must be made to speak very fondly, if he should pray him
that was not in rerum natura, to bless those children; he might very well have
prayed God for Christ's sake (that was to come) to bless them: but to pray
Christ himself, whom he knew then not to be any where living or extant to
blsse them, has no sense in it; for blessing (as all other working) supposes
a real being and existence of the same party. To this example of Jacob, we
may join the consaile that Eliphas the Thamite gave unto Job; Turn thy self
unto some of the Saints, and Jobs own practice; Cap. 19. verse. 21. Tob. c. 12.
verse. 12.
Job cap. 5. verse. 1.
Have pity on me, have pity on me, at least you my friends. Upon which place
S. Augustine says, that Job the holy man made intercession to the Angels, or
to the Saints to pray for him; to which we may also add, how that Raphael
offered up good Tobias prayers to God, and how that another Apoc. 8. verse. 3.
Angel did give of the incense of prayers of all Saints, upon the Altar of
gold which is before the throne of God: Out of which places, and such like I
frame this argument.

The Angels be most holy and charitable creatures of themselves, they also have
by Gods appointment charge over us, and do assist us; whereupon it follows
most clearly, that they are most ready in word and deed, to further all our
good desires and honest demandes: and consequently being by us requested to
pray for us, cannot refuse it. To say that they have no care of our prayers, is
both contrary to their charity and to their charge, and the places in Scripture
already cited: to which this may be added. Christ to discourage men from
offending children and little ones, alleges this inducement: Math. 18. verse.
10.
That their Angels see the face of his father in heaven, signifying that they
would complain of them to God, and sue for severe punishment against such
offenders; which argues, that they do very well know and carefully tender
our good: which is also strengthened by an other place, Luc. 15. verse. 10.
where our Savior declares what great joy they make at the conversion of a
sinner. Out of all which textes is plainly to be collected, that they know
of our conversion, see the particular wrongs that be offered us, and the good
deeds we do: so that the Protestants can find no starting hole to escape out
at; for that they both hear our prayers, and be willing to pray for us. And
having won the Protestants to begin our Lytanies with us, Luc. 20. verse. 36.
and so to say S. Michael pray for us, all holy Angels pray for us, etc. We may
no doubt persuade them to go forward thus: the Saints in heaven are equal
unto Angels both in charity, knowledge, affection toward us, and what else
soever is requisite unto intercession; therefore if we may pray unto Angels, we
may also pray unto the Saints.

M. PERKINS answers, that at the general resurrection Saints shall be equal
unto Angels, as our Savior says, but not before.

Reply. If Saints then shall be equal to Angels, they are so at their first
entrance into possession of the heavenly joys, for (as all Divines confess)
the essential glory of their soul, shall not be increased at the resurrection;
and the glory of their body which they shall then receive, does not make them
more like, but rather more unlike unto Angels that have no bodies at all:
therefore this answer is insufficient, which M. PERKINS foreseing adds a
second.

Saints be equal to Angels in glory, but not in office and ministry, by which
they are ministering spirits for good men* leaving us to understand belike, (for
the good man does not express it) that because the Angels are ministering
spirits, therefore they better know our prayers, and are more careful to pray
for us.

Reply. First, the Saints being of our own nature, and having passed the like
perils that we be in, and being also members of the same body of Christ, as we
are, cannot but tender the matter of our salvation, as much as Angels do;
especially considering that their charity toward God binds them, to further
by all possible means his honor and service: and their love toward their
neighbors does move them sufficiently to second and help forward our
salvation, in what they can. But the other point of their knowledge of our
affairs is of greater difficulty: the which we prove first, by the perfect
knowledge they have of God, which is as great, and also greater then some
Angels have, and so in that clear mirror of Gods substance they may most
easily see all that has been, is, or shall be said or done upon earth. And we
say further, that the perfection of their most happy state does demand as due
to it, that they should be made privy unto their friends reasonable suites
unto them: All which has been already proved. But here I will add this,
which is to the pr^sent purpose. That the Saints have also charge over us, and
therefore that it belongs unto their office, as well as to the office of
Angels, to be acquainted with our affairs in particular. That God has
appointed the Saints to rule over us, is proved out of our Saviors words,
where he says: Luc. 19. verse: 17.
That the good servant for well using of his pound, shall be placed over ten
Cities. And again, Apoc. 2. verse. 26.
He that shall overcome, and keep my words until the end, I will give him
power over Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, etc. even as I
have received of my father. Item, Ibid. 3. verse. 21.
I will give him to sit with me in my throne. Out of which textes is plainly
gathered, that Christ gives unto holy Martirs and Saints, a charge and command
over Cities, Countries, and Nations: which the ancient Fathers have well
observed, and do plainly testify. Lib. 8. in Lucam. De viduis. In 40. Mart.
Whereupon S. Ambrose says: Even as Angels do govern over us, so do they
who have attained unto the life of Angels. In another place he calls the
Saints departed salutis nostrae Praesides: the Presidents of our salvation. S.
Basil terms them Protectors of mankind. Gregory Nazianzene desires S.
Cyprian to look down upon him, and to direct his speech and life, Orat. in
Cyprian.
and to feed his flock, and to govern them together with him. Theodorete
says, that they at his time that went from home, Lib. 8. de curandis*
prayed the Martirs to be their companions, or rather the guides of their
journey: and returning safe did yield them thanks, acknowledging the benefit
by them. Many more such like testimonies, may be produced out of the ancient
learned Fathers if need require, to show manifestly how they understood the
Scriptures concerning this office and ministry, or rather presidency of the
Saints departed over us that live on the earth: wherefore to conclude this
reason, the Saints being equal unto the Angels, as well in office and
ministry; as in charity and affection toward us, we may as well pray unto them
as unto the Angels.

Our third reason shall be to prevent that evasion of theirs, their God
(forsooth) is so ready of himself to hear us, that we need not any spokesman
to him: thus I propose it. One of us living here may pray unto another to pray
to God for him; therefore much rather may we pray unto the Saints departed to
pray for us, because the better that the men be that pray for us, the more
vvorth are their prayers, according to that of S. James: The continual prayer
of a just man avails much. Iac. cap. 5 verse. 17.
And the examples of Abraham, Moses, Job, Elias, and such like excellent men,
do confirm the same; whose prayers God did hear when he refused to hear
others. Yea, Genesis 20. verse. 7. Job 42. verse. 8.
God himself (as the Scripture teaches) advised Abimilech King of Egypt, to
speak unto Abraham to pray for him: and would not hear Jobs friends praying
for themselves; but sent them to his servant Job, to request him to pray for
them; at whose intercession he did pardon them. Does not this most plainly
prove, that notwithstanding Gods readiness to receive us into his grace; yet
his will and pleasure is, that we do pray unto others to be a means unto him
for us, especially when we have so offended him, that we may justly be
ashamed even to present our selves before his divine Majesty? need we any
better warrant for praying unto others, then the advice and commandment of God
himself? Now to the confirmation of the consequent: But the Saints, Math. 11.
verse. 11.
yea the least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater then S. John Baptist (that
is) then the best on earth; ergo, their prayers will do us much more good,
then any man's prayer yet living.

M. PERKINS answers that we have a commandment to pray unto the living, but
none to pray unto Saints departed.

Reply. I have already confuted this answer, where I showed before that we
need no commandment to pray, or to desire others to pray for us; but it is
sufficient to know their credit with God, and willingness to entreat for us
when they be thereunto requested.

Wherefore says M. PERKINS, secondly there is a great difference between
requesting one to pray for us, and by invocation to request them that are
absent: for this is a worship that is given to them, and a power to hear and
help all that call upon them.

Reply. First, that by invocation we may pray unto men S. Augustine teaches
directly, grounding himself upon the express text of Scripture, Locut. in
Genesis 200. Genesis 48. verse. 15.
where Jacob commands that his name and the name of his forefathers be
inuocated upon of the children of Israel. And what is invocation in English
but the calling upon one, which is as lawful as the praying unto him? That we
do them an honor and worship thereby, I grant; and say that the Saints being
better then the living, are better worthy of that worship then the living.
Further, that we assign them a power to hear them that be absent more then
the living can do, it is no marvel; for the perfection of their heavenly
state requires that prerogative, as I have more then once declared. But
because this point of their knowledge, breeds the greatest doubt of praying
unto the Saints, let S. Augustine (a most juditious Doctor, and one that was
not partial in that matter, delivering his sentence grounded also upon holy
Scripture) be hearkened unto and followed: he treating of the happiness of
Saints in heaven, has these words. Lib. 22. de ciuit. 29.
If the Prophet Helizeus being absent in body, did see his servant Giesy
receiving the gifts which Naaman the Syrian gave him, etc. how much more in
that spiritual body shall Saints see all things, not only if they shut their
eyes, but also from whence they be in body absent? this he confirms by that
sentence of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. ver. 9.10.
We know in part and in part do we prophecy, but when that shall come which
is perfect, then shall that be made void which is in part, etc. Hence thus
reasons S. Augustine: If the knowledge of this life in such as the Prophets
and Apostles were, be no more in comparison of the Saints knowledge in heaven,
then is a little child compared to a man, and this which is in part to that
which is perfect: then surely if Helizeus and other Prophets did see things
done far distant from them, yea things that were to be done many hundred
years after their times; they being (without doubt) endued with this admirable
knowledge from God: how much abundantly shall all they in heaven enjoy this
gift, when their bodies shall not hinder them, yea they shall not need bodylie
eyes to see things absent, but with the heart or spirit they shall be present
to them, 4. Reg. 5. verse. 26.
as Helizeus was, who said: was not my heart present, when the man returned from
his chariot to meet thee? Can any thing be more evident or more soundly
proved, then that the Saints in heaven have great pre-eminence above all that
lived upon the earth, to see and know things absent and far distant from
them? which the same father proves also by most evident experience, in the
fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters of his book entitled de cura pro mortuis
agenda. And that you may perceive, that that is not the opinion of S. Augustine
alone, I will join the testimonies of three or four other Fathers with him.
S. Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem says; Even as S. Peter did question Ananias,
Catach. 16 Act. 5.
willing him to tell whether he had sold his ground for so much: so did the
Prophet Helizeus (though he were not ignorant of it) ask his servant Giesy,
whether he had not received money of Naaman the Syrian; for (says he) nothing
done even in the dark, is hidden from the Saints. S. Basil writes thus: Let a
Virgin first of all fear her own conscience; L. de Virginitate.
and if she be never so solitary, yet has she her Angel guardian present,
whose sight she must not contemn, specially when as they have Angels (as it
were) patterns of virginity: but before all Angels, let her respect and
reverence her spouse Christ, who is present every where. And why did I speak
of an Angel? for she has an innumerable company of Angels present, and with
them the holy spirits or souls of the Fathers: for there is none of these, who
does not see all things every where; not truly beholding them with corporal
eyes, but by a spiritual sight pearcing unto the knowledge of all things. The
same does S. Athanasius that famous ancient Doctor resolve in his 32. question.
Quaest. 32.
See S. Augustine also lib. 20. of the City of God, the 22. Chapter, Teaching
that the Saints in heaven, do know in particular what is done among the
damned in hell. And S. Hierome does prove against Vigilantius, that The Saints
(who follow the Lamb whither soever he goes) be excluded from no place: and
scorneth that dreaming Heretic for imagining, that unless the souls of the
Martirs did lie houering about their shrines, they could not hear their
prayers that went thither to pray; affirming him therefore to be a monster
worthy to be banished into the uttermost c^asts of the earth. Encherines a most
holy and learned Archbishop of Lions, all most 1200. years since confirms
the same, grounding his discourse upon the same texts of Scripture that S.
Augustine did, saying: If the Prophet Helizeus absent in body, did see his
servant Giesy taking gifts: how much more shall Saints in that spiritual body
see all things, not only if they shut their eyes, but also from whence they
are in body absent. For then shall be that perfection of which the Apostle
speaks, in part we know, and in part do we prophecy; 1. Cor. 13.
but when that shall come which is perfect, it shall be voyded which is in
part: therefore when that shall come which is perfect, and this corruptible
body shall no longer cumber the soul, but it shall have a glorious body which
shall nothing hinder it, shall the Saints then need the help of bodylie eyes,
to see such things which Helizeus absent needed not to behold his servant? The
testimonies of so many worthy Fathers will (I hope) suffice to persuade any
reasonable man, that the Saints in heaven do very well hear our prayers.

To these I will join that which M. PER. makes our second objection, because
it does fortify the same. Luc. 16. verse. 24.
Abraham (not then in possession of heavenly knowledge after our doctrine, but
in heaven as the Protestants think) did hear Dives from hell, which is
further off from heaven then the face of the earth which we inhabit; and
therefore more easily might he have heard any living body praying unto him,
then he did that rich glutton out of hell.

M. PERKINS answers, That this is a parable, and out of a parable nothing can
be gathered, but that which is agreeable unto the intent thereof.

Reply. Why does he then twice in this very question gather out of it; first,
that Abraham was in heaven, then, that faith is not to be confirmed by
apparitions of dead men, which are not the principal intent and scope of it?
but we must give our new Masters leave, both to affirm a thing when it
seems to make for them, and after to deny the same flatly when it bears
against them. Lib. 2. in Iouinianu^ de cura pro mort. cap. 14. lib. 4. dialog.
c. 29.
We then say with S. Ambrose upon that place, with S. Hierome, with S.
Augustine, and with S. Gregory, (the four principal Doctors of the Latin
Church) that the story of Dives and Lazarus is a true hystoricall narration,
and not a parable of that which never was, as by the proper names of Abraham
and Lazarus, and other circumstances they gather. And whereas M. PER.
objecteth against it, That then it may be collected out of it, that wicked men
in hell have compassion and love to their brethren on earth, and zeal to Gods
glory, because Dives seems so to have had. I answer, that there is no
appearance of any zeal of Gods glory in Dives, only he desired that some might
go out of that place of torment to advertise his brethren of it, that they
came not to him thither: which was not out of any love neither that he bare to
his brethren, but for fear of his own further torments if they came thither
after him; because he had given them evil example and encouragement to do
evil, and perhaps evil counsel when he lived with them, and therefore was
by their condemnation to receive increase of his own pains: so that his
entreaty for them proceeded only out of the love of himself, and from the
fear of more grievous torments. Now it being certain, that Abraham in heaven
(according to the Protestants opinion) could hear Dives in hell: much more
easily can the Saints in heaven hear our prayers, or any man's that dwells on
earth; Now after our doctrine, who hold Abraham then to have been in Lymbo,
thus the argument must be framed: If Abraham not yet endued with that perfect
knowledge, which the Saints in heaven have could (nevertheless) hear Dives in
hell; between whom and himself there was magnum Chaos, Ibid. 26.
as the text has, a huge deep darkness and great distance: with much
facility can the Saints (who excel him being then in Lymbo in knowledge) see
and hear men living on the earth.

Our fifth argument* the Saints in heaven do present unto God the prayers of
holy men living upon the earth, therefore they know the same prayers well in
particular, and embrace and recommend them to the divine Majesty. The
consequent is manifest, because no man can offer up by word of mouth a petition
if he know not what it is: neither will any vvise-man (such as the Saints be)
speak for he knows not whom nor what: wherefore if the Saints do present
our prayers to God, they do know them in particular. The antecedent is set
down in express terms in the word of God: The 24. Seniours (who sat about
the throne of God) fell before the Lamb, having every one harpes and golden
vials full of odours, Apoc. 5. verse. 8.
which are the prayers of Saints. M. PER. says, that these were their own
prayers and not other men's, but without alleging either authority or reason.
We prove by the text it self that it must be understood of other men's prayers
and not their own; because otherwise in due construction it should have been
said, Which are their own prayers: but the text saying, That the odor of
their vials were the prayers of Saints, it distinguishes plainly those Saints
from themselves, which also the learned interpreters on that place, Primasius,
and the Greek school, with Oecumenius does confirm and testify.

The former arguments were to prove, that the Saints do hear our prayers; now
the sixth reason shall be to meet with that outcry of our adversaries, that
(forsooth) we rob God of his honor, and give it to Saints, when we pray
unto them, thus: God is more honored by our worshipping and praying unto
Saints departed, then if we did no worship unto them, nor prayed not unto them
at all, but went immediately to God without their help: therefore if it were
for nothing else but for the greater honor of God, we ought to worship Saints
and to pray unto them. I prove the former proposition thus: First we worship
the Saints, only for the supernatural gifts which God has bestowed upon
them, which must needs redound unto the honor of the giver, as when I honor
any of the kings officers, it being principally because he is the kings
officer, the King himself is together and more principally honored, and Christ
says expressly, that he that despises one of his servants, Luc. 10. verse. 16.
despises Christ himself. Whence it follows, that he who respects and
honors one of his servants (especially because he is his servant) does
together and (in deed) more principally honor Christ: he and his graces being
the very cause why we respect and vvorshippe the other. Further, when many
(and those of the vvorthyest sort) do become humble suitors unto God for any
one of us, much more honor is done unto God through the dignity of their
persons, then if one mean silly sinner did sue to him alone: For it is more
honorable and magnificall, to do a pleasure at the instance and request of
many worthy personages, then where one poor worm alone does sue for it; yea
and much more excellent thanks is rendered unto God by the number and dignity
of the suitors, when their petition is granted them. This argument which is
evident reason, is grounded also upon S. Paul's authority; who requesteth the
Christians of Corinth to help him in their prayers: 2. Cor. 1. verse. 11.
That (says he) by many men's persons, thanks for the gift which is in us, may
be given by many in our behalf. Seeing then, that by our praying unto the
Saints, they are drawn in to become suitors with us, and for us; and
consequently obtaining their suite, they stand as well bound to render thanks
to God therefore as we do: It follows thereupon most evidently, that God is
by our praying to his Saints, both more honored when such worthy persons sue
unto him for us, and also better thanked, for that we do obtain by their
intercession. Now let us close up this question with the testimony of some of
the mo^^ ancient, famous, and best learned Doctors of both the Greek and Latin
Church. Origin who lived not much above 200. years after Christ, prays unto
that blessed pattern of patience Job, Lib. 2. in Job.
thus: O happy Job now living for ever with God, and remaining a conqueror in
the sight of our Lord and King, pray for us wreatches, that the wonderful
mercy of God may also defend us in all tribulations, and deliver us from all
oppressions of the wicked one, In euang. de sanct. Deipara.
etc. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, and first of the four principal
Doctors of the Greek Church, after many praises of the immaculate Virgin Mary,
says: Therefore all the rich men of the earth do pray unto thee, to be
enriched with thy goods and spiritual contemplations. We do cry unto thee,
remember us most sacred Virgin, etc. Gregory Nazianzene the second of these
famous Doctors, does thus pray unto S. Athanasius, who dyed in his time: Orat.
in sanct. Athanas.
O Athanasius, o sacred and loving heart, etc. thou from above look favorably
upon us, and govern this holy people that adore the holy Trinity, and cherish
and feed us in peace, etc. The like prayer he makes to S. Cyprian, and to S.
Basil in his funeral orations made of them. S. Basil speaking of forty
Martirs, Orat. in quadrag. Mart.
of whom he made his sermon, says: He that is troubled flies unto these
forty, and he that rejoyseth runs unto them: they that they may be
delivered from their adversity; these that they may continue in prosperity:
here the Godly woman is found praying for her children, etc. S. Chrysostom the
last but not the least of the four, highly commends the Emperor of Rome,
for praying unto S. Peter and S. Paul, saying: He that is revested in purple,
Hom. 66. ad populu^ Antioch. Ibid.
goes to embrace their tombs, and all state laid aside does become an humble
suppliant to the Saints, that they would pray unto God for him: he that goes
crowned with a Diadem and imperial crown, humbly prays unto the fisherman
and to the maker of tents, as to his patrones and protectors. Let us to make up
the half dozen join one other their equal with the former; it shall be
Gregory Nyssene S. Basils brother, he speaking unto the Martyr Theodore, says:
Make intercession unto the King of all for our Country; Orat. in Theodor.
we stand in dread of great persecution. The wicked Scithians are at hand, and
about to wage battle against us; thou as a soldier fight for us, as a Martyr
speak boldly in our cause: and much more to this purpose, which I omit that I
be not over tedious. To those of the Greek Church let us join as many of the
Doctors of the Latin Church, beginning with S. Ambrose the first of the four
more famous Doctors: he first teaches, Lib. de viduis.
That Angels and Martirs are to be besought unto, and earnestly prayed unto by
us, alleging that they are our Presidents, and the beholders of our life and
actions; and encourages us not to be ashamed to use them as intercessors of
our infirmity. And in another place prays thus: That this my prayer may be of
greater force, Sermon. 91. de invent. corpor. Geruas. and Prothas.
I request the aid of the blessed Virgin Mary, of the Apostles, Martirs, and
Confessors; the prayers of such personages thou (o Lord) do never despise,
if it shall please thee to inspire them to pray for me. S. Augustine also first
teaches us to pray to Martirs, saying: Tract. 84 in Johan.
We do not so remember Martirs at that table, as we do others that rest in
peace: for we do not pray for them, but rather pray to them that they will
pray for us. And else where he says: Sermon. 7. de verbis Apostoli.
That it is an injury to pray for a Martyr, unto whose prayers we ought to
recommend our selves. Secondly, he himself De bapt. co^t. Donat lib. 7. ca. 1.
prays unto S. Cyprian to help him with his good prayers. Thirdly, he has
recorded Lib. 22. de ciuitat. Dei cap. 8.
the miraculous help which two several persons obtained by praying unto the
Martyr S. Stephen. S. Hierome is so formal for worshipping of Relikes and
praying to Saints, in his treatise against Vigilantius, that the Protestants
are driven to prefer that odious Heretic before him; Yet because some of
them deny him to speak there of praying to Saints, note these words of his:
Thou Vigilantius say, that whilst we live we may pray one for another, but
after we be dead no man's prayer shall profit other, etc. see the objection of
the Protestant. Now hear that learned Doctors answer: If (says he) Apostles
and Martirs whiles they lived here might pray for others, when they ought to be
careful for themselves; how much more now after their crowns and triumphs.
Take also another place of his, which is so clear that it cannot admit any
exception: Epist. ad Eustochiu^ in epitaph. Paulae.
Farewell (says he to that blessed vvidowe Paula, being then departed this
life) and with thy prayers help the old age of him that worshippeth thee: thy
faith and good works have joined thee to Christ: being present thou shall more
easily obtain that which thou will ask. The fourth of Latin Doctors is
Gregory the great (to whom we Englishmen are so much bound for our
conversion to the Christian faith;) he persuades praying to Saints in this
sort: Homil. 31 super. eua^g. ^fine.
If any of us had a great cause to be heard tomorrowe before a high judge; we
would this day most diligently seek out a wise well spoken and gracious
counsailour, that were likelyest to handle it in the best manner. Behold (says
he) the severe judge JESUS, assisted with a terrible troop of Angels and
Archangels, is to sit upon us; before that majesticall assembly the cause of
our salvation is to be discussed, and yet we do not now provide us Patrones,
that may on that day defend us: Martirs will then be good advocates, but they
look to be requested, and (as I may say) do seek that they may besought
unto; therefore seek by praying unto them to get them to be your Patrones,
make them before hand intercessors of your guiltynesse, because he that is to
be our judge will be now entreated, that then he may not punish us. To these
four pillars of the Latin Church, I will (to make the number equal with the
Greek Fathers) add two others; the first shall be out of Ruffinus (who was
of S. Hieromes standing) of the most Christian Emperor Theodosius: Ruffin. li.
2. hyst. ca. 33.
He assisted with the Priests and People, visited the holy places, and clad in
bayre-cloath lay prostrate before the shrines of the Apostles and Martirs, and
by his faithful intercession and praying to the Saints, most humbly sued for
succor. The last shall be our famous countryman venerable Bede: Let us (says
he) with swift flight, Lib. 4. in Cant. circa finem.
seek unto the holes of the wall, that is: let us fly unto the often
intercession of Angels and Saints, that they may pray for us unto our merciful
creator, for these are the most strong and surest fortresses of holy Church.
Now I would gladly know whether the testimony of these dozen of the
chiefest Bishops and Doctors, as well for their Godliness of life, as for their
knowledge in holy Scriptures, who were also chosen by the holy Ghost to
govern, instruct, and teach the principal Churches in both Europe, Afric,
and Asia, and that in or about the most flourishing state thereof (for all of
them saving S. Gregory the great and venerable Bede, lived within 400. and some
within 200. years of Christ:) Whither, I say, these most sound testimonies of
so many sacred and worthy personages, be not sufficient to persuade any
reasonableman, that praying to the Saints in heaven is both agreeable to Gods
word (which no man in these days understands half so well as the worst of
any of them did) and also very profitable for us. Yet for the further assurance
of this important matter, I will add one miracle (which I touched before)
wrought in confirmation of it: so that he that will not believe this, shall be
convinced not to believe God himself witnessing of it. In the coasts of
Thelousae in France, Ex lib. 3. vitae S. Bernardi cap. 5.
about 400. years past, one Henry an Apostata and wicked fellow, began to
cry out against praying for the dead, and praying to Saints, and pilgrimages,
and some other points of the Catholic doctrine: the fame of S. Bernards
holiness and learning being then very great, he was sent for by the Popes
Legate to come thither, to stay the people from following that lewd companion;
who on a day after he had preached at a town called Sarlate, blessed some
loaves of bread, and said: This shall be a certain proof that our doctrine is
true, and theirs false; if those that be sick, by tasting of this holy bread
be cured of their diseases. There stood by among others the Bishop of Charters,
who fearing what might follow, added; if they taste of it with faith: Nay said
the holy Father Barnard, (nothing doubting of Gods power) I say not so, but he
that shall taste of it shall be truly cured, that they may know us to be true
men, and the true messengers of God, then a great multitude tasting of it, were
(according to his word) perfectly healed of what disease soever they had. What
can be more evident or better assured, then that praying to Saints is the truth
of God? seeing that it pleased God to confirm it in such sort, by the
miraculous curing of so many people.

M. PERKINS for an vpshot says, that he finally dissenteth from the
Catholics, because they are not content to pray to Saints, but say further;
that God through their merits in heaven, does bestow many benefits upon us on
earth.

I would he agreed with us in the two former points, we should quickly be at
accord in this: for the good man is foully mistaken if he think that we
affirm the Saints (after they be come to heaven) to merit a new there; for we
hold that none after their death can merit any more, but do then receive
according unto their former merits, either salvation or damnation: but we
nevertheless say, that God in respect of their former merits gotten in this
life, does for their sakes bestow many benefits upon us, and this does M. PER.
himself confirm in plain words, In this question.
when he grants (pressed thereto by the evidence of Gods word) that men upon
earth have help and benefit, by the faith and piety which the Saints departed
showed when they were in this life: for (says he further) God showed mercy on
them that keep his commandments, to a thousand generations. True it is, that
this their faith and piety he would not have to be called merits; but we with
that most honorable Father S. Ambrose do say: Apud Deum, Lib. 5. super Luca^.
seruus and interueniendi meritum, and jus habet impetrandi; with God, a
servant of his has both the merit to be an intercessour, and the right to
obtain his suite: see more of merits in that question. Here M. PER. adds
against himself: That the Saints in heaven have received the full reward of
all their merits, and therefore there is nothing further that they can merit.
Here we have first that the Saints had merits, which he was wont to deny
flatly; again, how does God (having fully rewarded their former faith and
piety at their entrance into heaven) afterward for their sakes, show mercy to
thousands? which he confesses himself: wherefore he is as well bound to
answer this as we are, it bearing as strongly against his own doctrine as it
does against ours. To save him a labor I answer in a word, that it is one
part of the reward of a faithful servant, to be always after (not deserving
the contrary) in his Masters favor, and so gracious with him, that he may
entreat any reasonable mat^^r at his hands: so are the Saints with God, who
can never be wearyed with their suites, so long as they all do but tend unto
his own honor, and the salvation of his poor creatures, and as we both
agreed upon before: Their faith, piety, and charity, whiles they lived, did and
does still move and cause God to show mercy unto thousands upon earth, for
their sakes; though their merits were before most abundantly rewarded: let this
suffice for this question.

OF IMPLICIT OR INFOLDED FAITH.
M. PERKINS Page 266.
THis question is handled for two causes (as he says page 274.) first, to
rectify the conscience of the weaker sort of his disciples: secondly, to
rectify their Catechismes which do (as he censureth) require too full an
assurance of salvation in all men.

It being then for the instruction of his own deceived flock, and not much
appertayning to us, I will post it over lightly.

He teaches a twofold implicity of faith: first, that faithful men may be
ignorant at the beginning of many articles of faith, and learn them
afterward.

It was so (in deed) in Christ's time, because he taught them not all a once;
but since the establishment of the Gospel, it is necessary that every one
believe all the articles of the Apostles Creed, the true doctrine of the
Sacraments, and such other necessary heads of the Christian religion: other
points of faith may be learned in time, according unto the capacity of the
persons.

The second fold of his faith is: that many (of his deceived disciples) have
not at their conversion, and in time of temptation, a full assurance of their
salvation; which notwithstanding will serve the turn then, if they desire to
have a full assurance, and labor afterward to attain unto it: which he
speaks to the comfort of their consciences, that cannot persuade themselves
so assuredly, that their sins are pardoned them.

This presumptious doctrine of full assurance of salvation, I have in a several
question before confuted; therefore I say only here, that no Christian is bound
to have any such absolute assurance of his own salvation, but that he must
(according to the Apostles rule) work his salvation with trembling and fear,
Ad Philip. 2. verse. 12.
considering his own frailty: Marry, very good hope and confidence ought we
all to have, in respect of Gods infinite mercy and goodness, and in the
inestimable merits of our Lord and Savior JESUS Christ; but by faith we cannot
believe it, unless God do extraordinarylie reveal any such thing unto us:
which he does to very few of his best beloved, and best tried servants.

In the matter of our difference, he says first; That we teach not faith to be
a knowledge of things believed; but a reverent assent unto them, whether they
be known or unknown.

But this he says very untruly: for we hold faith in his own nature, to
comprehend a certain kind of knowledge, though not so clear and evident; yet
of as great assurance, as is the knowledge of natural things: but the man
harpeth upon something else, if he could hitte on it. We say (indeed) that it
is not of necessity, for the simpler sort and ignorant people, to read the
holy Scriptures, and to go fish their faith out of that profound Ocean; but
may content themselves with their Pastors instructions, and with their
Catechismes and other books of piety and devotion: albeit, we wish them of
better understanding (if they be not too curious and wilful) to read the holy
Scriptures with reverence, seeking humbly to better their knowledge, and
especially to amend their lives; and in places of difficulty, not to trust unto
their own wits, but to refer themselves to the exposition of the Catholic
Church, which is the pillar and fortress of truth: and there upon wholy to
rely. Yet, we require much more knowledge in the simpler sort of people, then
the Protestants do: for we teach, that every one is to know expressly the 12.
articles of the Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments, and those Sacraments
which they themselves are to receive. Further also, all such laws and
ordinances of either the spiritual, or temporal Governor, which do
appertain unto their own estate; that they may know how, both in spiritual
and temporal matters, to carry themselves without offense. Let those our
Authors which teach cases of conscience, be consulted in those points, and you
shall find them to charge every man in conscience, to know all these things,
whatsoever some men have thought to the contrary; who be not in that allowed,
but disproued even by the testimony of that Author Banes whom M. PERKINS
quoteth.

And touching praying in Latin, the laws of the Catholic Church does not bind
any man to pray in Latin, who is not first bound to learn the Latin tongue,
that is: men in holy orders are bound to their Latin Breuiary; but no man
ignorant of the Latin tongue, must be admitted unto holy orders: for them that
are ignorant of the Latin tongue, we have diverse books of English prayers,
wherein they may exercise themselves fruitfully. If any devout women, or
others who understand not Latin, desire to read some selected and approved
Latin prayers, we do not forbid them; because those prayers have many
privileges above others. And we doubt not, but that many of them do read
the same Latin prayers, with much more humility, attention, and elevation of
their minds unto God and all goodness; then thousands of Protestants or
Puritans, who read and pronounce gallantly, many glorious English prayers
composed very curiously, when their hearts be far from God.

Lastly, he dissenteth from us, for that we say; That some articles of faith,
were at the first believed generally by an infolded faith, which afterward
being by general Councels unfolded, and declared to be articles of faith, were
believed expreslie.

This implicity of faith touching articles of religion, M. PER. rejects,
saying; That all matters of faith are contained plainly in the Scriptures.
This he says without probation, and it is by me in the question of Traditions
refuted already: therefore, to that place I refer the reader.

OF PVRGATORY.
OUR CONSENT.
M. PERKINS Page 278.
WE hold a Christian Purgatory, by which we understand, first; the afflictions
of Gods children here on earth: secondly, the blood of Christ is a Purgatory
for our sins; and so Augustine calls the mercy of God our Purgatory.

To this I say, that the word Purgatory may be taken diversely, and signify
many things; which because they be not to the present purpose, may be here
well omitted.

THE DIFFERENCE.
WE differ in two things: first, concerning the place, the Catholics hold it
to be under the ground, into which men's souls after this life do enter. This
we deny as having no warrant in the word, which mentions only two places for
men after this life: Luc. 16. v. 25.26. Ioh. 3. Apoc. 22.
heaven and hell.

Here M. PER. begins the disproofe of Purgatory with his ordinary hackney,
it is not mentioned in the Scriptures. To which I answer first, that it is, as
shall be proved hereafter: but if it were not, yet were it to be believed,
because it was received by Tradition even from the Apostles time. Besides this
fault in M. PER. argument, there is another more childish, to wit: because
there is no mention made of Purgatory in three or four places by him quoted,
he concludes that it has no warrant at all, in any other place of Scriptures;
as who should say, there is no Doctor of Physic in two or three Colleges of
Cambridge, therefore there is not one in all the University besides. Finally,
Luc. 16. verse. 25.
the very first place by him cited, overthrows flatly his own position, it
being truly understood according unto the general exposition of the most
learned Doctors: for Abraham then was not in heaven, but in a third place
called Lymbo Patrum; because, before Christ had paid their ransom by his death
on the cross, the Fathers of the old Testament were holden captive: and so of
Christ it is said, That ascending on high, he led captivity captive. Ephesians.
4. verse. 8. Hebr. 9. v. 8. and 15.
And S. Paul proves by the entering of the high Priest only into the second
part of the Tabernacle, called Sancta Sanctorum; that the way of the Holies was
not then manifested, but by the blood of Christ to be laid open, and they by
the death of the testatour, to receive the eternal redemption. But this is by
the way, to show the wisdom of the man, to bring one text in controversy to
established another.

But he goes forward and says stoutly, that there can be no place for
Purgatory: for that it is said, That they who dyed in the Lord, Apoc. 14.
verse. 13.
are bidden to rest from their labors: which cannot be (says he) if they go
into Purgatory. And to cut off all cauils, it is further said, their works
(that is) the reward of their works follow them, even at the heels.

I answer first, that we have here by the way, heaven to be the reward of
works by M. PER. confession, which in the question of merits he denied most
absolutely. Secondly, that albeit they who die in our Lord, do not go to
Purgatory, yet many others may; Lib. 20. de ciuit. c. 9.
because according unto S. Augustines judgment, and the holy brethren of
Geneua, this place is to be understood of Martirs only, who die for our Lord.
And we that confess Purgatory, do hold that no Martyr does go thither; but
being (as it were) a new baptized in their own blood, do appear before the
face of God without any spotte: whereas other ordinary good Christians be not
free from all such stains, and may also have much penance at their death not
performed, which they must endure in Purgatory. I say thirdly, that if the
words should be applied to all Christians that die in the grace of God; yet
is there nothing in them against Purgatory. For the words following may well
be spoken of them that go thither; because they both rest from their labors,
which they had in their former life: and also enjoy an assurance of heaven,
without any such peril or hazard thereof, as they lived in before: and their
works may very well be said to follow them; for that according unto the rate
of their works, they must endure the fire of purgatory, either more or less.
Fourthly, I may answer with S. Augustine on that place; that they who die in
our Lord, from that time there spoken off, Verse. 13.
shall go to heaven: Amodo dicit spiritus, from thence forth says the spirit,
they shall rest from their labors. Now, to see what time is there spoken off,
read the seventh verse of the same chapter, where are these words: Fear our
Lord, and give him honor, because the hour of judgment is come: so that from
thenceforth (that is) after the last judgment there shall be no Purgatory;
wherefore, M. PERKINS very cunningly clipped the word from thence-forth out of
the text, for fear of breeding some scruple: and thus you see, that the text
of Scripture so highly esteemed by M. PERKINS serves nothing for his purpose.
Now to some fragments which he cites out of the Fathers.

Hom. 50. Tom. 10.
Augustine says well, after this life, there remains no compunction or
satisfaction.

This same text he cited before in the question of satisfaction somewhat
otherwise, viz. homil. 5. tom. 10. both quotations are most imperfect: for in
that tenth Tome of S. Augustines works, there are six several kind of
Homilies, to wit: De verbis Domini, De verbis Apostoli, 50. homiliarum, de
Sanctis, de Tempore, de Diuers^s; which of these he means I know not: and to
read over the 50. and fifth of every of them for one line I list not; the man
belike took it by retayle. But it may most easily be answered even by the very
next words, that he cites out of the same author: Enchirid. 115.
Here is all remission of sins; here be temptations that move us to sin;
lastly, here is the evil from which we desire to be delivered, but there is
none of all these things. So that in this life only there is compunction (that
is) true repentance, and turning from all sin, with satisfaction, or a
purpose to satisfy; and he that dies without this true repentance, shall be
damned: there is no Purgatory for them, but for such only as die with true
compunction, and with full purpose to satisfy for their sins, either in this
life, or in the next.

De verbis Apost. 31.
M. PERKINS cites another line out of S. Augustine. We be not here without
sins, but we shall go hence without sin.

Of whom speaks he trow you? what, of all sorts of men? then none shall
be damned. Again, what is this to Purgatory? for they that go to Purgatory,
must before they die, by true repentance obtain pardon of their sins; or
else they shall not go to Purgatory, but to Hell. Lastly, I have read the
Homily over, and find no such word there. Hear (by the way) out of the same
works of that most vener^ble Doctor, three passages for Purgatory: and
confer them with those cited by M. PER. and then judge what his opinion was
of Purgatory. In that Treatise called 50. Homilies. homil. 16. he writes thus:
This punishment (of hell fire) tarryeth for them, who shall perish
everlastingly; to whom it is said: Math. 3.
The chafe he shall burn with unquenchable fire. But they who have done
things worthy of temporal punishment, of whom the Apostle says: 1. Cor. 3.
If any man's work burn he shall suffer detriment, but he shall be saved yet
so as through fire; of which also the Prophet speaks, and a fiery floodde did
run before him: Dan. 7.
They shall pass through a fiery floodde, and horrible foordes of burning
flames. And according to the greatness of the matter of sin, so shall their
stay and aboade be there; and as much as their former faults required, so much
shall the reasonable correction of the flame take of the man. Is not this a
plain description of Purgatory? The second out of his Enchyridion: Neither is
it to be denied, Cap. 110.
but that the souls of the departed, are holden by the piety of their friends
alive; when for them is offered the Sacrifice of our Mediator, or alms are
given in the Church for them. But these things profit them, who when they
lived, did deserve that these things might profit them: for there is a
certain kind of life neither so good, that it does not need these after
their death, neither so evil, but that these things will profit him after his
death. There is a life so good, that it needs not these things* and again
another so evil, that cannot be helped with them, etc. The third, out of the
third Treatise cited by M. PERKINS de verbis Apostoli: It is not to be doubted,
but that men deceased this life, Sermon. 34.
are helped by the prayers of the holy Church, and by the comfortable
Sacrifice, and by alms, which are given for their souls; that our Lord does
deal with them more mercifully, then their sins required: those men then
were in Purgatory. Thus much (by the way) out of S. Augustine, for a taste of
his opinion touching Purgatory. Now to the rest of M. PERKINS testimonies.

Cyril says: They which are once dead, Lib. 3. in Esaiam.
can add nothing to the things that they have done, but shall remain as they
were left, and wait for the time of the last judgment.

Here is such a citation as sends to no piece of his works; yet, nothing
difficult to be answered if any such be: for the very next sentence that he
alleges will serve to solue it, which is out of S. Chrysostom, who says:
That after the end of this life there be no occasions of merit. To both which
the answer is, that a man after his death cannot merit any more, because merit
only belongs unto men while they live: after death they may well reap the
due reward of their merits, or else suffer just punishment for their former
offenses. Neither can a man that is dead alter his estate, but must expect
judgment according to his former deserts. Now, if he have upon the true
foundation builded wood, hay, and stubble, then he must pass through the fire:
marry, by the help of good prayers, alms, and principally by the Sacrifice of
the Mass, he may have his pains in that purging fire, remitted or much eased;
as you have heard before out of S. Augustine. Hom. 41. in 1. ad Corinth.
And the same teaches S. Chrysostom, saying: The dead are helped not by their
friends weeping; but by their prayers, supplications, and alms. And this is
all in effect which M. PERKINS disputes against Purgatory.

Secondly (says he) we differ from them touching the means of Purgatory. They
say that men are purged by suffering of pains in Purgatory, whereby they
satisfy for their venial sins, and for the temporal punishment of their
mortal sins: We teach the contrary, holding that nothing can free us, from
the least punishment of the smallest sin, but the sufferinges of Christ.
Indeed they say, that our sufferinges in themselves considered, do not purge
and satisfy; but as they are made meritorious by the sufferings of Christ. But
to this I oppose one text of Scripture: Hebr. 1. verse. 3.
Christ has purged our sins by himself; where the last clause cuts the
throat of all humane satisfactions and merits: and it gives us to understand,
that whatsoever purges us from our sins, is not to be found in us, but in
Christ alone.

To batter this his only fortress, his own words in the beginning of the
same Chapter, are very sufficient: for there he plainly teaches, That by
afflictions which men suffer in this world, they are cleansed from their
corruption; as gold is from the dross by fire. If our own suffering purge us
from sin (as he confesses before) how then can it be true, that that which
purges us from our sins, is not in us, but in Christ alone? Again, it is
but a diverse reading in the Greek text, that has those words, by himself;
for they are not in the Latin translation. But admitting them for current, the
sense is most easy, and nothing against either Purgatory or humane
satisfactions: for the Apostle means no other thing thereby, then that he
expresses in the 9. Chapter following, to wit: That Christ not by the blood of
Calves or Goats, but by his own blood, purged us from our sins, and wrought
our redemption; in such sort as in the question of satisfaction has been
declared at large. Here I say briefly, that Christ appeased his Fathers wrath,
toward all such as shall be made pertakers of his merits, defaced the sin it
self, and paid the eternal punishment due unto their sins; but left a
temporal pain to be endured of the offendour (for every such sin pardoned)
either in this world, or in the next: both because reason requires, that he
who falls after that he was once freely pardoned (as we were all in
baptism) should not the second time be so easily admitted into Gods grace, as
that he should not himself feel some smart for his offense. Again, we being
members of Christ's body, meet it is that we suffer with him, Romans 8. Col. 1,
24.
if we will reign with him, as the Apostle teaches: who also was so bold as
to say, that he in his body accomplished those things, that wanted to the
passions of Christ. To this place M. PER. refers prayer for the dead, of
which he propounds three conclusions: two affirmative, and one negative, but
proves nothing.

The first conclusion: We hold that Christian charity must extend it self to
them that be dead, to wit: in honest burial of them, in preserving their good
names, and in relief of their posterity.

The second conclusion: Further we pray in general for the faithful departed,
that God would hasten their joyful resurrection.

The third conclusion: To pray for particular men departed, and to pray for
their deliverance out of Purgatory, we think it unlawful; because we have
neither promise, nor commandment so to do: and so ends he the question of
Purgatory, not propounding one argument in favor of our party.

His reason of the necessity of a promise and commandment to pray for any
thing, before we pray for it, I have in the question of praying to Saints
confuted at large, and therefore omit it here: and will furnish this place
with some arguments for the proof of Purgatory. And though M. PER. blushed
not to say, that it has no warrant in the word of God; yet he has, or might
have seen in Cardinal Bellarmine, Tom. 1. controuer. 6. cap. 3. and 4.
little less then 20. textes of holy Scripture, used by the ancient Doctors
to confirm the doctrine of Purgatory, I will make choice of some few of them:
and because Purgatory and prayer for the dead, be so closely lincked together,
that the one does necessarily follow the other, I will join them both
together. And (gentle Reader) remember here that which has been before
rehearsed out of S. Augustine: that there be some who die in so perfect an
estate, that they are carried presently to heaven; as all Innocents, and
Martirs, and such other holy personages who commit few offenses, and yet do
lead a very austere life. Others there be too too many, who both live and die
wickedly; such are also straight after their death, plunged into the flames of
hell fire. Now, There is a third sort of men, who live reasonable honestly, at
least do die very penitently; these only go to Purgatory, there to do
satisfaction for their former offenses, before they can be admitted into the
joys of heaven: now to our proofs.

First, 2. Machabaeor. 12.
Judas Machabeus (that most valiant Captain of the people of God) with all his
army, prayed unto God to pardon the offense of them that were slain: Verse. 42.
and afterward making a general collection among them, sent 12000. groates to
Jerusalem, that sacrifice might there be offered for the offense of the
departed: the holy Ghost in the text witnessing it, To be a holy and wholesome
cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed and delivered from
their sins. This text is so evident for prayer for the dead, that it can have
no other answer, then that which Heretics fly unto, in their most desperate
plunges, to wit: to deny the whole book to be Canonical Scripture. Upon
which point, because it belongs to another place, I will not dwell: yet, will
I note by the way, that S. Augustine in express terms does declare, 18.
Ciuit. cap. 36.
that the Church of God in his time did take it for Canonical Scripture,
although the Jews did not so. The Protestants (I know well) cavil at many
things in those books; so might they that were disposed to wrangle, against
the best Hystories in the Bible. But one of milder temper may (perhaps) demand,
how those books that were at the first doubted off by many, and not generally
received for Canonical, could afterward be made Canonical? to this I answer,
that the Protestants (as well as we) do take now for Canonical, some such
books as were 300. years after Christ doubted off, to wit: the Epistle to the
Hebrews, S. James Epistle, the second of S. Peter, the second and third of S.
John, S. Iudes Epistle, and the Apocalipse, or Revelation of S. John. Now,
they themselves having admitted all these of the new Testament for Canonical,
upon the judgment and declaration of the Catholic Church: why do they not
as well take those of the old Testament for Canonical also, the same Church
having above a thousand years past, approved them for Canonical, as well as
the other? At the first, because of the great persecutions, the learned could
not so generally meet together, to examine and discuss such matters, as
afterward in the peace of the Church; and therefore in that time diverse men
were of diverse opinions, concerning the authority of such books: but when
the learned in the Church, assembling together in the name of God, and having
the assistance of the holy Ghost to direct them, had once declared which were
Canonical, which not; there was no further question among the obedient
children of the Church: only unskillful men, or Heretics (because they will be
choosers) will admit of which it pleases them, and reject also those which
displease them. But to leave this digression; the books of the Machabees
cannot but have even with Heretics, far greater credit, then Liuie,
Plutarke, and such like profane hystories, Page 307.
as M. PER. also confesses. They then will serve to convince any reasonable
man, that the custom of the people of Israel (then the only chosen servants
of God) was to pray for the dead, and to offer sacrifice for the pardon of the
souls that were departed; because it is so recorded in the best history of
their times: and is also seconded by Josephus the son of Gordan in his book
of the Jews war; Cap. 91.
where he says, that the Jews were wont to pray for the dead, unless it
were for such that had slain themselves. And thus much out of the old
Testament: now out of the new.

Our Savior Christ wills us to agree with our adversary, whiles we are in
the way with him, least perhaps he deliver us to the judge, and the judge to
the officer, and so we be cast into prison: for verily (says he) thou shall
not go out from thence, till thou repay the last farthing. By this parable or
example, our Savior teaches us vvhiles we live in this world, to agree with
the law of God, which is our adversary when we transgress and offend against
it; otherwise at our death we shall justly be cast into prison, and lie there
till we have fully satisfied and paid the last farthing of our debt. The
Protestants say, that he who is so cast into prison shall never come out: We say
the contrary, that this parable concerns them especially that shall be
delivered at the length, and prove it; first because the parable is not taken
from a murderer or thief, who may be justly condemned to death, or to
perpetual prison; but of a debtor, who ordinarily does get out in time: and
therefore it agrees better unto men cast in Purgatory, to pay the debt of the
former trespasses, then to them that are condemned to hell. Besides, the
ancient Fathers do so expound it.

Origin. Albeit it be promised, In epist. ad Romans
that he shall at length come forth of that prison* not withstanding it is
designed, that he cannot go out until he has paid the last farthing.

S. Cyprian. It is one thing to stand for pardon, Lib. 4. epist. 2.
and another to pass straight to glory: one thing, being cast into prison not
to go forth till you have paid the last farthing; and another, to receive
presently the reward of faith and virtue: one thing, to be corrected and purged
long time in fire for your sins; and another, by dying for Christ to have
purged all your sins.

Eusebius Emissenus. Homil. 3. de Epiph.
But they who have deserved temporal pains (unto whom those words of our
Lord appertain, that they shall not go out thence, until they have paid the
last farthing) shall pass through a floode of fire. So that both by the scope
of the parable, and by the interpretation of the Fathers, many men dying in
debt, that is, not having fully satisfied for their former sins, are cast
into the prison of Purgatory, there to pay the last farthing, unless by the
piety and intercession of their friends, their more speedy deliverance be
procured and obtained.

Moreover, that there is such pardon granted after this life to some, is
confirmed by that which our Savior says in another place: Math. 12.
That they who sin against the holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven neither in
this world, nor in the world to come: which were a very improper kind of
speech, if none were to be pardoned in the world to come; As it should be for
our King, to say to some offendour, I will not forgive thee neither in England,
nor in Italy; whereas he has nothing to do to pardon in a strange Dominion.
And the learned know, that in enumeration of parts, it is as foul a fault to
reckon something for a part which is none, as to omit some true part indeed:
so that then our Lord parting the forgiveness of sins into this world, and
the world to come, in all congruity of speech we must understand, that some
sins are forgiven in the world to come; which cannot be in heaven, where none
are; nor in hell where there is no remission of sin: therefore it must be in
a third place, which we call Purgatory.

And this is no new collection made by modern Catholics, out of the word of
God; but as ancient as S. Augustine, who has these words: Some men suffer
temporal punishment in this life only, Lib. 21. de ciuit. c. 13.
others after their death; some others both here and there: yet, before that
last and most severe judgment. For all men after their deaths, shall not go
unto those everlasting torments of helfor (says he, citing this place) to
some, that which is not forgiven in this world, is forgiven in the world to
come, as I have taught before. With S. Augustine agrees S. Gregory, Lib. 4.
dialog. c. 39.
saying: It is to be believed, that there is a Purgatory fire before the
judgment, for certain light faults; for that the truth says: if any man
blaspheme against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. In which sentence there is given to
understand, that certain faults are forgiven in this world, and certain in
the world to come: for that which is denied of one, by consequence, is
understood to be granted to some others. In 3. Mar. sermon. 66. in Cant.
Even so do S. Bid, and S. Bernard with diverse others, expound those words
of our blessed Savior.

The third text of the new Testament, shall be taken out of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, where he (by a similitude of building) declares; that some men
upon the only sound foundation JESUS Christ, 1. Cor. 3.
do build gold, silver, and precious stones, that is, very excellent and
perfect works: others do build upon the same foundation, wood, hay, and
stubble, that is, imperfect and many vain trifling works. He adds: that the
day of our Lord, which shall be revealed in fire, shall prove the works of the
aforesaid builders: and they who have built gold, silver, and precious stones,
because their works will abide the proof of fire, shall receive their reward;
but because the other sort of builders works cannot resist the fire, but will
burn, they shall suffer detriment, but shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

Hence we gather, that after the trial of Gods judgment, some men who are
found guilty of lighter faults, shall be saved, because they keept the
foundation; notwithstanding they shall suffer detriment, and pass through the
fire of Purgatory: as a man that has an halfe-timber house covered with
thetch, set on fire; he being in the midst of it, must pass through the
flames of fire, to escape and save his life. The Protestants say, that it is
the fire of tribulation in this life that does try our works, and that through
it only lighter faults are purged. We reply first, that tribulation of this
life, does not commonly discern and try good men's works from the badde;
because very often good men are more afflicted in this world then the badde.
Again, it is said in the text, that at the day of our Lord this trial shall
be made; which day of our Lord being expressed with the Greek article (as
here it is) ordinarily in Scripture signifies the day of his judgment; so
that by the very circumstances of the text it is very plain, that the Apostle
S. Paul delivered the doctrine of Purgatory: which yet is made more assured by
the universal consent of the holy Fathers, who take this place to prove
Purgatory. See Origin, homil. 6. in Exodum. S. Basil says: He threatens not
utter ruin and destruction, In cap. 9. Esaias.
but signifies a cleansing according unto the Apostles sentence; but he shall
be saved, yet so as by fire.

Theodorete. This same fire we believe to be the fire of Purgatory, In scholijs
Gr. in 1. Cor. 3. In psalm. 36
in which the souls of the departed are tried and purged, as gold is in the
furnace. Oecumenius and Anselmus upon the same place, be of the same judgment.

S. Ambrose upon those words: Sinners have drawn their swords, says: though
our Lord will save his, yet so they shall be saved as by fire; and albeit they
shall not be consumed with fire, yet they shall be burnt. S. Hierome in 4. cap.
Amos. S. Augustine in almost twenty places, expounds this text after the same
manner. Hear this one taken out of his Commentary upon the 37. Psalm: O Lord
reprove me not in thy indignation, that I go not to hell; neither correct me
in thy wrath, but purge me in this life, and make me such a one, that shall
have no need of that purging fire, prepared for them who shall be saved; yet
so, as by fire. And why so? but because here they do build upon the
foundation, wood, hay, and stubble: if they did build gold, silver, and
precious stones, they should be safe from both fires; not only from that
everlasting, which is to punish the wicked everlastingly, but from that also,
which shall correct them who shall be saved by fire: for it is said, he shall
be saved, yet so as by fire. And because he shall be saved, that fire is
contemned: yea truly, though they shall be saved, yet that fire is more
grievous, then whatsoever a man can suffer in this life. These few testimonies
of the most approved Doctors, may suffice to assure us, that the Apostles
speeches are to be taken of a purging fire, prepared after this life for them,
that upon their true faith in Christ do build (through the frailty of our
nature) many idle, odd, and vain works.

The last text of holy Scripture shall be this, taken out of S. John: 1. Epist.
5. verse. 16.
He that knows his brother to sin a sin not unto death; let him ask, and
life shall be given him: there is a sin to death, for that I say not that any
man ask. Hence I reason thus: a sin to death, must in this place needs be
taken for sin, wherein a man dies; for which no man can pray, because that
he who dies in deadly sin, shall never afterward be pardoned: wherefore, a
sin not unto death, is a sin of which a man repents him before his
death; and for such a one does S. John exhort us to pray: therefore, the prayer
which he speaks of when he bids us not pray, being prayer for the dead;
the other prayer also, must be prayer for the departed: and so does he will us
to pray for such men departed, that dyed not in deadly sin, but with
repentance. The Caluinists say, That S. John speaks rather of Apostataes, and
some such like heinous offenders, for whom yet alive he would not have us to
pray. But this is very wicked doctrine; for we may pray even for Turks, and
Jews, and the most sinful persons that live, whiles they live and have time
to repent: for what know we, whether God will take them to mercy or no? and
S. Paul says expressly, that he would have us to pray for all persons, 1. Tim.
2. verse. 1. De correct and gratia cap. 12.
whiles they live. Much more convenient therefore is that exposition before
rehearsed, which is taken out of S. Augustine, who affirms: That a sin to
death, is to leave faith working by charity, even till death.

To these arguments selected out of holy Scripture, I will join another of no
smaller moment with us Catholics, which is drawn from Apostolical tradition,
and the practice of the universal Church in her primitive purity; which has
used always to pray for the dead. Let us hear two or three substantial
vvitnesses speak in this matter. S. Chrysostom that most renowned Patriarch
of Constantinople shall be the first, who says: Hom. 69. ad populu^.
That it was not without good cause ordained and decreed by the Apostles, that
in the dreadful mysteries there be made a commemoration of the dead. For they
did know, that they should receive thereby great profit and much commodity. S.
Augustine as famous for his learning and sincerity in the Latin Church, as the
other was in the Greek, De verbis Apostoli sermon. 34.
says to this point thus: It is not to be doubted, but that the dead are
helped by the prayers of holy Church, and by the comfortable sacrifice, and by
the alms that are given for their souls, that God may deal more mercifully
with them, then their sins deserved. For (says he) the universal Church
observes and keeps this, as by tradition received from the Fathers, that for
them who are departed in the communion of the body and blood of Christ, when at
the sacrifice there is made a commemoration or mention of them, they are prayed
for; and the sacrifice is remembered to be offered for them. The third witness
is Tertullian a most ancient and learned author: De corona militis.
who reckons it among the traditions of the Apostles, to pray for the souls
of the faithful departed. It appearing then so manifest, by the testimony of
such approved witnesses, that to pray for the dead is an Apostolical
tradition, generally received and practiced in the most flourishing state of
the Church; S. Augustines verdict must needs prove true, who says: that it is
a point of most insolent madness, to dispute against that, which the whole
Church does practice. Wherefore, our Protestants were 1300. years ago,
condemned for Heretics in this point in one Aerius, who was censured by that
holy and learned Bishop Epiphanius, haeres. 75. and by S. Augustine ad Quodvult
deum, haeres. 53. an Heretic; because that to the Arrian heresy he added this
of his own, that we must not offer sacrifice nor pray for the souls of the
departed: so that to deny prayer for the dead, is by the judgment of the
ancient Church, deemed flat heresy.

To these former authorities, let us add one reason deducted also out of the
word of God. When a sinner is truly converted, though the fault and eternal
pain due to it, be through Christ's merits freely pardoned him; yet, there
remains some temporal punishment to be suffered by the party himself, for
the same offense before remitted. This proposition is denied by the
Protestants; but it is so manifestly set down in Gods word, that they cannot
but be put to great shame for it, if they be urged with the examples of the
children of Israel, of Aaron, and Moses, and David; Number. 14. Ibi. c. 20. ver.
24. and Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 51. 2. Reg. 12.
who were all first pardoned of their sins, and afterward put to penance for
the very same offenses, as I have in the matter of satisfaction more amply
proved. Now to the present purpose: But many who have been great offenders,
are not converted till toward their death; or else being converted long
before, do not fulfill such penance, as in justice is due unto their grievous
and manifold former offenses: therefore, the due order of Gods justice
requires, that after their death they accomplish that which was wanting in
their life time. To this nothing else can be answered, but that which some of
them do answer: that the very death which every one endures, does serve to
supply all former defectes of his life, and purges him clean from all pain
due to his former sins: but this is said both without authority, or any
reason. For a natural death is due unto all the Sons of Adam, for original
sin; in so much as the very innocents baptized are not freed from it: and
therefore, that cannot be also a satisfaction for all other actual sins.
Again, some who have deserved great punishment, die suddenly, and with
small pain: so that there is no proportin between the pain of their death,
and their former trespasses. We deny not, but that such may be both the length
and sharpness of the sickness whereof some die; that it being patiently
taken may either greatly diminish, or (perhaps) wholly extinguish al former
offenses: but to say that every ones ordinary death, does cancel all former
obligation of sins, how many or how great soever they were, has neither
^ime or reason in it.

I could for a conclusion assemble the sentences of the fathers, and show how
they prayed for the souls departed in their funeral Orations for them: as
Gregory Nazianzene, for the soul of Cesanis; S. Ambrose for the souls of
Theodosius, Valentinian, and Satyrus, promising also to offer sacrifice for
them; In epist. ad eunde^. Lib. 5. hystor. c. 26. Lib. 3. Institut. c. 5.. 10.
S Hierome commending Pomachius for praying and giving alms for the soul of
his wife; and Theodorete praising the Emperor Theodosius the younger for
prostrating himself at the Relikes of S. John Chrysostom, and praying there
for the souls of his parents, Arcadius and Eudoxia. I could (I say) bring a
cloud of witnesses to this purpose, but Calvin eases me of that labor; who
acknowledges, That for 1300. years before his days (that is almost, from the
first time that the ancient Fathers began to write) the custom of praying
for the dead has been used in the Church: Marry, he would have us believe,
that it was brought in by the vulgar sort, after the imitation of the Gentiles.
But we have showed, that the best learned and most sincere and Godly Preachers
and Doctors, have both out of the word of God, and Tradition of the Apostles
taught their flocks that point of Christian doctrine; and further, by name
condemned them of heresy, that taught the contrary: so that very fondly does
Calvin tax S. Augustine for praying for his mothers soul, saying (forsooth)
that he did it only to satisfy the old woman's request; and says yet more
impudently, that in his book of the care to be taken for the dead, he does
very coldly handle the matter: whereas you have heard (I hope) sufficiently
out of him, how resolute and peremptory he is for Purgatory. See the beginning
of it, and cap. 4.
And in that said book his principal intent is, to approve the burying of the
dead near unto the body or relikes of some Martyr, to the intent that he, who
remembers the body of his best beloved to be there buried, may with greater
devotion recommend unto the same Martyr, his dear friends soul. And
therefore he does much commend a devout Matron, for burying her son near
unto the relikes of S. Foelix; and counsaileth others so to do, adding: that
if they cannot procure any such burying place for their friends; yet, that in
no case they ought to cease from necessary prayers and supplications for them:
For (says he) wheresoever the body of the departed do lie, the rest and peace
of his soul, is to be procured and sought for. And whether out of fond
affection toward his mother, or out of a most settled judgment he prayed for
her; and whether it were coldly or no, let his own words declare: thus he
begins to prove Calvin an audacious liar. Lib. 9. Confess. cap. 13.
But now I having my heart cured of that wound, in which humane affection might
be faulty, do power forth unto thee (our God) for that thy servant (his mother
Monica) another manner of tears, which flows from a mind stricken with
fear, by consideration of those perils, which follow every soul that dies
in Adam, etc. I therefore (o my praise, my life, and God of my heart) laying
aside for a season her good works, for which I rejoicing do give thee
thanks, do now pray unto thee for the sins of my Mother: hear me (I
beseech thee) through the salve of our wounds, that hanged upon the tree, and
now sitting at thy right hand, does plead for us. I know that she did many
works of mercy, and from her heart forgave all them that trespassed against
her: do thou (o Lord) also forgive her her trespasses, if she committed any
after baptism. Pardon her, pardon her, (o Lord) I beseech thee, and enter not
into judgment with her: let thy mercy surpass thy judgments, because thy
words are true, and thou have promised mercy to the merciful, etc.

Could that most worthy Doctor more directly cross Caluins false relation, of
his coldness in this matter? or in better manner clear himself from his
spiteful slanders? Calvin blushed not to say, that S. Augustine out of
passion prayed for his mother: but he himself relates, how he did it some
years after her death of settled judgment, having his heart cured from humane
affection.

And thus I end this question of Purgatory.
OF THE SVPREMACY IN CAUSES ECCLESIASTICAL.
OUR CONSENT.
M. PERKINS Page 283.
TOuching the point of Supremacy Ecclesiastical, I will set down how near
we may come unto the Roman Church in two conclusions.

The first conclusion. For the founding of the primitive Church, the Ministry
of the word was distinguished by degrees not only of order, but also of power,
and Peter was called to the highest degree; for Apostles were above
Evangelists, and Evangelists above Pastors and teachers: now Peter was an
Apostle, and so above all Evangelists and Pastors, howsoever he were not above
other Apostles.

The second conclusion. Among the 12. Apostes, Peter had a threefold
privilege or prerogative: first, of authority, I mean a pre-eminence in
regard of estimation, whereby he was in reverence above the rest of the twelve.
Secondly, of primacy, because he was the first named as the foreman of the
quest. Thirdly, of principality, in regard of measure of grace, wherein he
excelled the rest of the twelve; but Paul excelled Peter every way, in
learning, zeal, and understanding, as far as Peter excelled the rest.

ANNOTATION.
MAster PERKINS (as his manner is) at the first would seem to approach
somewhat near unto the Catholic doctrine, and therefore gives as brave
words for S. Peter's prerogatives, as we do, to wit; That he surpassed the
other Apostles both in authority, primacy, and principality: but p^^^ently
(after his old fashion) he waters his former words with such cold glosses,
that they shrink in exceedingly; for all Peter's privileges do extend no
further, then that he excelled the rest in private grace of learning, zeal,
and understanding, and was therefore somewhat more esteemed then the rest, and
named first: so that with M. PER. a great millpost, is quickly thwited (as they
say) into a pudding prick. Again, all this is besides the purpose: for the
question is not which of the Apostles excelled in those private gifts of
understanding, zeal, and piety; for it is not unlikely hat S. John the
Evangelist (who sucked divine mysteries out of our Saviors breast) was not
inferior to either S. Peter or S. Paul, in these spiritual graces of heavenly
knowledge and charity: but we leaving these secrets unto him who is the
judge of the heart, and of his inward gifts; do affirm S. Peter to have been
advanced above all the rest of the Apostles, in the external government of
Christ's Church; and the Bishops of Rome his successors, to inherit the same
supremacy.

THE DIFFERENCE by M. PERKINS.
THe Church of Rome gives to Peter a supremacy under Christ above all persons
and causes: this stands in a power to determine which books of Scripture be
Canonical, and what is the true sense of any doubtful place of them; and for
this purpose to call and assemble general Councels, and to confirm the
decrees of them, and by these means to decide all controuersi^^ about matter
of faith. Besides, he can excommunicate any Christian be he King or Kaesar, if
they by obstinate withstanding Gods laws or the decrees of holy Church, shall
justly deserve it. Moreover, to him it does belong to make Ecclesiastical
Canons and laws, for the due discipline and ordering of matters of the Church,
which do bind in conscience. Finally, to confirm the election of Bishops,
and to decide all such greater controversies, as by appeal are brought unto
him from any part of Christendom.

These indeed be the chiefest points of the Popes supremacy: as for that of
pardoning of sins, it is no proper part of his primacy, but common unto all;
not only to Bishops, but also to Priests.

We (says M. PERKINS) hold, that neither Peter nor any Bishop of Rome, had or
has any such supremacy over the Catholic Church: but that all supremacy under
Christ is appertaining to Kings and Princes with him in their Dominions. And
that our doctrine is good and theirs false, I will make manifest by sundry
reasons. First, Christ must be considered as he was a King, two ways: first,
as he is God, so is he King over al by right of creation; and so as God has
deputies on earth to govern the world, namely Kings and Princes. Secondly, he
is King by right of redemption over the whole Church, which he has redeemed
with his precious blood; and so as mediator and redeemer, he has no fellow
nor deputy: for no creature is capable of this office, to do in the room and
stead of Christ that which himself does; because every work of the mediator
must arise from the effects of two natures concurring in one action, namely
the Godhead and Manhood. Again, Christ's Priesthood cannot pass from his
person to any other; whence it follows, that neither his Kingly, nor his
Prophetical (he would have said Priestly) office, can pass from him to any
creature. Nay, it is needless for Christ to have a deputy, considering that a
deputy only serves to supply the absence of the principal: whereas Christ is
always present by his word and spirit, it may be said that the Ministers in
the work of the ministry are Christ's deputies. I answer, that they are no
deputies, but only active instruments; because they do only utter the word,
but it is Christ that works in the heart. In like manner in excommunication,
it is Christ that cutteth that excommunicate person from the Kingdom of
heaven; and the Church does only declare this, by cutting him off from the rest
of Christ's people, until he repent: so that in all Ecclesiastical actions,
Christ has no deputies but only instruments, the whole action being personal
in respect of Christ.

Is not this trow you a pretty piece of an argument? but we must bear with the
length of it, because it alone will serve (as M. PER. opineth) to overthrow
many points of Popery: let it be therefore well considered of. To it then I say
first, that if it be ought worth, it as well overthrows the Kings, as the
Popes Supremacy. For if the Pope may not be Christ's deputy, as he is mediator
and governor of his Church, because that no creature can be his deputy in any
point of Ecclesiastical government as M. PER. defines; then surely no King
nor Prince, who are mere creatures (and not one of them I trow, both God and
Man) can be Christ's deputy in the government of his Church. I say secondly,
that a mere creature may be Christ our mediators deputy and Vicar in the
Ecclesiastical government of his Church: neither is there therein any one
action, that necessarily proceeds from the two natures of God and Man, as M.
PER. dreameth. Examine all the points of Supremacy proposed in the difference
by himself, and see whether there be any one that must needs be the action
of both God and Man: to call a general Council is none such, nor to ratify
the decrees thereof; to discuss and declare which books be Canonical
Scripture, and what is the true meaning of all obscure places therein
contained, may be done by men assisted by the inspiration of the holy Ghost:
and so among all the rest, there is not one point of the Supremacy, but may be
well executed by a mortal man assisted with Gods spirit. The points of
Christ's mediation, namely to satisfy his Fathers wrath by paying him the
full ransom of all mankind; the establishing of a new Testament or law; the
creation of spiritual Magistrates; the furnishing of it with Sacraments, and
such like are indeed so proper to Christ, that they cannot be communicated
unto others: Marry, to see that his laws be well observed, lawful Governors
and Ministers elected, and his Sacraments rightly administered; the chardge (I
say) of these things may be very well committed unto his deputies, and the
principal ouer-sight of all unto one supreme governor under himself, that
all the inferior Prelates may be holden in peace and unity. And to say that
Christ's presence, by his word and spirit is sufficient to dissolve all
doubts that arise about matter of faith, and to reform all misdemeanour that
is among Christians, without the authority of some Magistrate to see the same
well declared, and applied unto particular persons; is to speak against all
reason and experience. For who shall reform obstinate Heretics? Christ's
word? but Heretics have always said, and will ever say that it makes for
them. Shall Christ's spirit correct them? they hold that they have that spirit
in such abundance, that it cries in them, Abba, Father: so that M. PER.
argument drives to this, that there must be no governor at all; but that
every wrangling fellow, is to be left unto the word and spirit of Christ:
which is most absurd in matter of government. And albeit that in producing of
supernatural effects, men be but Gods instruments: yet because they be
instruments endued with reason, chosen by God, and enabled to do that
whereunto they are by Christ appointed; I see no reason why they may not be
well called Christ's deputies. Sure I am, that S. Paul fears not to style
himself with the other Apostles, 2. Cor. 5. verse. 20. 1. Cor. 3. verse. 9,
Christ's Legates or Ambassadors: which is as much, if not more then his
deputies. And in an other place, he goes yet further, and says; that they are
coadjutors, or fellow worke-men with God: for though it be Gods work, as the
only efficient cause; yet men do concur thereunto as his instruments, and
do in their kind work properly toward the producing of the effect: as the
Preacher by his persuasions, zeal, and piety, does very much move his Auditors
to embrace Godliness, although he should labor in vain if God d^d not
principally both concur with his speeches, and inwardly also dispose the heart
of the hearer to receive them. But of this more hereafter in the matter of the
Sacraments.

Touching the matter of government, I cannot understand what M. PER. means
when he says, that every action thereof proceeds from the very person of
Christ: for when the Bishops or congregation does excommunicate an offendour,
how can that act of theirs be personal in respect (...) speaks? Is Christ
there th^^ in pa^^^^^ (...) ^^n-hood together, are they prosecution (...)
sentence of excommunication? what ado^^^ (...) if such deep doctrine drown
many p^^^e of Pop^^ry. If Christ be not there present, how th^n can thee
action proceeds (...) him only, and be so proper to him that it may be called
personal? M. PER. means perhaps only, that when the congregation does out
(...) the Church by excommunication, then Christ (...) from the kingdom of
heaven; which is also false; for many (...), which afterward upon their (...)
unto that kingdom, and therefore were not cut off from it by Christ. But
suppose it were true, that Christ then separated that person from heaven;
would it follow thereof, that the act of co^ting him off (...) congregation
done by the Church, were the proper action of Christ proceeding immediately
from his two (...) of God and man? nothing (I think) can be imagined more
absurd: wherefore, all the actions of Ecclesiastical government issue properly
from the persons of the Governors, who are in deed placed in that seat of
authority by Christ, and inspired by him to exercise that function duty; but so
qualified by Christ, do formally execute and work all the actions belonging
to government, and therefore may be most properly called Deputies: who in
their Masters name and by authority received from him, do that they have
commission to do.

M. PERKINS second reason is: All the Apostles were equal in power and
authority: for the commission Apostolical was equally given unto them all.
Math. 28.
Go teach all nations, baptizing them, etc.

Answer. They were equal in that point of preaching the Gospel to all
nations, and in many other things which appertayned to the planting of the
Christian religion: Marry always with this general prouiso; that both they
and all those who were converted unto the faith by them, should acknowledge
and obey one supreme Pastor, Christ's Vicegerent on earth. Which S. Leo does
very plainly teach, saying: Epist. 84. ad Anast.
Between the most blessed Apostles in the similitude or equality of honor,
there was a certain difference of power: and where as the election of them all
was equal, yet it was given unto one of them to have pre-eminence above the
rest.

But M. PERKINS says, that the promise of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven
was not private to Peter, but in his person made to the rest of the Apostles,
according unto Peter's confession made in the name of the rest.

Answer. Very just; even as Peter made his confession, so was the promise:
but he made that confession of Christ in his own name, and that by special
revelation from God, without consulting with any of the rest; therefore to him
alone was that promise of Christ made, although in, and by him, to the great
benefit of the whole Church.

In cap. 16. Math.
But Theophilact has: that they who receive the gift of a Bishop, have the
power of committing and binding as Peter had.

Answer. We grant that all lawful Bishops can bind and loose, both in the
court of conscience and publicly; but thereof it follows not, that that
promise of Christ for building his Church on S. Peter, etc. was common unto the
rest of the Apostles. In psalm 38
But Ambrose says, that which is said to Peter, is said to the Apostles: Then
belike that was also said unto the rest as well as to him, This night before
the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrife; which no man can say.

To understand then such general propositions, take this distinction with
you, that things spoken unto S. Peter are of three sundry sorts. Some are
spoken unto him as an ordinary Christian, and such sentences do agree unto all
Christians: other things are spoken unto him, as an Apostle, and those are
common unto the rest of the Apostles: there be lastly certain things spoken
unto him particularly, as head of the Church, which may not be extended unto
any other of the Apostles, but only unto his successors.

Now S. Ambrose speaks of the second kind of things: but against this M.
PER. excepteth thus: That although Peter be admitted to have been in
commission above the rest for the time, yet hence may not be gathered any
supremacy for the Bishops of Rome; because the authority of the Apostles were
personal, and consequently ceased with them, without being conveyed unto any
others: and he adds the reason of this to be; because that when the Church of
the new Testament was once founded, it was needful only, that there should
be Pastors and Teachers for the building of it up, unto the worlds end.

Reply. What means this man by Pastors? does he comprehend Bishops within
that word? then he overthrows himself: for if such Pastors be yet necessary,
then is it needful that the Bishops of Rome do succeed S. Peter in that
ample power which he had. If by Pastors he understand Parish Priests or
Ministers that have charge of flocks, and by Teachers other Preachers; then
does he here as much for the Bishops, as in his last discourse he did for
temporal Princes, that is: as he went about there to prove, that Christ as
our redeemer, could have no creature for his deputy in government; and
consequently that Kings cannot be Christ's Lieutenants in Ecclesiastical
causes: so here he does insinuate, that Bishops be not necessary to the
building up of Christ's Church, but the Minister of every Parish with the
Elders thereof, will suffice for ordinary matters; and that affairs of greater
moment must be referred (belike) to the Consistoriall assembly of many
Ministers and Elders together. Does not this savor rankely of Puritanisme? but
because he only says this without any proof, let it suffice for answer to
say; that as Ministers are necessary to teach the word of God, and to
administer the Sacraments: so are Bishops both to institute and ordain the
Ministers, and to see, that they do diligently discharge their duty. And as
Bishops are necessary to ouer-see Priests and Ministers: so are Archbishops and
Metropolitanes to look unto Bishops, and to provide that there be no schisms
or divisions among them, and to determine their controversies, if any arise
between them. And in like manner one Supreme Pastor is necessary in the
Universal Church of Christ, to hold all Archbishops, Primates, and Patriarchs
in unity of faith, and in conformity of Christian ceremonies and manners.

M. PERKINS third reason: When the Sons of Zebedee sued unto Christ for the
greatest rooms of honor in his Kingdom, Christ's answer was; Ye know that
the Lords of the Gentiles have dominion, and they that are great, exercise
authority over them: but it shall not be so with you. Bernard applies this to
Pope Eugenius on this manner; Lib. 2. do consid.
it is plain that here dominion is forbidden the Apostles: go to then, dare
you (if you will) to take upon you ruling an Apostleship; or in your
Apostleship, rule and dominion? if you will have both alike, you shall leefe
both: otherwise you must not think your self excempted from the number of
them, of whom the Lord complained; ye have raygned, but not of me.

Answer. Insolent and tyrannical dominion, such as was in those days
practiced by the Gentiles, Pagans, and Idolaters, is there by our Savior
forbidden the Apostles; but not modest and vigilant Prelature in
Ecclesiastical government, as the very text it self does plainly show: for
in that he does foretell that there should not be such a haughty and disdaineful
kind of superiority among his disciples, he does give us to understand that
there should be some other better; and says further, Luc. 22. verse. 26.
That he who is greater among you, let him become as the lesser, and he that is
your leader (or as it is in the Greek egoumenos your Captain or Prince) let
him be your wayter. See, he will have among them one greater then the rest, to
be their Captain and leader; which he confirms with his own example,
saying: As I my self came not to be waited on, or ministered unto, but came to
minister or to wait upon others: so that this discourse of our Saviors, only
disproueth in Christians such Lord-like domination as was then in use among
the Gentiles, who were given for the most part, to take their own pleasures to
overrule laws as they listed, to oppress their subjects with taxes, and to
use them like slaves. Now in Ecclesiastical gouernementall must be otherwise:
the Prelate must not seek his own ease, wealth, or pleasure, but most
vigilantly study day and night to feed and profit his flock, with whom he
must converse most modestly, not scorning or contemning to speak familiarly
with the meanest amongst them. And this is that which S. Bernard counsaileth
Eugenius to do; To rule as an Apostle, and not to overrule or to dominier
like unto some temporal Princes: which in the same book he does plainly
teach, saying: That when Eugenius was created Pope, he then was exalted over
Nations and Kingdoms, yet not to domineer over them, but to serve them. And
further, he does in the same book deliver the Popes Supremacy in these most
evident words, speaking thus to the same Pope Eugenius: Who art thou? a great
Priest, the highest Bishop; thou art the Prince of the Bishops, the heir of
the Apostles, etc. Thou art he to whom the keys of heaven were delivered, to
whom the sheep were committed. There are also indeed other Porters of
heaven, and Pastors of sheep; but thou art so much the more glorious, as thou
have inherited a more excellent name above them. They have their flocks to
each man me; but to thee all were committed, as one flock to one Pastor. Thou
art not only Pastor of the sheep, but of all other Pastors, thou alone art the
Pastor. Thus far S. Bernard, and much more does he say in favor of the Popes
Supremacy in the same book: wherefore to pike out a broken sentence of his
against ouer-ruling, thereby to disprove that which he does most plainly prove
and allow; argues an evil conscience in M. PERKINS, and a mind fully bent
to deceive them that be so simple as to believe him.

Ephesians. 4.
His fourth reason: Mention is made of gifts, which Christ gave to his Church
after his ascension, whereby some were Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers: now of there had been an office, in
which men as deputies of Christ should have governed the whole Church, that
calling might here have been named; and no doubt but that Paul would not have
concealed it, where he mentions callings of less importance.

Answer. This man will never leave playing the Sophister, and using of
fallacies insteade of sound arguments: what a reason is this? there is no
mention made of the supreme Pastors calling in one place of S. Paul, therefore
there is no mention made of it at all. Let us return this his weapon upon his
own pate: In that place of the Apostle, there is no mention made of the Kings
supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, but rather a plain declaration
that the Church of God needs no such officer for her Ecclesiastical
government: ergo, Kings have no such authority. And because M. PER. seems
not greatly to care for the Princes supremacy, let this argument be urged
against the admirable Elders of their consistoriall discipline; who
notwithstanding they be such peerless peers of the reformed Churches, yet
were utterly concealed, or rather never thought upon by the Apostle, when and
where he mentions callings of lesser moment. Now the direct answer to that
place may be twofold: either that there is not mention made of all Church
officers, as it is evident and must be confessed on all parts; or else that by
convenient interpretation, they may be reduced unto some of them there named,
and so may the supreme Pastor of Christ's Church be contained well in that name
of Pastors; or because it belongs unto the supreme Pastor to have a general
care of all Christendom, and to send always some to convert Infidels, his
chardge and calling may be well an Apostleship: as it is in the very words
cited by M. PER. in his last argument out of S. Bernard. Epist. 162. Lib. 2.
co^t. Ruffinum.
Besides, S. Augustine, and S. Hierome with others do call the Sea of Rome an
Apostolical chair and seat.

M. PERKINS fifth reason: The Popes supremacy is condemned by sentences of
Scripture, before it was manifest to the world; by the spirit of prophecy, to
wit; the man of sin (which is Antichrist) shall exalt himself above all that
is called God: now this whole Chapter with all the circumstances of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
most fitly agrees to the sea of Rome, and the head thereof.

Answer. This is a capital accusation, and therefore should have bin
thoroughly well proved, and yet you would marvel to see how slightly he
goes about it: I can scarce bring his proof into any form of argument, it is
so substantial. But thus he seems to argue: At the decay of the Roman Empire
the man of sin shall be revealed: but the Sea of Rome never slourished till
the Empire decayed; ergo, that Sea is the man of sin. Here is a new found
manner of arguing: Let us admit the first proposition, because it may hap to be
true, though it be very uncertain what is meant by that defection mentioned by
S. Paul. But let us grant it: shall every thing that begins then to
flourish, be the man of sin? and if every flourishing state shall not then be
that man of sin, why shall the Sea of Rome be rather that man of sin, then
any other flourishing estate? sure it is, that it has no consequence out of
that argument. Secondly, it is most false also, that the Sea of Rome never
flourished till the Empire decayed: for when did it ever flourish more, then in
that good Emperors days Constantine the great, and in many other excellent
Christian Emperors that lived an hundred years after him? Thirdly S. Paul
speaks not of a decay of the Roman Empire, or whatsoever else he means;
but rather of a general revolt, or utter ruin and decay of it, which is not
as yet happened: for the Empire to this day yet continues in some part of
Hungary and Beameland; so that man of sin cannot be the Sea of Rome, which
so many years has flourished together with that Roman Empire. Finally, S.
Peter and three and thirty other Popes of Rome after him, enjoyed the supreme
government of the Church, more then four hundred years before that
declination and decay of the Roman Empire, which they speak off: so that
nothing can be more fond and absurd, then to draw thence any argument against
the Popes supremacy. And whereas he says that all that chapter agrees fitly
to the Sea of Rome: I say and will briefly prove, that nothing in that Chapter
agrees unto it any thing aptly. First, the Apostle speaks of one particular
man, as his words do manifestly show: for he calls him the man of sin,
Verse. 3.
the son of perdition, and that with the Greek article which does more
formally particularize; how can this be applied unto more then two hundred
Popes? Verse. 4. In illum locum.
Secondly it is said, that that man of sin shall be extolled above all that
is called God: and as S. Chrysostom expounds it, shall command himself to
be adored and worshipped as God, which is and has ever been most far from
the thoughts of all Popes, who profess themselves servants of all Gods
servants. Verse. 9.
Thirdly, that man of iniquity shall work many strange signs and wonders; Let
them name which of the Popes has so done for these last 900. years, which
they accuse most. Fourthly, that man shall be received of the Jews; for says
S. Paul, Verse. 10.
Because they received not the charity of truth, that they might be saved;
therefore God will send them the operation of error to believe lying: now all the Greek interpreters do understand this of the Jews, as the very text
leads them. With whom agrees S. Hierome, interpreting these words thus:
Quaest. 11. ad Algasiu^
Antichrist shall do all these signs not by the power, but by the permission
of God for the Jews: that because they would not receive the charity of truth,
that is, the spirit of God by Christ, and so receiving the Savior, they might
have been saved: God will send them, etc. With these accord both S. Augustine
and S. Cyril, upon this sentence of our Savior speaking to the Jews: I come
to you in the name of my father, Ioh. 5. verse. 43.
and you received me not: if any other shall come in his own name, him you
receive, that is Antichrist: but the Jews have not yet received the Bishop of
Rome for their Messiah. Nay they take the Pope for the greatest enemy of their
religion in the world, and like much better of all them who vvith-drawe
themselves from society in religion with him.

Verse. 9.
Finally, it is there said, that Christ with the spirit of his own mouth shall
kill that man, with the manifestation of his aduene or coming: whence the
learned interpreters gather, first; that Antichrist shall be punished with a
very extraordinary and exemplare death, which has not happened to any of these
Popes. Secondly, that Antichrist is to tyranize only some few years before
the latter coming of Christ to judgment, which cannot stand with the
Protestants computation of Antichrists reign, which they draw nine hundredth
years in length already, and yet are uncertain how much remains behind. By
this (I hope) you see, how well you may trust M. PER. on his word another
time, who blushed not to affirm all the circumstances of the man of sin
related in that Chapter, to agree most fitly unto the Pope of Rome: when as not
one sentence there penned by the Apostle, does touch him any whit at all, but
are only by the wresting of his enemies, violently torn and cast upon him.

Now to M. PERKINS last reason, which is taken from the testimony of the
ancient Church. Cyprian says: De simpl. Praelator.
Doubtless the same were the rest of the Apostles that Peter was, endued with
equal fellowship both of honor and power, but a beginning is made of unity
that the Church may appear to be one.

Answer. Doubtless here is a pretty piece of cosinage; for the words are
strooken out, which would have made all plain against the Protestants: for
S. Cyprian there says, that the beginning proceeds from one, and the primacy
is given to Peter, that the Church may appear to be one: So that he allowing
all the Apostles to be equal in honor, being all of the same calling and
power to preach the Gospel to all nations, yet affirms the Supremacy to have
been given unto S. Peter; that by that unity of one head, the Church might be
kept perpetually in unity of one faith, and uniformity of religion. Note how
his own witness does give plain evidence against him.

Gregory says: If one be called universal Bishop, In regist. lib. 6. epist.
118.
the universal Church goes to decay. And cap. 144. I say boldly; that
whosoever calls, or desires to call himself universal Priest, in his pride
he is a forerunner of Antichrist. And lib. 7. cap. 30. Behold in the preface
of your Epistle a proud title, calling me universal Pope.

Answer. I could vvish that the cause might be determined by that blessed
Bishop S. Gregory's sentence, it were then already gained on our side: for in
those books of his Epistles, he does almost nothing else but declare the Popes
Supremacy, in ordering of all Ecclesiastical matters, and that over all
Countries; but whence the Be sucketh honey, thence also the Spider draws some
poison. They regard not what or how much he vvriteth there in favor of the
Supremacy; but they think to have some advantage for their cause, out of that
which he writes against the name of universal Bishop or Priest, but they are
miserably deceived: for one may very well be supreme head of the Church, and
yet not universal Bishop, as S. Gregory there takes that word. For he is only
an universal Bishop after S. Gregory, who is Bishop in every Diocese of the
universal Church, other Bishops being but his Suffraganes or Deputies: such an
universal Bishop is not the Pope; for excepting the special points of his
prerogatives, he is not to intermedle with the particular business of my other
Bishop within his Diocese, no more then the Archbishop of Canterbury, is to
deal with the government of any other Bishop under him, saving in cases of
his prerogative. But even as it appertains unto the Metropolitan to compose
the controversies that may arise between the Bishops of his Province, and to
determine all such causes as by appeal or otherwise belong unto his court; to
call a Provincial Council, and to confirm the decrees of it, and to make
Ecclesiastical Canons and constitutions for his Province: in like manner does
it appertain unto the supreme Pastor of the Church, to appease and end all
debates that shall happen between the Metropolitanes or Priuates; to judge of
some such matters of great moment, that may by appeal be very worthylie
referred to his court; to call general Councels, and to be President in them;
to make Ecclesiastical laws for the whole Church: in which and such like
matters, the point of his Supremacy principally consists. And these were all
most carefully undertaken and practiced by S. Gregory, though he misliked the
name of universal Bishop; because that did seem unto him to exclude all other
Bishops from their proper dignities and callings, Lib. 7. epist. 69.
as he expounds himself, saying: If there be one universal Bishop, it
remains that you be no Bishops. And if you make one universal Patriarch, you
deprive all the other Patriarchs of their title and dignity: l. 4. ep. 36. In
this sense took S. Gregory the name of universal, and therefore did justly
refuse it himself, and very sharply reprehended the Patriarch of
Constantinople, for usurping of it: for although in a good sense it might have
been attributed unto the Sea of Rome, who is supreme Pastor of the universal
Church; yet it could not without apparent pride and arrogance, be used of the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who had nothing to do without the compass and
limits of his own Patriarkeship.

The testimony of S. Bernard is easy to be answered: for he says only, that
Eugenius is not Lord of Bishops, but one of them: and that he is not to draw
all power to himself, but to leave to every Bishop and Archbishop (his
brethren in government) their proper causes; all which we say with him.

But he returns to Pope Gregory, who says: That he was subject to the
Emperors commandment: and had every way dischardged that which was due, in
that be had performed his allegiance unto the Emperor, and yet did not
conceal what he thought in Gods behalf.

Answer. Why did he not cite the place where S. Gregory has these words?
there lurketh some padde under that straw: but he might very well use such
words, excepting the word allegiance, which sauoureth of a false translation.
Per Ioh. Diaconu^, l. 4. c. 58.
For S. Gregory (as it is to be seen in his life) was of so profound humility,
that he called all Priests his Brothers; al Clerks his Sons; and all
laymen his Lords or Masters: and so might well write unto the Emperor, that
he was subject to his commandments; for it is an usual phrase both in Italy
and France, to call all their friends requests, commandments.

Besides, S. Gregory did dispatch much business in and about Rome for the
Emperor in his absence, and so might write that he had faithfully discharged
the trust that the Emperor reposed in him: yet in the very Epistle whence
Calvin piketh some like words, Lib. 4. epist. 31.
He does admonish the Emperor; that he ought to do reverence to Priests, and
puts him in mind of Constantine the great, who would not presume to judge
of Bishops causes, albeit the Bishops themselves requested and desired him so
to do. And thus much in answer to that which is objected out of S. Gregory:
now, if you desire to see what this holy Bishops opinion was concerning the
Supremacy of the Sea of Rome, read the 72. Epistle of his first book, where
he commands, That if any out of Numidia (the remotest part of Afrike) desired
to come unto the Apostolic Sea (of Rome) that they should be permitted. And in
the 37. of his second book does signify, That all the four Patriarchs might
appeal unto his court of Rome, and could not afterward remove the case from
thence, without great scandal and contumacy. And in the 7. book, epist. 63.
does in most express terms declare, That without all doubt the Patriarch of
Constantinople was subject unto the Sea Apostolic. And in the 64. adds, That
all Bishops are subject unto it; saying, For in that he says himself to be
subject to this Sea, if any fault be found in Bishops, I know not what Bishop
is not subject to it. And further l. 4. epist. 52. It is evident unto all that
know the Gospel, that by our Lords voice the chardge of the whole Church was
committed unto the most blessed and Prince of all the Apostles, S. Peter. And
in his exposition of the fourth penitential Psalm affirms, The Church of
Rome to be head of all Churches. And l. 14. Moral. c 19. teaches, That Priests
(not Princes) are the chief members of the Church. And lib. 5. epist. 25.
speaking of the Emperor Maurice, says: I know the most pious Princes to line
discipline, to keep order, to reverence the Canons of the Church, and not to
intrude themselves into the business of Priests. This may suffice to assure
him that cannot read S. Gregory's works, of his opinion in this matter; and
a hundredth times more may he find, that will take the pains to peruse that his
work of Epistles called registrum. By this may be answered, that which M.
PER. cites out of Pope Leo 4. that lived (as he says) two hundredth years
after Gregory: That he professed obedience unto his imperial commandments, to
be but an usual Italian phrase. And with what congruity he cites one of them
to profess obedience of curtefie to the Emperor, whom they account to have
been no better then Antichrist in his full pride, and to have acknowledged no
other man for his head, yea to have extolled himself above God, as they
blaspheme; I leave it to the consideration of the wise. Hitherto in answer of
M. PERKINS objection against the Popes supremacy.

It followed in due order, that having disputed against that, he should have
confirmed his own opinion for the supremacy of Kings and Princes: for it does
not follow necessarily, that if the Pope be not head of the Church, that then
the King is; for Patriarchs or Primates may be in the several Provinces, or
else the grave learned Senate of consistoriall Ministers and rude artificers,
called (forsooth) Elders of the congregation. But M. PER. toward the end of
his book waxes slothful, and has omitted also to propose any arguments in
our behalf; yea he does not propose one reason in proof of his own position:
Nay which is most reproueable, he does in his own arguments made against the
Popes supremacy, utterly subvert the Kings supremacy, as you have heard
already in his first and fourth reasons. To which I will add a third,
gathered out of him in an hundred places.

Nothing is to be believed as necessary to salvation, that is not written in
the word of God: but it is not written any where in the new Testament, that our
Savior Christ committed the government of his Church unto Kings or temporal
Princes; therefore no such thing is to be believed or taught by any Christian.
There is so little said in favor of their Supremacies in holy Scripture, that
M. PER. held it good policy not to go about the probation of it. Some are so
simple as to allege that of the Apostle S. Paul in proof of it: Romans 13.
Let every soul he subject to higher powers; but it falls many feadomes to
short of it: for that sentence may be as well applied to spiritual as to
temporal governors. Again, if he speak of temporal Magistrates, most
assured it is that he meant nothing less, then to counsel the Christians
Romans to obey their Emperors (who were then Pagans and persecutors) in matter
of religion. The same answer will serve for their other text out of S. Peter,
1. Pet. c. 2. verse. 14.
who bids Christians obey the King as the more excellent. More excellent
then whom? what then Priests and Bishops? nothing less; but more excellent
then their Dukes, Captains, and such like officers under them, as it follows
in the text; of which sort very few in S. Peter's days were members of the
Church, and much less supreme heads in cases Ecclesiastical: so that there
is no vvarrant in all the new Testament for Kings supremacy in matters of
religion, and as little is there in the old, as shall be examined in due place;
wherefore not to be believed of any Protestant. And in very equity and true
natural light, how is it likely that temporal Princes both slenderly studied
in matter of Divinity, and nothing practiced in the manner of Ecclesiastical
government, should be chosen as fittest persons to decide all doubts in
Divinity, and to order and determine all controversy in Church government? or
shall we think that our Savior had such a simple foresight, or slender care
of his Church, as to commit it specially to their chardge, who were both
least able, and most unlikely to look well unto it? Women also and children
may be lawful Kings; but to make them supreme Governors of causes
Ecclesiastical (wherein children cannot, and women may not speak) is most
ridiculous. And if all other proofs failed, the very experience of our age
were sufficient to persuade any reasonable man, that it is most absurd to be
ruled by temporal Princes in matters of religion: for it would follow of it
necessarily, that a Christian were bound to conform his conscience to the
Kings laws, and to embrace that religion which the King commands him,
because he is bound to obey his superior appointed by God. And consequently my
father for example, who lived in King Henryes the eight, King Edwardes, Queen
Maryes, and Queen Elizabeth's days, should have changed his religion four
times in his life, and that with a very good conscience; because he was so
commanded to do by the formal laws of those four his temporal Sovereigns:
and so might without any offense to God, have been now of the old religion,
then of the new; and again of neither old nor new, but of a hotch-potch, and
mingle-mangle of some of the one, and some of the other, which is most absurd:
even so is that of which it follows. And to confirm this with some testimony
of antiquity, S. Ambrose a most firm pillar of the West Church, spoke
resolutely unto the Emperor Valentinian, saying: Epist. 35.
Trouble not your self (o Emperor) with thinking that you have any imperial
jurisdiction over those things that be Divine and Holy; for the right of
Civil causes was committed unto you, but not the chardge of Holy things. And
another his ancient S. Athanasius, Epist. ad solita. vita^ age^tes.
the first of the four Doctors of the Greek Church, does reprehend the
Emperor Constantius for intermedling with Ecclesiastical causes; and
records an notable saying of that venerable Bishop Hosius (who was present
at the first general Council of Nyce) unto the same Constantius, to wit:
Command us not (o Emperor) in this kind of affairs; rather learn these
things of us: for God has committed the Empire to your chardge; but has
bequeathed unto us, and put us in trust, with the affairs that appertain unto
his Church. And therefore would not that most renowned Emperor Constantine
the great, judge of Bishops causes, although the Bishops themselves referred
their matter to him, and requested him to compose them, but said; That it did
not belong unto him to judge them, but to be judged by them: whose blessed
steps the most learned and juditious Emperors that followed him, chose rather
to follow then the evil example of his Arrian Son Constantius. For
Iustinianus the elder that famous lawe-maker, faith unto John the second Pope
of that name: In Codice tit. primo.
We do not suffer any thing to pass that belongs unto the state of the
Church, but that we make it known unto your Holiness, who are the head of all
the holy Church.

And Valentinian the Emperor in an Epistle unto Theodosius vvriteth: We must
in our times mainetaine the dignity of ^u^ reverence unto the most blessed
Apostle S. Peter, Extat inter praeambulas ad Council. Chalced.
so farre-forth, as the most happy Bishop of Rome (unto whom antiquity has
yielded the principality of Priestly office above all others) may have place
and power to judge of matters of faith, and of Priests. And thus much by the
way, against the Supremacy of Princes in causes Ecclesiastical. It remains
now that I briefly prove S. Peter to have had this Supremacy in his time, and
that therein the Bishops of Rome do succeed him,

And for a foundation of this Question I take that for an assured truth, which
the best Philosophers do grant, and the practice of the best and greatest
Kingdom has confirmed, to wit: That in one Kingdom it is best to have one
King and supreme governor, assisted with the counsel of his wisest subjects;
which is so well known and confessed generally, that he must needs betaken
for a vvrangler that will deny it: now then to our purpose. Christ's Church
is but one state or spiritual Kingdom, which has but one faith, one
baptism and form of Sacraments, one true religion and solemn manner of
divine service: Now seeing we are not to doubt, but that he (who purchased
himself this one Church, with the shedding of his own most precious blood)
would have it governed in the best sort; therefore we must confess, that he
has ordained one supreme Governor of it. They say, that this supreme Pastor
is Christ himself, and that he is always present with it in spirit, and by
his word; wherefore there needs no deputy, or other in his room. This I
have once before confuted, granting that Christ is present to his Church in
spirit, and that he does inwardly quicken and govern it: but that is not
sufficient; for unless we have one certain person visibly present, to assure
us which is the word of God, and what is the true sense of all doubtful
places of it, we shall never have unity of faith: for if they who mistake the
true sense, must be left to their own judgment, and the direction of their
own spirit, which they believe to be guided with the holy Ghost; then shall
we have so many heresies current in the Church, as there be Archeretikes to
coin and stamp them. The like may be said for Sacraments and sacred rites of
religion, the which without one Supreme Moderatour, cannot be kept uniform: so
that it rests most clear, that our Savior Christ being to leave this world
and to return unto his heavenly Father, he was to commit the high charge of
his only Spouse and Dove, unto the custody and fidelity of one supreme Pastor,
This is confirmed by the example of the old Testament, which was a figure of
the new, Deuteronomy. 17. ab 8. ad 13.
where the sovereign and supreme authority of deciding all doubtful
questions, that should arise about the law, was by Gods express order, given
unto the high Priests; and every Israelite bound under pain of death to obey
him, and stand to his sentence. And that this Supremacy continued all along the
state of the old Testament, even until Christ's days, both the
Magdeburgenses, and Calvin do testify. Centur. 1. lib. 1. c. 7. Lib. 4.
Instit. ca. 6.
But the Protestants object, that some Judges and Kings of Judah, did take upon
them to deal in matters appertayning to religion. I grant, that good Kings
as principal members of the temporalty, ought to have a special regard to the
preservation of the service of God, and to see that matters of religion be duly
ordered; because the peaceable government of their temporal affairs,
depends much upon the concord, piety, and virtue of Ecclesiastical persons:
and therefore they are to admonish and call upon the Bishops and Governors of
the Clergy, to redress all disorders among them, but not to meddle by
themselves as their superiors in spiritual causes: so did those good Kings of
Israel, as it is recorded of one of the best of their King Iosaphat; who
sought for reformation of Church matters, 2. Paralip. 19.
But reserved the Presidency of those things which appertain unto God, unto
Amarias the high Priest. And now a-dayes we give many privileges to Princes:
as the denomination of most Bishops, and higher Magistrates of the Church; that
the two states spiritual and temporal may the better agree, and live more
peaceably together. S. Augustine also does declare it to be the duty of Kings,
to defend the Church and her decrees, and to punish with severe laws all
Heretics, and other condemned by the Church. But directly to the former
objection, let the places of the old Testament be perused, where the authority
and right of Kings be specified, and you shall not find in any one of them,
that they were to have the supreme government in cases Ecclesiastical; but
where the first institution of Kings is mentioned, There they are willed to
receive the examplar and copy of the law, Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 18.
from the Priests of the tribe of Leuy. And in the same Chapter a little
before, All men are bound to take the true exposition of the same law, not
from the King, but from the high Priest of the same tribe of Leuy. Now if the
Jews being but one nation, could not be kept in unity of truth, without one
supreme Governor, what division in faith and religion would there be among all
the nations of Christendom (which be so many, and so diverse) if there were not
one supreme Pastor, to whose final sentence they should all be obedient and
bound to stand? first, then it is evident, that there must be one supreme
Governor in the Church. Now to go one step forward: this supreme authority
was by our Savior Christ JESUS given unto S. Peter, which I will prove both by
the promise, and performance of it. Math. 16. verse. 15.
The promise of this supremacy is recorded in these words: Whom do you say
that I am. Simon Peter answered and said, thou art Christ the Son of the
living God; and JESUS answering, said unto him: blessed art thou Simon
Bar-Iona, because flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father
which is in heaven; And I say to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church, etc. Whence I reason thus: That is the foundation in a
building, which is the head in a body and supreme Governor in a commonweal;
for the foundation is first laid and does uphold all the rest of the building:
but our Savior promises to build the spiritual commonwealth of his Church
upon Peter, as upon a firm Rock and foundation; therefore he meant to make
him the head and chief Pastor under himself of it.

Some answer that Christ said not that he would build his Church upon Peter,
but upon that Rock which was himself; because that Christ is called a Rock.
1. Cor. 10.


Reply. This cannot be: for albeit Christ be the most firm foundation, and
chief corner stone of all that building; yet has it pleased him to appoint a
Deputy and Vicar to govern in his absence under him, and so to communicate his
Titles in a certain measure and degree, unto his servants. Math. 5. verse. 15.
He is the light of the world, and yet says he to his Apostles, You are the
light of the world. He is the Pastor of our souls, and he makes them our
Pastors: so he is the Rock, that sustayneth all parts of the Church by his
own power and virtue, but has imparted to Peter that name; to signify, that
he should be made able to bear the person of his Vicar on earth, and to rule
under him, and by virtue received from him, the whole Church for his time. Now
the very course of the text does convince, that the Rock there specified
cannot be Christ: for it has joined with it, the word, this, and upon this
Rock; which does demonstrate and point out that which was spoken of
immediately before, which was Peter: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock,
etc. Again, what congruity should there be in this sentence, to begin with
Peter, and to make show of bestowing some high reward on him for his noble
confession; and in the end of it, to say that he would build his Church upon
himself? Thirdly, in the next sentence there is no question made, but that
Christ did promise to Peter the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and not to
reserve them to himself: therefore most certain it is, that in the former
sentence he promised to build his Church upon Peter. Finally, in the Syriake
tongue (in which our Savior then spoke) it is so plain, that it cannot be
doubted of: for it is, thou art Cephas, and upon this Cephas I will build my
Church: now the word Cephas signifies a rock or stone. Let us to make the
matter more manifest, hear the judgment of some of the ancient and most
learned Fathers, of both the Greek and Latin Church touching this exposition.

S. Epiphanius. In Ancorate.
Our Lord made Peter (the chief of the Apostles) a firm Rock, upon which the
Church of God is builded.

S. Gregory Nazianzeno. Orat. de mod. seruand. in disput.
Peter is called a Rock, and has the foundations of the Church committed unto
his fidelity.

S. Chrysostom. Hom. 55 in Math.
Our Lord said, thou art Peter, and upon thee will I build my Church.

S. Cyril. Lib. 2. in Job. ca. 2.
Christ foretold that he should not be called Simon but Peter, by the name it
self fitly signifying, that he would build his Church upon him, as on a Rock
and most sure stone.

S. Cyprian. Epist. ad Quirinu^.
Our Lord did choose Peter the first or chiefest, and upon him did he build his
Church.

S. Ambrose says: Sermon. 42
That Peter is called the Rock, both because he first of all laid the
foundation in the actions of faith; and also for that as an immovable stone,
he does sustain and bold together the frame and burden of all the Christian
work.

S. Hierome upon that place: Math. 16
According unto the metaphor of a Rock, it is rightly said to Peter, upon thee
will I build my Church.

S. Augustine sometimes indeed gives an other interpretation; but yet
allows of this, and leaves it to the readers choice, adding: Lib. 1.
retract. and 21.
That in his time that Hymn of S. Ambrose began to be chaunted publicly in
the Church, that the Cock crowing, the Rock of the Church with tears washed
away his fault: so common was that exposition even then, that the Rock of the
Church was taken for a sufficient description of S. Peter's person.

By these plain sentences of the most approved Doctors of the church, may be
expounded some others more obscure, which say that upon Peter's faith or
confession Christ built his Church, in this manner: for the excellency of
Peter's faith and confession, he was chosen to be the rock or foundation of
the Church; which is S. Basils own interpretation, who says: that Peter for
the excellency of his faith, Lib. 2. in Eunomiu^.
received the building of the Church upon him. And in true reason, the Church
being a congregation of men, cannot be builded (...) qualities, but must have a
man of the same nature to be her (...) indeed with such spirit^ all and
heavenly qualities; or else it should not have been a proportionable and well
shaped body, but some monster. Neither can that other shift of the Protestants
(which M. PERKINS insi^^^teth) serve their turn; that (forsooth) what is s^^a
^ere to S. Peter, is understood to have been spoken unto all the rest of the
Apostles. For the holy Ghost in penning this passage, has as fully prevented
this evasion as it was possible, by such a particular description of Peter's
own person, as a curious lawyer could not in so few words have done it more
precisely. For Christ specifieth both his former name of ^in^^^, and his
Fathers name Jonas, and then his own new name Peter; and so particularized
and singled out from the rest, directs his speech to him: I say to thee th^^
art Peter, etc. How could he better have expressed himself to have spoken to
Peter particularly? Again he said before; that Peter had not learned that his
confession of flesh and blood, but by the revelation of his heavenly Father:
whereby he signifies, that Peter had not received his answer from his fellow
Apostles, or spoke it as delivered by conference from them; but out of his own
heart, inspired by the holy Ghost: wherefore, to him alone were his words
following directed. And thus much concerning the promise which our Savior made
unto S. Peter of the Supremacy: now to the words of performance, which are
written in S. John.

Job. c. 21. verse. 15.
JESUS faith to Peter, Simon (the son) of John, do thou love me more then
these? he says to him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee: he says to
him, feed my lambs. He says to him again, Simon of John lo^est thou me? yea
Lord thou know that I love thee? he says to him, feed my lambs. He says
to him the third time, Simon of John love thou me? Peter was strooken fadde,
because he said to him the third time, love thou me? And he said unto him,
Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee: he says unto
him, feed my sheep. Amen, amen, I say to thee, when thou wast younger, thou
did gird thy self, etc. These words have I set down at length, that
every one may first see and be well assured, that they were spoken to S. Peter
only; because Christ does first sever and part him from the rest, saying* Do
thou love me more then these? to wit, then the other Apostles who were then
present. Again, Peter was sad and began to misdoubt himself; which argues
that he took it spoken to himself and shows plainly that he spoke in his
own name only: and thirdly the words following; Amen, I say unto thee, are
without all question spoken particularly to Peter. Now that Christ in giving
him chardge to f^ede his lambs and sheep, did give him the supreme
government over his Church, I prove first by the word pasce, feed, or be thou
Pastor of my flock: for it does signify not bare feeding, but to feed as a
sheepe-heard does his sheep; which is not only to provide them meat, but to
keep them also from the woulfe, to cure their diseases, to lead or drive them
whither he will, briefly to rule and govern them. And this word pasce, and
much more the Greek Poimaine is frequent in holy Scripture, in this sense of
governing: see psalm. 2. verse. 9. Thou shall rule them in an iron rod.
Michaeae 5. verse. 2. Math. 2. verse. 6. Apocal. 19. verse. 15. where the Greek
word, Poimaino, is put for to rule and govern. And in the 77. psalm v. 71.
David was chosen to feed his servant Jacob, and Israel his in heritance, that
was to rule over them, but like a good sheepe-heard, mildly, vigilantly, and
rather for the good of the sheep, then for his own pleasure or profit.

Now that the chief feeding and supreme government of all Christ's flock was
committed unto him, it appears first, by those words of our Savior to him:
Do thou love me more then these? why should he require greater charity in S.
Peter then in the rest of the Apostles, but for that he meant to advance him to
a chardge above the rest? secondly, in that he committed to Peter the feeding
of both sheep, and lambs, that is: of both the Temporalty, signified by the
lambs; and of the Clergy, who be sheep; let us hear S. Leo. Again, Sermon.
3. d^ anniuers. Assumpt. suae.
In that he commits to him absolutely without exception of any, his sheep,
feed my sheep; he makes him Pastor of his whole flock: as S. Bernard (whom
M. PER. often alleges against us in this question) does very learnedly
infer. Lib. 2. de consid. cap. 8.
Thou (says he) wilt ask me how I prove, that both sheep and Pastor are
committed and credited to thee? even by our Lords word. For to whom of all (I
will not say Bishops but Apostles) were the sheep so absolutely and without
limitation committed: if thou love me Peter feed my sheep; he says not the
people of this Kingdom, or of that City, but my sheep: whosoever therefore
will acknowledge himself to be one of Christ's sheep, must submit himself to
be governed by S. Peter, or by some of his successors. You see then by the
very words and circumstances of the text, that the supremacy is given to S.
Peter: let us hear whither the most learned and holy ancient Fathers, have
not so understood them.

S. Cyprian says: To Peter our Lord after his resurrection said, De vnitat.
Eccles.
feed my sheep, and builded his Church upon him alone.

Epiphanius in Ancorato: This is he who heard spoken to him, feed my sheep,
to whom the fold is credited; alluding to that place, Job. 10. verse. 16. Lib.
2. de Sacerd^r.
there shall be one Pastor and one fold.

S. Chrysostom, Why did our Lord shed his blood? truly to redeem those
sheep, the chardge of which be committed to Peter and to his successors. And
a little after: Christ would have Peter endued with such authority, and to be
far above all his other Apostles; for he says, Peter do thou love me more
then these? In cap. 2. verse. 21.
see him also in his learned Commentaries upon that text of S. John.

S. Augustine also upon the same place, says: That he committed his sheep to
Peter to be fed, that is (says he) to be taught and governed. And because he
produces S. Gregory against us, he must give us leave to cite him for us.

Lib. 4. epist. 76.
He says; It is evident to all that know the Gospel, that by our Lords mouth
the chardge of the whole Church is committed unto Peter, Prince of the
Apostles; for unto him it is said, Peter do thou love me? feed my sheep:
to him is it also said, Luc. 22. verse. 31.
Behold Satan has required to sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not; and thou once converted, confirm thy brethren, etc.
By these two places of holy Scripture (to omit for breuities sake twenty
others) it is clear enough to them who desire to see the truth, that S. Peter
by our Saviors own choice and appointment, was not only preferred before all
the rest of the Apostles in some particular gifts, but was made also governor
of his Church.

Now to that which M. PERKINS lets fall by the way, That though Peter
excelled the rest of the twelve, yet Paul passed him every way: this said he
boldly and barely without any author, or any show of proof; but let us in
kindness help him to prove it. Galat. 2. verse. 9.
First, S. Paul says: James. Cephas, and John, who seemed to be the pillars,
gave me and Barnabas the right hand of fo^tery: now if he were fellow with
the best, he was not inferior to Peter.

Answer. In an orderly fellowship there is ordinarily one head and chief
commander, and so S. Paul might be very well admitted into that holy society
and fellowship of preaching the Gospel, and yet be under the President and
Master of that College or company, S. Peter.

Secondly, S. Paul further says: That the Gospel of the prepuce, (that is,
the preaching unto the Gentiles) was committed unto him, as the chardge of the
Israelites was unto S. Peter: therefore he was S. Peter's equal at least, and
perhaps his better too, because a larger commission was grounted unto him.

Answer. A partition of preaching the Gospel unto all nations, was made by
common consent among the Apostles, and it seems that S. Paul (who was called
afterward) was admitted in S. Peter's circuit or quarter; vvhereupon for the
more orderly proceeding in that blessed work, it was agreed upon by them,
that S. Paul should have principal care of the Gentiles, and S. Peter of the
Jews: not that each of them might not also deal with both Jews and Gentiles,
(for S. Peter was the first of all others, that by revelation from heaven did
convert the Gentiles; as he testifies saying: Act. 15. verse. 7.
Brethren you know that God chose, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear
the word of God and believe:) yet because men commonly do most tender and
affect that, which is more specially committed to their charge, to S. Paul
were the Gentiles recommended, as to S. Peter the care of the Jews. But this
might be very well done, and yet S. Paul be inferior unto S. Peter, and owe
him a reverent duty in the cases of supremacy: as the Bishops of Canterbury and
London have charges of several men and places; yet is London to acknowledge
Canterbury as his superior. And if the other Apostles, who had also their
divisions and Diocesses a part, were nevertheless inferior unto S. Peter: so
might S. Paul be, notwithstanding his distinct charge.

Thirdly, S. Paul resisted S. Peter to his face and reprehended him for
walking, amiss: therefore he was rather his superior.

Answer. Not so: for an inferior by way of brotherly correction, may in
decent sort reprehend his superior, if he see him not to take good courses: I
know well that S. Hierome following the opinion of most of the Greek
Fathers, does clear S. Peter of all fault; holding it to have been but a set
match between the two great Apostles, that one of them for the instruction of
others, should reprehend the other. But admitting with S. Augustine that S.
Peter was worthy blame, and therefore justly reprehended by S. Paul; yet thence
will follow no derogation to S. Peter's dignity, but great commendation of his
humility, as the holy Fathers of that opinion do gather. Of it thus writes S.
Cyprian: Epist. 71. ad Quintum.
Neither did Peter whom our Lord chose the first, and upon whom he built his
Church, when Paul disputed with him about circumcision, arrogate to himself
any thing, saying: that he bad primacy, and therefore the latter disciple ought
rather to obey him; but took it in good part.

S. Augustine says: Peter gave to his posterity a more rare and holy example,
Epist. 19. ad Hiero^.
that they should not disdain to be corrected of their juniours, then Paul;
that inferiors (saving their charity) might confidently resist their
superiors for the defense of truth.

And S. Gregory the great, speaking of S. Peter, says: Hom. 18. in Ezech.
He yielded unto his inferior brother, and in that matter became a follower of
his juniour, to the end he might excel in this point: that he who chiefest in
the top of the Apostleship, might be chiefest also in humility. Thus much of
S. Peter's supremacy: Now that the Popes of Rome do succeed him in the same
authority.

First, that this Monarchy and sovereign authority of one over all the rest,
was not to expire and end with S. Peter (as M. PER. dreameth) but to continue
in Christ's Church until the end of the world, is clear and evident to them
who consider, that this Supremacy was not given unto S. Peter principally for
his own honor and advancement; but for the benefit of the Church, to preserve
and maintain unity and peace among all her loving and obedient children,
according unto that of S. Hierome: Among the twelve Apostles one is chosen, L.
1. cont. Iouinian.
that a head being established, the occasion of schism and division might be
prevented and taken away. If therefore it was thought necessary unto the
vvisdome of God, Christ JESUS, to appoint one head among the Apostles, and a
few of the best Christians (who had the first fruits of his holy spirit) to
cut off dissension, and to maintain peace; how much more need has there
been ever sithence, of one supreme Pastor and moderatour of controversies,
when the number of Christians is so greatly increased, and such variety of
nations are ingrafted and incorporated into it? when through the diversity of
wits and judgments and the decay of charity, there must needs be a thousand
times more need of the supreme authority of some one, to hold all the rest
together in the unity of faith and religion. Again, in the old Testament and
law of Moses (which was a figure of the new) the same form of government by
one head and final judge in spiritual matters, was at the first established,
and continued ever after without alteration, till Christ's first coming: Even
so must the same Ecclesiastical Hierarchy (which our blessed Savior has
demised, framed, and founded) stand always firm and inviolable, until his
second coming; for he has built it upon so firm a Rock, that hell gates
shall not prevail against it: which may be further confirmed, if we weigh
well of what moment and importance it is, to alter and change the form of
government. For it is of no less moment, then to alter the whole estate of
Christ's commonweal; the very essence, form, and unity of a public state,
consisting principally in the manner and order of ruling of it: which
alteration and variety to imagine to have happened in Christ's Church, is to make
many seames in his unsown garments, or rather to rippe it, and rent the unity
thereof into many pieces. It being therefore a most certain truth, that the
same supreme government which S. Peter had over the rest, was to continue
always in Christ's Church; it follows as plainly, that the Bishops of Rome
were to succeed him in that sovereign authority: for the very light of
nature and common custom of all nations does teach us; that he who succeeds
unto another in any established estate and calling, does at his lawful
enstalement therein, enter into full possession of all the rights, dignities, and
privileges thereunto belonging. For example, when one is crowned King of any
nation, he presently there upon is endowed with all the power and prerogatives,
which his Predecessors in that Kingdom enjoyed before him. And to speak of
spiritual Prelates; who doubts but that as soon as any Ecclesiastical
person is chosen and confirmed (for example) Archbishop of Canterbury, but that
forthwith he is not only made governor of that Diocese, but also
Metrapolitane and supreme Pastor of the Church of England; his very succession
in that Sea, making him (as it were) inheritour unto all the privileges and
prerogatives of his Predecessors in that seat? Even so the Bishops of Rome
succeeding unto S. Peter in that Apostolical Sea, do inherit and succeed
him in that supreme authority, which Christ gave unto S. Peter, for to be
continued in his Church until the worlds end. Now to avouch as some
desperately do, that S. Peter did not die at Rome, nor never was at Rome; is
so gross and palpable an untruth, auerred by mere guess and fantasy,
contrary to the evident testimony of all ancient fathers, and repugnant unto
the express and sensible monuments of the place of his execution, of his
relics, and Churches (builded by Constantine the great to the perpetual
remembrance of them) in the City of Rome, yet to this day most famously known
through the world: this their assertion is (I say) so blockish and impudent,
that it were but lost time to stand about the proof of it; for he that is so
senseless as to believe such a paradoxe, deserves small pains for his
recovery.

But for an vpshot of this question, let us hear the opinions of the principal
Doctors of the East Church, who of all men are most likely not to attribute any
such supremacy unto a Bishop of the West Church, if they had thought it due
unto any Patriarch of theirs, or if they had not judged it to be a clear case
in true Divinity, that such sovereign authority was due unto that one chief
Pastor in Gods Church. The first shall be one the auncientest of them, that
most worthy champion of Christ Athanasius, who was also one of the chiefest
Patriarchs of the East Church, as being Bishop of Alexandria: He in a special
treatise (of Dionysius one of his predecessors in that Sea) shows; how he
went to Rome to another Dionysius then Pope, there to have his cause heard and
determined: which he would not have done if he had not acknowledged the Bishop
of Rome for his superior, and one, to whose final sentence, all of the East
Church as well as of the West, were bound to obey. And in his Epistle unto
Pope Foelix he has these words: God has therefore placed you and your
predecessors (Apostolical Prelates) in the tower of superiority, and has
commanded you to take charge of all Churches, that you may succor and help
us. This Epistle indeed of Athanasius M. PER. does mislike, but because he
shows not wherefore, his authority will not serve to discred it it. But he
says as much in another of his, and of all the Bishops of Aegipt joined with
him to Pope Mark, to wit: That they al with all committed to their charge, were
and ever would be obedient unto the Bishop of Rome. Lib. 3. hist. cap. 7.
It is also recorded by the Ecclesiastical Hystoriographer Zozemene, how that
both Athanasius, Patriarch of Alexandria, and Paul, Patriarch of
Constantinople, with diverse others of the Greek Church, being by the Arrians
banished out of their own Bishoprics, did fly unto the Bishop of Rome for
refuge: Who (as that author witnesses) because the care of all did belong
unto him, through the dignity of his place and seat, did restore their
Churches to every of them. Athanasius also in his second Apology, has recorded
these words of the same most holy Pope Julius, to the Bishops of the East: Are
ye ignorant this to be the custom, that first of all you must write unto us,
that from hence, it may be defined what is just. Wherefore, if there had been
any such suspicion against the Bishop, you ought to have related it to our
Church of Rome: thus much of S. Athanasius, the first of the four Greek
Doctors.

Now to the second S. Gregory Nazianzene, who had been also Patriarch of
Constantinople; In c^r^a. de vita sua. Epist. 52. ad Athan.
he says, That the Church of Rome had always mainetayned the true faith and
opinion of God, as it became the City that was superior to all the world.

His divine companion S. Basil, aduertiseth Athanasius, That he thought it good
to write unto the Bishop of Rome, to hear their matters, and by the decree of
his judgment, to determine them: and because it was hard to send from thence,
that the Pope would give to certain chosen men authority to compose their
controversies, and to reuerse and make void the acts of the Council of
Arimini. See what soueraignety this learned ancient Father of the East Church,
does attribute unto the Church of Rome.

The very same does that golden mouth, and most learned and holy Doctor S.
Chrysostom acknowledge, vvriting unto Innocentius the first, Pope of Rome:
Epist. 1. ad Innocentium.
Beseeching him that he would repeal and make void the wicked fact of the
Patriarch of Alexandria, with a whole Council of the East, and lay the
Ecclesiastical censures and punishments upon them; which every man knows
that he could not have done, if he had not power and jurisdiction over all the
East Church.

Unto these four most firm pillars of the Greek Church, let us join one
neighbor of theirs, little inferior unto them for either standing, learning,
or authority, I mean Theodorete, a Bishop in Asia that had 800. Churches under
him. He notwithstanding his distance from Rome, writes thus unto Leo the
first: Epist. ad Leonem.
I do expect the sentence of your Apostolical Sea, and in humble wise do
beseech your Holiness, that your just and right judgment may help me
appealing unto you; and that you will command me to run unto you, to verify
that my doctrine is consonant to the Apostles. And in another Epistle to
Renatus a Priest of Rome, he writes: That the Heretics had spoiled him of his
Bishopric, and cast him out of the Cities, without any reverence or respect
of his gray-hayres: wherefore (says he) I request you, that you will persuade
the most holy Archbishop Leo, that he will use his Apostolical authority, and
command us to come to your Council; for that holy seat of Rome boldeth the
stearne of governing all the Churches in the world. Well then to conclude this
long and intricate question, seeing the Bishops of Rome from all antiquity (as
is to be seen in their decretall Epistles) have ever challenged this right of
Supremacy over the whole Church, as the successors of S. Peter: and that the
very Patriarchs and principal Prelates, even of the East Church (who were
likelyest to have resisted if they had seen any cause why) have from the very
beginning of the free practice of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, acknowledged
and confessed the same; and that finally the greatest, vvisest, and best
Emperors of both the Latin and Greek Church, have (as you have heard before)
declared the same right to appertain unto the said Roman Sea, the matter
cannot be but clear enough to all that list not to remain vvranglers, where
the right of the Supremacy rests.

OF THE EFFICACY OF THE SACRAMENTS.
OUR CONSENT.
M. PERKINS Page 295.
THe first conclusion. We teach and believe that the Sacraments are signs to
represent Christ with his benefits to us.

The second conclusion. We teach further, that the Sacraments are indeed
instruments, whereby God offers and gives the foresaid benefits to us.

THE DIFFERENCE.
THe Catholics teach, that the Sacraments are true and proper isntrumental
causes, which being moved by God thereunto, do produce and give grace to the
worthy receiver. Even as the pen does make the letter, or as the axe does cut
the wood, being thereto applied by the workman: so (for example) does the
Sacrament of baptism wash away the sins of the baptized, being by God
thereunto ordained, and rightly used by the Minister. But M. PERKINS holds,
that the Sacraments have no operation to that effect of forgiveness of sins,
but are only outward means, which being applied unto the party, God of
himself does immediately purge him from sin, and not by means of the
Sacraments. Again, Whereas we require a fit disposition in the receiver to
make him capable of the grace presented, and exhibited unto him, by the
Sacrament; He holds, that all the virtue of the Sacrament consists in the
receiver, Who beholding those signs from God in the hands of the Minister,
must conceit and imagine: First, that God himself by his own mouth, does
promise him severally and by name, remission of his sins, the sign and
pledge whereof, is that Sacrament; which the mind considering reasons thus:
he that uses the elements aright, in faith and repentance, shall receive grace
thereby; but I use the elements aright, therefore shall I receive from God
increase of grace. Thus then faith is confirmed, not by the work done, but by
a kind of reasoning; the proof whereof is borrowed from the elements, being
signs and pledges of Gods mercy.

Contrarylie we hold, that the Sacrament it self conferreth and does give
great grace, so that there be no impediment or let of it, by reason of the
receivers evil disposition. Now if the receiver come thoroughly well prepared
with great humility, charity, and attention, he then over and besides the
ordinary grace of the Sacrament, shall receive more grace according unto the
measure of his own preparation.

Lastly, whereas we teach the very grace of justification to be given in some
Sacraments, as in Baptism and Penance, M. PER. says no; because A man of
years must first believe, and be justified, before he can be a meet pertaker
of any Sacrament. But what will he then say unto Infants? must not they
receive the grace of justification by Baptism, before they have wit to
believe, and to reason in such sort as he prescribes?

Before I come unto the arguments of either party, I thought fit to give the
reader to understand, that whether the Sacraments be true physical instruments
of grace or no, Lib. 2. de Sacram. in gener. cap. 11.
is not a matter of faith, as Cardinal Bellarmine declares; so we hold them
to be true moral causes of the same grace: to which M. PER. yielded his
consent; wherefore I will not be long in this question. Secondly to perceive
well the state of the question, you must observe what difference there is
between a physical and moral instrument. That then may be called a moral
instrument, which moves the principal agent to do any thing, albeit he use
not that thing it self as a means to do it vvithall: so that if God be
effectually moved to bestow grace upon him that receives a Sacrament, by the
sight of the Sacrament, though he give not the grace by the work of the
Sacrament, but immediately from him felfe, the Sacrament is the moral means of
the same grace; but it cannot be called the physical or natural instrument of
that grace, unless God do use and apply the Sacrament it self, as the mean
and instrument to convey the same grace into the soul of the receiver. Now,
we hold it more agreeable with the word of God and sentences of the holy
Fathers, and more for the dignity of the Sacraments themselves, to say that God
by them as by true natural instruments, does convey his graces into our soul:
M. PERKINS goes about to prove the contrary, thus.

The word preached, and the Sacraments do differ in the manner of giving
Christ unto us, because the word works by the ear, and the Sacraments by the
eye: otherwise, for the giving it self they differ not, Christ saying; that in
the very word is eaten his own flesh: and what can be said more of the Lords
supper? Augustine says, that believers are pertakers of the body and blood in
baptism: Sermon. ad Infant.
so says Hierome to E^^bia. Now upon this it follows, that seeing the work
done in the word preached, conferreth not grace; neither does the work done in
the Sacrament confer grace.

I answer that his own first word must stand, wherein he said that the word
preached and the Sacraments do differ in the manner of giving us Christ's
grace: for preaching does by persuasion draw us unto grace and goodness; but
the Sacraments as conduite-pipes, do take and derive grace from Christ's
passion, and convey it into the souls of all them, who do not stop up those
divine conduits by their own default, and want of due preparation. To his idle
and ill shapen commation I answer, that Christ's body may be eaten two vvayes:
either really as in the blessed Sacrament; or else spiritually, by believing in
Christ and being incorporate into his mystical body: and in this second sort
Infants in baptism, and all true believers do eat the body of Christ. But
how this proves that the word and the Sacraments do give grace after the
same manner, is there any man that can tell?

His second reason: I baptize you with water to repentance, Math. 3. verse. 11.
but he that comes after me shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with
fire. Hence (says M PER.) it is manifest, that grace proceeds not from any
act of the Sacrament: for John though he do not disjoyne himself and his
action from Christ, and the action of the spirit; yet does he distinguish them
plainly in number, persons, and effect.

Answer. He that can, let him pike some English out of this, and show how it
makes for M. PERKINS. But to the purpose: I answer, that S. John there does
put a plain difference between his own baptism, and the baptism of Christ,
saying of his own: That it was the baptism of water, nor giving the holy
Ghost, as the baptism of Christ should do; which also most of the Fathers
both Greek and Latin do playnelie testify, and the words of the text do
evidently confirm the same. Whence I reason thus: S. John's baptism was such
an instrument and means of grace, Mat. 1.
as M. PER. describes (for there was a promise of remission of sins, to him
that received it with faith and repentance;) yet was it nothing comparable
unto Christ's baptism, which is now only used: therefore Christ's baptism
does over and besides the representation of grace which was in S. John's
baptism, effectually convey the same grace of the holy Ghost into our souls,
by the very applying of it to us; so that this worthy argument of his,
proceeds wholly against himself.

He goes forward and says, That Paul who trauayled of the Galatians, and
begat them by the Gospel, 1. Cor. 3. verse. 7.
says of himself: that he is not any thing, not only as he was a man, but as
be was a faithful Apostle; thereby excluding the whole evangelical Ministry,
from the least part of divine operation or efficacy in conferring grace.

Answer. This is nothing to the purpose, for S. Paul speaks there of
preaching the Gospel; and we treat here of ministering the Sacraments.
Preaching (as has been said) does not confer grace of it self, but by
persuasion; no more does the preacher, and so may be said to be nothing in that
work of producing grace and faith in the hearer: but the Sacraments conferring
grace, he that administreth the Sacrament, does really concur as an
instrument of producing the same grace. Moreover, such an instrument may be
sa^^ to be nothing, because they themselves with all their endowments can do
nothing in that matter, unless they be thereunto applied and moved by the
principal agent, which is God: as a pen, or other instrument be it never so
good, can do nothing of it self, and therefore may be said to be nothing.

M. PERKINS third reason: The Angels, nay the flesh of the son of God has
not any quickening virtue from it self, but all his virtue is from the
Godhead: now if there be no effi^^cy in the flesh of Christ, but from the
Godhead, how shall bodily actions about bodily elements confer grace
immediately?

Answer. This is too too simple; for a base bodily thing may convey grace
immediately, as an instrument of God, when as the highest creature has not
power of it self to produce and confer the same grace, as principal agent:
as a mean subject by special commission and authority from the Prince, may
have power of life and death; which the greatest Peer in the realm has not
of his own authority, without some privilege from the Prince.

Romans 4.
His fourth reason: Paul stands much upon this, to prove that justification by
faith is not conferred by the Sacraments; and gathers it, because Abraham was
first justified, and afterward received circumcision, the sign and seal of
his righteousness. Now the general condition of all Sacraments is one, and
the same: and that baptism succeeds circumcision.

Answer. He mistaketh greatly S. Paul's discourse, which is nothing less then
that he says, but to prove that neither by the observation of Moses law, nor
yet by the moral carriage of the Gentiles men were to he saved, but by faith
in Christ, and obedience unto his Gospel. Yea, he is so far off from denying
justification to be conferred by the Sacraments, that in the same epistle he
teaches us to be justified by baptism, saying: We are buried together with
Christ by baptism into death, Cap. 6. verse. 4.
that as he is risen again from the dead, etc. so we may walk in newness of
life. Again, if Baptism be but a sign and seal of righteousness, how
comes the infant (that cannot for lack of discretion believe) to that
righteousness, whereof Baptism is the seal? Abraham in deed was justified
before he was circumcised, because he was above 70. years old before he
heard of any circumcision; but thence it follows not, that the infants
(circumcised at eight days old) were justified before they were circumcised.
And so it may be, that Cornelius the Italian Captain was justified, before he
heard a word of the Sacrament of baptism, but that is nothing to prove or
disprove the ordinary vvorking of the Sacraments; for before the lawefull
publication of any law, no man is bound to observe that law: so that Abraham
before he had heard of circumcision, and Cornelius knowing nothing of Baptism,
were not bound to them, but had other means of justification according to Gods
will; and afterward received those Sacraments in obedience to God, both in
testimony of their former righteousness, and to increase the same grace. Hence
it does not follow, but that the ordinary vvorking of both circumcision and
baptism in infants, was and is, to purge them from original sin, and to
power the grace of justification into their souls. But let us admit al to be
true which he says, yet this argument helps not the maine point which he is
to prove, to wit; that the Sacraments do not produce grace into our souls:
for albeit they produced not the first justifying grace, as the Sacrament of
the Alrar and some others do not; yet they may truly produce and work in us
an increase of Gods grace, and so be true physical isntrumental causes of
grace, according as the Catholics hold. Consequently, you may judge what a
pithy reason his fourth is, which may be answered four manner of ways.

His fifth is the judgment of the Church. Basil: De spiritu sancto 15.
If there be any grace in the water, it is not from the nature of the water,
but from the presence of the spirit.

Could any man have produced a witness to speak more formally against
himself? M PER. holds, that there comes no virtue from the water to
sanctify the soul: S. Basil (the foreman of his quest) auerreth, that grace
comes from the water, and is in the water: marry, that grace the water has
not of his own nature, but from the spirit of God there present.

In 14. Esaiae.
His second author. Hierome says: Man gives water, and God gives the holy
Ghost.

This is true, but whether God gives that grace by the ministry of the man,
and means of the Sacrament, S. Hierome in that place says neither yea nor no;
and therefore his testimony helps not M. PER. cause. But in his 83. Ad
Oceanum. Tract. 80. in Johan.
Epistle he does at large declare, what efficacy baptism and the water
sanctified in Christ has.

Augustine said, Water touches the body, and washes the heart.

Answer. His words are: What great force and virtue is this of water, that it
touches the body and cleanses the heart? can any thing be more clear and
forcible to ouerturne M. PERKINS position, then to say that the water of
baptism washes and purifieth man's heart? this sentence scalded his lips,
wherefore he would gladly shake and shift it off by another place of the same
Father, Tract. 6. in epist. Iohannis.
where S. Augustine teaches, That water sometimes signifies the gifts of the
holy Ghost. Be it so: what then? does it therefore signify the holy Ghost in
all places? or in that where he says, That it touches the body and washes
the soul? it cannot be: for he speaks of that water, with which first the
body is washed, and that is not the holy Ghost, but natural water. But at least
in the other place he does not say out altogether, as much as he did in the
first. True: and who is he that treating often of one matter, that is very
copious and large, but that sometime he handles one point of it, sometimes
another: here he discusseth one and the same thing more exactly, there more
slightly, as occasion served? wherefore, it is no reason to say that in one
place he said not so much of this matter, therefore when he spoke more
particularly of i^ in another, you must expound him by that place where he
spoke less of it. And thus much in answer unto M. PERKINS reasons.

Now to some few arguments for the Catholic party. He proposes one for us,
thus: Remission of sins and salvation are ascribed to the Sacrament of
baptism; Act. 22. verse. 17.
Be baptized and wash away thy sins: Ephesians. 5. verse. 26.
Cleansing the Church, by the lauer of water in the word of life. Tit. 3. verse.
5.
He has saved us by the lauer of regeneration: 2. Tim. 1. verse. 6.
The grace of God was given to Timothy, by the imposition of hands. Which
phrase of cleansing, and saving by the lauer or bath of water, imports no
less then that by water, as a true physical instrument, that grace of God was
convayed into the souls of the baptized; which may be confirmed by many the
like places, as where it is said: Ioh. 3. verse. 5.
Unless a man be borne a new of water and the holy Ghost, where our
regeneration and new birth is ascribed unto the working of water; which were
all very improper speeches, if they di^import no more, then that when water is
applied unto us, then does God immediately from himself and not by any means
of the water, sanctify us: so that first we have the Scripture for us in his
proper native signification.

M. PERKINS answers, That salvation is ascribed unto the Sacraments as to the
word of God, that is: as they are instruments to signify, seal, and exhibit
to the believing mind the foresaid benefits, but indeed the proper
instrument whereby salvation is apprehended, is faith. And Sacraments are but
props of faith, furthering salvation two ways: First, because by their
signification they help to nourish and preserve faith. Secondly, because they
seal grace and salvation to us; yea, God gives grace and salvation unto us,
when we use them well: so that we believe the word of promise made to the
Sacrament, whereof they are seals. This his answer I have put down at large,
that the juditious reader may see, how many words he uses, to answer not
one word to purpose; for here is indeed an explication of their own doctrine,
but not any reason, why we should not take the words of holy Scripture before
alleged, according unto the proper manner of the phrase, whereby they assign
water to be the real means, and true instrument of our salvation: and thus
much of our first argument.

The second shall directly confute his answer, thus: If Sacraments do work
like unto the word of God preached, and only exhibit and feale unto the
believing mind, the benefits by them promised; then he that cannot understand
such signs and promises, and has not wit to conceive and believe them, can
in no case receive any such Sacrament well and worthily (as if the word were
preached never so perfectly unto one of no capacity or understanding, it would
work nothing with him, by reason of his want of understanding:) but the
Sacrament of baptism and some others, given unto them who have not sufficient
wit and reason to understand the meaning of it, as (for example) unto infants;
yet do nevertheless work their regeneration and salvation: therefore, it is
most manifest and evident, that the Sacraments of their own proper force, as
the instruments of God do work our salvation, without the help of the
receivers faith. This is confirmed by the testimony of those ancient Fathers,
who hold that one special cause why our Savior would be baptized was, that by
touching the water, he might give it virtue to purge and cleanse us from sin:
so witnesses S. Ambrose, Lib. 2. in Lucam 12. S. Gregory Nazianzene, Oratione
in sancta lumina. Chrysostom, Hom. 25. in Ioha^nem. Venerable Bede, in 3.
Lucae. Again, it is the common opinion of the ancient Doctors, that the
Sacraments are conduites to convay the merits of Christ's passion into our
souls; yea, are said to have flowed out of Christ's side opened on the Cr^sse:
they therefore doubted not but that they had a spiritual virtue in them, to
cleanse and sanctify our minds. But let us hear some few of them in formal
terms delivering the same doctrine which we teach: you have heard already
S. Basil and S. Augustine, cited by M. PERKINS.

Gregory Nyssene, speaking of Aarons rod, and such like things by which
miracles were wrought, says: Orat. de Baptismo.
And all these things being without sense and life, yet having received virtue
from God, were means of great miracles: even so, water being nothing but
water, having received the heavenly blessing, does re^ewe a man unto a
spiritual regeneration. And further, That as seed is the cause of carnal
generation: so water that is blessed, is the isntrumental cause of man's
p^^gation and illumination.

S. Chrysostom. Hom. 25 in Johan.
That which the womb is to the infant, that is water unto the faithful: for
in water we are formed and made.

S. Cyril of Alexandria. Lib. 2. in Johan. cap. 42.
Even as water being heated with fire, does burn like fire it self: even so,
water wherewith the body is sprinkled in baptism, by the working of the holy
Ghost is reformed, and raised up to a divine power and virtue.

Tertullian. Lib. de Baptismo.
Of old, water gave life, that is, water brought forth living creatures; that
it be not strange, that water in baptism know how to give life.

S. Ambrose. Lib. 2. de Poenitentia cap. 2.
It seemed impossible that water should wash away sin: and Naaman the Syrian
did not believe that his leprosy could be washed away with water; but God has
made possible, that which was impossible, who has bestowed so great grace upon
us.

S. Siluester (as Nycephorus has recorded) speaks thus of baptism: Lib. 7.
hystor. cap. 33.
This water having received by the invocation of the blessed Trinity, heavenly
virtue; even as it washes the body without, so does it within cleanse the
soul from filth and corruption, and make it brighter then the Sunne-beames. So
that it is most conformable both unto the holy Scriptures, and the ancient
Fathers, to affirm and hold, that the Sacraments do really contain and
convay the graces of God into our souls, as his true and proper instruments.

OF SAVING FAITH.
M. PERKINS Page 305.
HEre follows a Chapter, which for the most part does nothing but repeat
points of doctrine, which has been particularly handled in the questions of
Justification, Satisfaction, and Merits, and above twenty times touched by the
way in his book; therefore a tedious and loathsome thing it is to me here
again to hear of them: yet, because the man thinks that in these points the
principal glory of the new Gospel consists, and that there fore they are
always to be inculcated in season and out of seasorr, I will briefly run
them once more over, showing (as he does) only wherein we differ, without
repeating the arguments, which are to be seen in their proper places.

To come to the matter he puts down fiu^ conclusions. The first conclusion.
The Catholics teach i^ to be the property of faith to believe the whole word
of God, and especially the redemption of mankind by Christ.

M. PERKINS DIFFERENCE.
THey believe indeed all the written word of God, and more then all: for they
believe the books Apocryphal, and unwritten Traditions.

Answer. Touching unwritten Traditions, see that Chapter in the first part. M.
PER. says here, Because they come to us by the hands of men, they cannot come
within the compass of our faith. Then I say upon the same ground; the written
word cannot come within the compass of our belief, because it also comes
unto us by the hands of men. And as the Apostles and their Scholars are to be
credited, when they delivered the written word unto us for Gods pure word: so
are they to be believed, when they taught the Church these points of Gods
word unwritten, to be embraced as the true word of God, although not written,
but committed to the hearts of the faithful. And when we have the testimony of
ancient Councels, or of many holy Fathers, that these points of doctrine were
by Tradition delivered unto the Church by the Apostles; we as firmly believe
them, as if they were written in the holy Scriptures. For which books of
Scripture be Canonical, which not; and what is the true meaning of hard
places in Scripture, we know no other way of infallible certainty, then by the
declaration of the Catholic Church: which we therefore as well believe, telling
us these things were delivered from the Apostles by Tradition, as those
things in vvriting. And that such credit is to be given to the Catholic
Church, the Apostles Creed witnesses, which bids us believe the Catholic
Church. Now touching those books of holy Scripture, which were some
hundredth years after Christ doubted off by some of the ancient Fathers,
whether they were Canonical or no, thus we say: That albeit it were
undetermined by the Church until S. Augustines time, whether they were
Canonical or no, and so were by diverse ancient Fathers, though not condemned
as Apocryphal, yet not comprehended within the Canon of assured Scriptures:
notwithstanding, that matter being in a Council holden at Carthage (where
among many other learned Bishops S. Augustine was present) thoroughly debated,
Council. Cartag. 3. cap. 47.
those books doubted off before, were found by the holy Ghost and them, to be
true Canonical Scripture; and afterward were by the sixth general Council
(that confirmed this Council holden at Carthage) declared and delivered to the
whole Church for Canonical. Now, as we received at the first the other books
of Canonical Scripture, on the ^^edit of the Catholic Church: even so ought
we to do these, she having declared them to be such; yea, the Protestants
themselves have admitted many books of the new Testament, which were
doubted off for three hundred years after Christ: why then do they not as
well receive them of the old? The difference betwixt us is, that they only of
passion and private fancy admit these, and reject those: whereas we of
obedience relying upon the judgment of the whole Church, admit those books
for Canonical, which the Catholic Church has declared for such. And thus
much of the first conclusion.

Now to the second, touching salvation by Christ alone, wherein the
Protestants either cannot understand, or will not report our doctrine aright.
We confess that Christ JESUS has merited the redemption and salvation of all
mankind; yet say we further, that not one man is saved through Christ, unless
he for his own part first believe in Christ, if he be of years, and be
content to do all those things that Christ has commanded us to do: so that
to salvation two things are required, the first and principal is Christ's
mediation, the second is the applying of Christ's mediation and merits unto us;
without this latter, the former will stand no man in steed. Now to be made
partaker of Christ's merits, we must not only believe in him as the Protestants
teach, but also keep his commandments, and by good works deserve heaven;
otherwise according to Christ's decree, we shall never come thither, as in the
question of Merits has been plentifully proved out of the holy scriptures: so
we teach then, that besides Christ's sufferings and merits we must have some of
our own, or else we shall never be partakers of Christ's.

And M. PERKINS cannot be excused from a vvilfull corruption of Gods word, when
he affirms S. Paul to say; We are not saved by such works as God has
ordained men regenerated to walk in: for those be not the words of the text,
but his peevish construction, S. Paul putting a plain distinction between
works that we are not saved by, and works that we must walk in; calling
these later good works, and the other barely works. To the other text I say,
that we have no righteousness of our own strength, or by the virtue of Moses
law; but through the mercy of God, and Christ's merits, we have true
righteousness given us by baptism. Christ indeed by himself and his own
sufferinges, not by sacrifice of Goats or Calves, has meritoriously washed
away our sins, that is: deserved of God that they should be washed away; but
formally he has washed away our sins by infusion of Christian righteousness
into our souls. He that will see more of this, let him read the question of
Justification. And where as M. PER. says, that all grace of God powered into
our hearts, is by the corruption of our hearts defiled; he little knows the
virtue of Gods grace, which so cleanses and purifieth our heart and soul,
that it makes it whiter then snow, the temple of the holy Ghost, Psalm. 50. 1.
Cor. 6. 2. Tim. 2. verse. 21.
sanctified and apt to all good works; as the word of God witnesses.

The third conclusion is about Christ's imputative justice: we hold that no
man is formally justified by that justice which is in Christ, which is
infinite, and would make us as just as Christ himself is; but that God
through Christ's merits, does bestow upon every righteous man a certain
measure of justice, wherewith his soul being purged from sin, and adorned
with all honesty, fit for his degree and calling, is made righteous in Gods
sight, and worthy of the Kingdom of heaven.

M. PERKINS holds, that Every just man has faith created in his heart,
whereby he lays hand on Christ's justice, and drawing that to himself,
makes it his own. He proves it by these words of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 1.
verse. 30.
Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption.

I answer, that Christ is in that place so made our righteousness, as he is
made our wisdom: now no man holds that he is made our wisdom by
imputation, therefore is he not our righteousness by imputation. The Apostles
meaning is, that Christ is the procurer and meritorious cause of both our
wisdom and justice, and of whatsoever other spiritual gifts we enjoy. And
this righteousness which God bestows on us in this life, is sufficient to
enable us to keep Gods law, (as I have proved in several questions before)
and to make us worthy of life everlasting.

The fourth conclusion: Catholics hold it the surest course, to put their
trust in the mercy of God and merits of Christ for their salvation: yet in
sobri^t^ they may have confidence both in their own merittes, and in other
good men's prayers.

That is, because God saves none of years, who do not merit life everlasting
by using his grace well: therefore a virtuous honest man, may have some
confidence in the good course of his life. Marry, because we are not thoroughly
assured of our own good works past; neither can we tell how long we shall
persevere in that Godly course of life: therefore, we rather stand in fear,
when we consider our own works, and our whole confidence is in the mercies
of God, who for Christ's sake calls most unworthy creatures to his grace,
and does never for sake any endeavoring to continue in his service. Neither
does that visitation of the sick in the Dutch tongue, found in a dusty corner,
any whit help them: for we teach all (especially notorious sinners that
vvallowe in sin until their dying day, such as it seems that visit was
made for) to trust, not in their own naughtiness or little goodness, who have
a hundredth times more evil then good in them; but in the infinite mercy of God
and inestimable merits of our Saviors death and passion: which lets not
but that a good man may have some confidence in his own merits, and in the
prayer of Saints. And M PER. considers little what he says, when he
affirms, That we make that our God, in which we put our trust: for albeit we
must trust only in God, as in the author of all good things; yet may we trust
in diverse other things, as in the means of our salvation. Do not the
Protestants trust in Christ's passion? and yet I hope they made not his passion
their God. Have they not a confidence and trust in their lively faith? yes, I
vvarrant you, or else they would not be far from desperation: so
notwithstanding his vain babbling, Catholics well grounded in virtue, may
have some confidence in their own good deeds, and in the prayer of Saints, as
orderly means to attain unto salvation, albeit we trust in God only, as in
the author of it.

The fifth and last conclusion, That we must not only believe in general, the
promises of life everlasting, but apply them to us in particular by hope. M.
PER. somewhat faintly excepteth against this, and says: That by faith we must
assure our selves of our salvation present, and by hope continue the certainety
of it. Marry, he adds further, That they teach not that every man living
within the precincts of their Church, is certain of his salvation by faith;
but that he ought so t^ be, and must endeavor to attain thereto.

Why then, that man has not the faith of Protestants, which cannot but apply
unto themselves in particular the promises of life everlasting; and that as the
nature of faith requires, without all staggering and doubt: but to sow
pillowes, and to lay them under poor deceived men's elbowes he sometimes says,
that he requires not such certainety of salvation; yet in the conclusion of
this very Chapter he forgetting himself so quickly, says: That we abolish the
substance of faith, namely in denying the particular certain application of
Christ crucified, and his benefits unto our selves. A worthy author, that can
no better agree with himself.

OF REPENTANCE.
OUR CONSENT.
M. PERKINS Page 316.
THe first conclusion. Repentance is the conversion of a sinner; which is
twofold, passive and active: passive is an action of God, whereby he conuerteth
a sinner. Active is an action whereby the sinner once turned by God, turns
himself and does good works, as the fruit there of: of this later the
question is.

The second conclusion. That repentance stands specially for practice, in
contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction in work or deed.
There be two sorts of contrition; one, when a man is sorrowful for fear only
of hell, and other punishments in this life: this he calls legal, though in
the state of the law there was most perfect contrition in some: The other
Evangelical, when one is grieved for his sins, not so much for fear of
hell, as because he has offended so good and merciful a God; which is always
necessary. Secondly, We hold confession necessary to be made, first to God,
then publicly to the congregation, if any man be excommunicate for any crime.
Thirdly, To our neighbor, when we have offended and wronged him. Lastly, In
all true repentance there must be satisfaction made: First to God, by
entreating him to accept of Christ's satisfaction for our sins. Secondly, to
the Church for public offenses, in humiliation to testify the truth of our
repentance. Thirdly, satisfaction is to be made to our neighbor, because if he
be wronged, he must have recompense and restitution made.

The third conclusion. That in repentance, we are to bring forth outward
fruits, worthy amendment of life: whereof the principal is, to endeavor day
and night by Gods grace to leave and renounce al and every sin, and in all
things to do the will of God.

THE DIFFERENCE.
WE dissent not from the Church of Rome in the doctrine of repentance it self,
but in the abuses thereof: first in general, because they begin repentance
part of the holy Ghost, and part of themselves, by the power of their free will
helped by the holy Ghost; 2. Tim. 2. verse. 15.
whereas Paul ascribes it wholly unto God, proving if God at any time will give
them repentance, etc.

Answer. Of this point has been spoken in the questions of Free Will, and of
Justification: and here M. PERKINS answers and confuteth himself
sufficiently, when he makes as a passione repentance, by which God turns our
hearts to him; so an active, whereby a man first moved by God, turns
himself to God: so that by his own doctrine, the freewill of man helped by
the holy Ghost, concurreth to the first act of repentance. And where he says,
that the sinner was before dead, and therefore could not move any part toward
repentance: we answer, that the grace of God raising him to repentance, does
quicken him and enable him to do that good work.

The second abuse of mistaking of penance, for the correction only of notorious
offenders, is a fable.

The third abuse (says M. PERKINS) is, that we make repentance not only a
virtue, but also a Sacrament; whereas for a thousand years after Christ, it
was not reckoned among the Sacraments. Yea, it seems that Lumbard was one of
the first, that called it a Sacrament: and the Schoolmen after him disputed
of the matter and form of this Sacrament, not able any of them certainly to
define, what should be the outward element of it.

Answer. I am sorry to see the man so careless of his credit: what do
schoolmen doubt of this Sacrament it self? or of either matter or form of
it? or are they not yet agreed what should be the outward element or visible
sign of it? He needs not fear to avouch any thing, that will not blush at
such a palpable untruth: Sess. 14. and 3.
for not only the Council of Trent, but long before it the Council of
Florence, in the instruction of the Armenians does teach, the acts of the
Penitent (to wit, contrition and confession) to be the element or material
part of it; and the absolution of the Priest, the formal. The same above three
hundred years past, taught the Prince of schoolmen S. Thomas of Aquine,
Richard, Durand, and diverse others upon the fourth of the sentences, the
fourtenth distinction, and now is the common opinion of al men: so that this
was a lie in grain. No more truth has the former part of his words: that
Repentance for a thousand years after Christ, was not reckoned among the
Sacraments For Victor Cartennensis who lived a thousand years past, does in
express terms prove, that we must make much of the Sacrament of Penance:
Lib. de Poenite^tia cap. 20.
and most of the ancient Doctors, do reckon and couple Penance with the
Sacrament of Baptism, or with the Sacrament of the Altar. To begin with the
latter that we may ascend upward, Victor Vticensis brings in the people
speaking thus to the Priests, which were going into banishment: Unto whom will
ye leave us poor wreatches, Lib. 2. de persecut. Va^dalica.
whiles ye go unto your crowns? who shall baptize these little ones in the
fountain of everlasting water? Who shall bestow upon us the gift of Penance,
and by the favor of reconciliation, loose and untie us bounden in the bands
of sin; because to you it was said, Whatsoever you loose upon earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. Is not Penance here joined with Baptism? the very like has
S. Augustine, where he first shows what recourse in times of danger is wont
to be made to the Church: S^^e craving to be baptized, other to be reconciled
and to do Penance, Epist. 180 ad Honor.
every one of them seeking comfort, and the administration of the Sacraments;
where he not only reckons reconciliation, and Penance with Baptism, but
says that they are Sacraments; for when the people seeks after them, he
says, That they seek after the administration of Sacraments. And a little
after: If the Ministers or Priests be present; some are baptized, some be
reconciled, none are defrauded of the communion of our Lords body.

S. Hierome. Let him be redeemed by the blood of our Savior, L. 1. cont.
Pelag. Lib. 1. de Poenite^tia cap. 7.
either in the house of Baptism; or in Penance, that does imitate the grace of
baptism.

S. Ambrose, speaking against the Nouatians, says: Why do ye baptize, if
sins may not be pardoned by a man? for in baptism there is remission of all
sins: neither is it any matter, whether Priests by Penance, or by Baptism,
do challenge this right to be given unto them; for it is the same in both of
the mysteries. So man remitteth sins as well in the mystery or Sacrament of
Penance, as in Baptism, and the like virtue is in both by S. Ambrose
judgment, there the one is a Sacrament as well as the other. And yet more
then a 100. years before him Tertullian says: Lib. d^ Poenite^tia
That God foreseeing the poison and infection of sin, and having shut up the
gate of pardon, and bolted the door of baptism, has yet suffered something
else to lie open: for he has in the porch or portall placed the second
penance, that may be opened to them that knock; where he testifies the second
Penance, that is, Penance after Baptism, to be appointed of God to take away
sin after baptism, as baptism did that which was before it: so that many
worthy ancient Fathers do reckon and account penance (or repentance as he
calls it) among the Sacraments of the Church; and so do most manifestly
confute his shameless assertion.

But because I desire here at once to dispatch this matter; I will prove, that
the Father of al Fathers (that is, Christ JESUS himself) has instituted and
delivered unto us this Sacrament of Penance, viz. When breathing upon his
Disciples, Ioh. 20. verse. 23.
he bid them receive the holy Ghost; and said, that whose sins soever they
remitted in earth, should be remitted in heaven. Whence we prove that as there
should be sinners in the Church, so men endued with power to absolve them from
their sin: and because they are not to absolve any that desire not be
absolved, the party must in humble sort request absolution, and declare from
what sins he desires to be absolved; for what wise man will absolve one
from he cannot tell what, and not knowing whether any restitution be to be
made or no? Wherefore, the party humbly confessing his fault, and the Priest
absoluing of him in a religious manner, thereby to magnify God by the due
dispensation of his gifts bestowed on men; there must needs be a visible sign
of grace of justification, which is at the same time conferred: so that even
after the def^^^tion of the Protestants, it is a true Sacrament; for there is a
religious ceremony instituted by Christ, that has a promise of justifying
grace annexed to it. And consequently so wide is that from truth, that within
a thousand years after Christ repentance was not accounted a Sacrament, that
even in Christ's own days, and by himself it was instituted a Sacrament.

M. PERKINS objecteth for us; It will be said that remissions of sins, and
life everlasting are promised to repentance: and answers; That it is not to
the work of repentance, but to the person which repents, and that not for
his works of repentance, but for the merits of Christ applied unto him by faith.

Reply. When there is no mention made of faith, but only of repentance, to
attribute all to faith and nothing to repentance, is a very extrauagant gloss;
specially he doing it of his own authority, without warrant either of reason
or of any author: and thus much of the abuses (forsooth) of repentance in
general. Now to the particular, about Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction.

The first abuse concerning contrition is, that the Catholics teach that it
must be sufficient and perfect: they use to help the matter by a distinction,
etc.

O remarkable abuse, that Catholics would have contrition to be sufficient
and perfect! If we would have had it imperfect, and not fit to serve the
turn, then lo we had hitte the nail on the head: what dotage is this? we
say briefly concerning sorrow for our sins past; first, that it ought to be
the greatest that we can have: for nothing is worthy to be so vehemently
lamented, as that we have deadly offended our creator and redeemer, and are
fallen from his grace, into the slavery of our most deadly enemy the Devil; so
that for this, as for the greatest evil that could be fall us, we are to be
most sorrowful. And this highest degree of sorrow is requisite in contritio^,
when thereby alone we do recover the grace of God: but when Contrition is
joined with Confession, and is made a part of the Sacrament, then lo though
it were not so great before as is otherwise requisite, it receives by virtue
of participating with Christ's grace in that Sacrament, the full measure of
sorrow, and so is made up sufficient and perfect; which M. PER* calls the
first abuse of Contrition, but goes not about to disprove it.

The second (as he says) is, that we ascribe to Contrition, the merit of
congruity.

Before he sticked not to say that we made repentance the meritorious cause of
remission of sins; which was a loud lie, because we teach that no man can
merit remission of his sins: for no man can merit ought at Gods hands,
unless he first be in his grace and favor, which no sinner is; wherefore we
hold only, that repentance as faith, hope, and a purpose of amendment, be only
good dispositions, making the man fit and apt to receive the grace of
justification, which God freely of his infinite mercy without any desert of
ours, bestows upon us only for Christ's sake. That apt disposition some men
call merit of congruity; wherein is no desert of the grace given, but only a
man is made thereby more meet and better prepared to receive such grace. Now
man's merits do so well agree and stand with Christ's merits, that Christ's
order is, that none coming to the age of discretion, shall be partaker of his
merits, unless he by his own merits do make himself capable of them, as
has been sufficiently proved before in the question of Merits.

The third abuse, That they make imperfect contrition or attrition arising of
the fear of hell, to be good and profitable, and to it they apply the saying
of the Prophet, The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. But (says he)
servile fear of it self, is the way to eternal destruction, etc.

Reply. He understands not what we say: we teach, that fear of being
punished in hell fire, makes evil men abstain from sinning, and begins to
put them in mind of Gods justice toward impenitent sinners; wherewith many
being strooken with the horror of that everlasting torment, are moved to fly
unto God for mercy: and so that servile fear becomes profitable unto them;
first in that it causes them to abstain from that wickedness, which they
would otherwise have committed; and then being helped with Gods grace, they
begin to turn unto his mercy: and so fear of Gods punishments becomes
unto them the beginning of wisdom. Thus much in effect does M. PER. himself
allow of, and yet would seem to confute it, his judgment is so slender:
Now to the abuses concerning Confession.

The first abuse, That we confess our sins to God in an unknown language.

What, is there any language unknown to God? or does he mean, that the
unlearned make their confession in Latin? which is impossible for a man that
understands not one Latin word. He would say (I gheste) that some of them
begin their general confession in Latin, but we speak here of every man's
confession in particular: that general of the Churches ordinance, is commanded
only to be used of them that are skillful in the Latin tongue; all others may
use the English. Withal (says he) we require the aid and intercession of
dead men. We believe the Saints to be living, which if he does not he
blasphemeth. Touching the intercession of Saints I have treated before. Now as
we request the help of their prayers, so do we acknoweledge unto them how
grievously we have offended, that they seeing our humility and sorrow for our
sins, may the more earnestly entreat for the remission of them. But let us
come unto the principal point in controversy about this matter, viz. That we
have corrupted Canonical confession, by turning it into a private auricular
confession, binding all men to confess all their mortal sins, with the
circumstances that change the kind of the sin (as far as they can
remember) once every year at the least; and that to a Priest, unless it be in
the case of extreme necessity: but in the word of God there is no warrant for
this confession, nor in the writings of orthodoxe antiquity for the space of
many hundredth years after Christ; as one of their own side avouches: and he
quoteth in the margent a man of small credit among us Beatus Rhenanus, for his
author. Well let us see a little, what warrant we have in holy Scriptures and
in the ancient Doctors, for confession of our faults unto a Priest.

First it is evidently collected out of these words of our Savior: Receive
the holy Ghost, Ioh. 20. verse. 23.
whose sins ye do forgive in earth, they shall be forgiven in heaven, and
whose sins ye do retain, they shall be retained. For giving his Apostles
power to remit and forgive men their sins, his meaning was not that they
should pardon them whether they would or would not, or that they should absolve
any other then such as were contrite, and did humbly crave absolution: neither
should they absolve them from they knew not of what, but that they should
know what, how many and how grievous their offenses were, that they might
be put to worthy penance, and receive particular comfort and counsel for the
amendment of their lives; or else they should be the most foolish judges, that
ever were appointed upon earth. Wherefore, seeing that the Apostles had
authority to forgive sins, and were in discretion to admmister the same unto
penitent sinners; it must needs follow necessarily, that the penitent should
confess all his sins in particular unto them: and that authority was to
continue in the Church for ever, it being given to the Apostles for the due
governing of the Church, and to the comfort of al sinners; which should never
fail to be until Christ's last coming to judgment. They to defeat all this
discourse, answer: That Christ gave not his Apostles authority to pardon any
man's sins, but only to declare that their sins were pardoned, if with true
repentance and faith they received the preaching of the Gospel. This
interpretation first is repugnant to the text, which in express terms has,
Whose sins ye shall remit or pardon; not whose sins ye shall declare to
be remitted. Secondly it has, that Whose sins ye shall forgive, they are
forgiven, to wit: even then, when they remit them, and not that they were
remitted before; as he should have said, if he had given them authority only to
declare them to be remitted. Thirdly, the metaphor of keys given unto them,
does demonstrate that power was given them to absolve, and not to declare only
they were absolved; because keys are given to open or shut doors, and not to
signify that either the doors are already open, or shall be upon condition.
Lastly, the Ministers pronouncing of men absolved, should be very rash and
frivolous if they do not truly absolve them. For if he pronounce them
absolutely to be absolved without good assurance of their faith and repentance,
he should but lie: and if he do pronounce them absolved conditionally if they
believe aright and be truly penitent, then were his absolution in vain; for
it depending upon their faith and repentance, and not upon the Ministers
pronouncing, it brings no further assurance then they had before: yea, they
themselves being of the faithful, could not be ignorant of so much before, to
wit, that he was free from sin, and needed not his absolution. Now that the
Apostles then, and Bishops, and Priests their successors ever sithence, did
truly absolve men from their sins, and were not (like to cryers) only
proclaymers thereof, see first S. Chrysostom, who says: That such power was
given here to men, Lib. 3. de Sacerdot
which God would never give to Angels, who yet had power to pronounce salvation
to penitent sinners. Secondly, That Priests have such power of binding and
loosing over the souls, as Kings have over their subjects bodies; which is
truly to bind or to loose them, and not only to declare them bound or loosed.
Thirdly, he says expressly: That the Priests among the Jews had power to
purge the leprosy, or rather to try whether they were purged from it or no;
but it is granted unto our Priests, not only to discern whether the body be
purged from leprosy or no, but plainly to purge our souls from the filth of
sin.

S. Ambrose in diverse places proves directly against the Nouatians, that
Christ gave power to Priests to remit sins. Lib. 1. de Poenitent. c. 2. and
7.
The Nouatians denied not but that one might preach the Gospel unto such
sinners that were relapsed, and promise them pardon too if they repented, but
would not have the Priests to reconcile them unto the Church by the Sacrament
of Penance; denying that Priests had any such power over such sinners, but
that they must leave them to God alone: which the holy Doctor confuteth by
these places of Scripture, Math. 16. verse. 19. and cap. 18. verse. 18. Ioh. 20.
verse. 23. Whatsoever ye forgive in earth, shall be forgiven in heaven.

Epist. ad Heliodor.
S. Hierome says: God forbid, that I should speak any evil of them, who
succeeding in the Apostolic degree, do with their sacred mouth make the body
of Christ, and by whom we are made Christians: who having the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, do in a certain manner judge before the day of judgment.

Lib. 20. de ciuit. c. 9.
S. Augustine does define in these words (Whatsoever ye shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound in heaven) that authority is given unto the rulers of the
Church to judge in spiritual causes; and not only to declare.

Hom. 62. in Euang.
S. Gregory upon these words, Whose sins you forgive, etc. Behold (says
he) the Apostles are not only made secure of themselves, but have power given
them to release other men's hands; and do obtain a prerogative of the
heavenly judgment, that in Gods steed they may forgive to some their sins,
and bind some others: and truly the Bishops now do hold the same place in
the Church; they receive authority to bind and to loose, etc. By this you may
see in part, with what forehead M. PERKINS affirmed, that for a thousand
years after Christ there was no mention of the Sacrament of Penance: and more
you shall see shortly, if that first I shall note out of the Scripture it
self, both the acknowledgement of receite of that power to reconcile and
absolve, and the practice and commandment of confession. S. Paul acknowledges
and declares, 2. Cor. 5. verse. 18. and 20.
that God had given unto them the ministry of reconciliation: and adds, that
they be Gods Legates, and therefore exhorts them to be reconciled: but they
that be sent Ambassadors with full commission to reconcile men unto their
Prince, must know both how grievously they have offended, and what recompense
they are willing to make; which must needs be by their own confession. Now
for the practice of confession by the first Christians, Act. 19. verse. 18. and
19.
it is recorded: That many of the faithful came confessing, and declaring
their deeds: and many that had followed curious acts, brought their books
and burned them in the presence of all the rest. Note here both particular
confession made unto S. Paul of the several deeds and factes, and not in
general: that they were sinners as the very words do witness, Confessing
their deeds, that is; what they had done in particular. And again, how
should he have known their study of curious books, if they had not told their
sins in particular? some Protestants convinced by the text say, That they
confessed some of their sins in particular, but not all. But I marvel how
they came by the knowledge of that: for why should they confess some more
then others? and the use of Scriptures is, by the naming of sins
indefinitely, to signify all; as when we pray, Forgive us our sins, we mean
all our sins: and when it is said of Christ; He shall save his people from
their sins, it is meant, that he shall save them not from some of their
sins, but from al. Lastly, touching the commandment, S. James does charge
us, Iac. 5. verse. 16.
To confess our sins one to another: which Hom. 2. in Leuiticum.
Origin, L. 3. de Sacerdot.
S. Chrysostom, and Lib. 50. Homiliar. hom. 12.
S. Augustine do expound to be meant of particular confession to the Priest.
And S. Bid upon that place, says: In this sentence, that discretion is to be
used, that for daily and light offenses we may confess unto such our equals,
by whose prayers we trust to be helped: but the uncleanness of the more
grievous leper, we must (as it is in the law) lay open to the Priest; and
according to his judgment we must endeavor to be purged, so much and so long
time as he shall command.

Calvin says, that S. James speaks of such confession only, which every one
is to make unto his brother, whom he has offended; and confirms it, because
it follows in the text: And pray one for another. But that which goes
before, of calling the Priest to the sicke-man to anoint him, does rather
argue, that it is spoken of confession to be made to the Priest, if the
sicke-man remember any mortal sins; for it is not enough to have the Priest
to pray for the sick, and to anoile him, if the sick be in state of mortal
sins: unless he first confess himself of them, he cannot be absolved from
them; nor vvorthylie receive Extreme Unction. And as other such like places
are expounded, as for example, 1. Pet. 4. verse. 9. Romans 12. verse. 6.
Use hospitality one toward another; every one as he has received grace,
ministering the same one toward another: which is not, let the poor use
hospitality as well toward the rich, as the rich toward the poor; and the
sick cure the physician as well as the physician to cure the sick. But use
hospitality one toward another, that is, those that be well able, toward
them that have need: even so confess one to another, that is, he that has
sinned, to him that has authority to absolve him. Now let us hear how
ancient this confession is, and whether it were heard off for a thousand
years after Christ.

S. Ireneus, who lived in the next age after the Apostles, L. 1. co^t. Haeres.
cap. 9.

Lib. de Poenitent.


makes mention of certain noble Women, whom Heretics had pitifully abused*
and says; That they coming to repentance made a confession of their faults.

Tertullian of the same age, reprehendeth some certain, Who more fearful (as
he speaks) of their own shame, then careful of their salvation, put off
their confessions from day to day: whom he likeneth to them who had diseases
in their secret parts, and fearing to discover them to the physician, do
through their own shamefastness perish. And in the end of the book he says:
That this confession of faults was appointed by our Lord himself.

Homil. 2. in Leuit.
Origin. There is also a seventh remission of sins, though hard and
laborious, which is by penance: when the sinner does wash his bed with his
tears, and when he is not ashamed to confess his sin to the Priest of our
Lord, and to seek remedy, etc.

Lib. 3. Epist. 16.
S. Cyprian. When in lesser offenses penance is to be done a just time, and
confession is to be made; his life being looked into who does the penance,
neither can he be admitted to come to the communion, before the Bishop or
Clergy have laid their hands upon him: how much more in these most grievous
and exceeding great crimes, must all things be warylie and discretly observed,
according unto our Lords order and discipline? Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
Again, Of how much greater faith and better fear are they, who though t^^y
be not entangled with any crime of sacrifice or libell; yet because they
thought of those offenses, do simply and sorrowfully confess them selves even
of those thoughts unto the Priests of God.

Sermon. in illa verba.
S. Athanasius upon these words (Going into a Village ye shall find a Colt
tied) says: Let us examine our selves, whether the fetters of our sins be
loosed, that we may amend our lives; and if they be not yet loosed, let us
present our selves unto the Disciples of JESUS. For they are present, that by
authority which they have received from our Savior can loose you: Math. 18.
verse. 18. Ioh. 20. verse. 23. Regula. 228.

Oratione in mulierem peccatricem.


for he said. Whatsoever ye bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And whose sins ye
forgive, they are forgiven.

S. Basil. Of necessity must we confess our sins to them, unto whom the
dispensation of the mysteries of God is committed, that is to Priests.

S. Gregory Nyssene. Do thou confidently open to the Priest thy faults,
discover the secrets of thy heart, (as privy wounds) unto the physician; and he
will have care both of thy honor, and of thy health.

S. Ambrose when he did hear men that came to him to receive penance, and to
confess their faults, as very many came to him therefore; he did so weep
that he constrained them also to weep, as witnesses holy Paulinus in his
life.

In cap. 10. Ecclesiast.
S. Hierome. If that serpent the Devil have bitten any man secretly, and have
venimed him without the priuity of any man; if he that was strooken hold his
peace and do not penance, nor will confess his wound unto his Brother and
Master, his Master that has a tongue to cure and heal him, cannot easily
help him: for if he that is sick be ashamed to show his wound unto the
physician, physic cannot cure that which it knows not. And upon the 16. of
S. Mathewe he specifieth those Masters that had tongues to heal, saying: So
here the Bishop and Priests do either bind or loose, who according to their
office having heard the variety of sin, does know who is to be bound, and
who is to be absolved.

S. Augustine. Be sorrowful before confession, In psalm. 66.
but when thou have confessed leap for joy, even then thou shall be cured: the
conscience of him that does not go to confession, has gathered together
corrupt matter, an imposthume is swelled out, it vexes him and gives him no
rest; the Physicians apply the lenitiue of words, and sometimes lance him,
etc. Do thou put thy self into the hands of the Physician, confess and let
all that corrupt matter issue forth in confession, and then rejoice and be
glad, for the rest shall afterward be easily cured. That Priests be these
Physicians of souls he teaches, Lib. 50. homiliarum, hom. 12. Item tract. 49.
super Johan. Con. 2. in Psalm. 101. Tract. 22. in Johan. and hom. 49. Lib. 50.
hom. Do penance such as is done in the Church of God; let no man say, I do
penance secretly, I do it to God, God knows that I do it who does pardon
it. To whom he replyeth thus: Then in vain was it said, whatsoever ye loose
in earth, shall be loosed in heaven: Therefore, to no purpose were the keys of
heaven given to the Church; we make frustrate the Gospel of God, we make void
the words of Christ; finally, we promise to our selves that which he denies
us, etc. See how plainly and formally he (so many hundredth years before)
has confuted the Protestants shot-anker, and only refuge of confessing their
sins to God alone; and assures us, that it is a most vain excuse, and will
not serve any man's turn; when as God himself has set down and decreed,
that he will pardon no man of his sins, who does not seek absolution
thereof from them to whom he has committed the charge of that matter, that is
from Priests. And in right reason, can there be any better bridle unto our
corrupt nature, then the very shame and bashfulnesse of confessing our secret
faults unto a learned, good, and grave man, such as a Confessor is or should
be? Again, where true confession of sins is, there men use the best means
that can be, to drive them from the custom of sinning: for besides the
particular sorrow which they have of their sins, they must firmly purpose
never to return to any kind of sin afterward; yea, they must abstain from
all occasions alluring to sin: so that no man (using well this Sacrament of
Confession) can dwell in malice, usury, leachery, or any state of sin.
Moreover, if they have taken away the goods or good name of their neighbor,
they are enjoined in confession presently to do their best to restore it back
again. These and many other great commodities being the inseparable companions
of private Confession, we Catholics do attribute unto the good use thereof,
the greatest Godliness and devotion that is amongst us. And no marvel, though
our common enemy do so busily endeavor to withdraw sinners from it,
amplifying unto them the indignity and shame of it: but if they would consider
maturely, that dying in their sins for lack of due confession, they shall be
(to their utter shame and confusion) made to confess them all and every one at
the latter day, before God, all his Angels and Saints, the Devil and all
damned souls being also present; they would undoubtedly make choice, rather to
confess their sins to some one virtuous Priest, who will never reveal
them, but in Christ's name absolve and pardon them; then to leave them to that
dreadful day of Gods just judgments, when besides the shame and confusion of
them, no pardon is to be hoped for. And thus much touching Confession.

Lastly (says M. PERKINS) The abuse of satisfaction is, that they have burned
Canonical satisfaction, which was made to the congregation by open offenders,
into a satisfaction of the justice of God, for the temporal punishment of
their sins. Behold here a most horrible profanation of the whole Gospel.

Answer. Behold here a most ungodly and senseless out-crye what, does the
whole sanctity of the Gospel consist only in the point of our satisfaction? it
is too too absurd so to say. And how knows he, that Canonical satisfaction
was only or principally to satisfy the congregation? They that ordained of
old those Canons of satisfaction, had a greater care to satisfy and appease
the wrath of God justly incensed against such wicked offenders; then to
satisfy men: but this profane man very fondly dreameth, that they rather
sought to please men then God. But of this matter there is a whole question in
the former part: there he that will may see, how all satisfactions are
principally instituted to appease Gods wrath, and that they do apply unto us
the satisfactions of Christ, and make us partakers of them, and are besides
most convenient means to bridle out corrupt nature from all sorts of sins.

M. PERKINS to show that he was the same man in the end of his book, as in
the beginning; concludes this part with a most palpable lie, to wit: That
Priests are not put to death in England for their religion, but for their
treasons which they intend and enterprise. Let their own records be seen,
whether very many of them have not been condemned, only because they are
Priests, made after the ancient Roman manner, without laying unto their
charge any enterprise, either against the person of the Prince, or peace of the
State. But what will not a Minister avouch to disgrace poor Priests, who do
nevertheless not only pray, but will be ready also to spend their blood for
the conversion of men of his sort, and for all others their dear countrymen,
by them most pitteously seduced.

Hitherto M. PERKINS has handled points of religion, something like a
schoole-man: now like a pulpit-minister he goes on with his text, and makes
such an unsavory gloss upon it, that it loathes me almost to look on it: yet
because he raketh and heapeth together all the most odious matter that he can
devise against us, I will give it the whippe, and hastily run over it: thus
he begins.

Secondly out of the same text (Go out of her my people) I gather, Page 331.
that the true Church of God is, and has been in the present Roman Church, as
the corn in the heap of chafe. For though Popery ouer-spread the face of the
earth for many hundredth years, yet, in the midst thereof, God reserved a
people to himself, that truly worshipped him, etc. And this will serve the
turn to stop the mouths of Papists, who demand of us where our Church was
one hundredth years ago, before the days of Luther? We answer out of this
text, that our Church has been ever since the days of the Apostles, and that
in the very midst of the Papacy: but it first began to show it self in
Luthers time, an universal Apostasy having hidden it before for many hundredth
years.

Answer. Here is a proper piece of doctrine, and proved as profoundly. It is
very ridiculous and absurd to say, that their Church was in the Church of
Rome: for one that will be both of their Church and of the Roman, must believe
and profess not one or two, but more then twenty articles flat contradictory
the one to the other, which is impossible. Can a man at once believe the Pope
to be head of the universal Church, and with-all swear that he has no
authority in many Provinces of it, but that all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
there belongs to the Prince? or that Christ's natural body, is really present
in the Sacrament, and not really present? and that Saints are to be prayed
unto, and not to be prayed unto? nothing is more evident, then that this cannot
be: no more could the Protestants Church be in the Church of Rome. And if the
Protestants would allow them for theirs, who believe most of the articles of
the Roman faith contrary to their own doctrine, so that in some few points
they do agree and accord with them: yet the Church of Rome will never take them
for any of her children, who do not wholly and inuiolably hold all the points
of faith that she professes; but renounceth them, and declares them to be
accursed: wherefore, no Protestant can be in the Church of Rome. But they say,
That their Church lay hid in the Roman, as corn in chafe. Did it in deed
lie in such obscurity, that none of them were to be seen or heard off?
therefore it was no Church at all: for the most proper marks of the Church
(according to their own principles) are, The true preaching of Gods word, and
the sincere administration of the Sacraments. Now, preachers of the word must
be both seen and heard also; and they walked not invisible (I hope) who
ministered and received their Sacraments: wherefore, they must either grant
that their Church in that general Apostasy was visible, or that it was no
Church at all, as not having the inseparable marks of their Church, which are,
The true preaching of the word, and due administration of the Sacraments.
Again, if they had been lively members of the true Church, how could they
live unknown in that great Apostasy? were they not bound in conscience, to
have made profession of their faith publicly? Romans 10. verse. 10. Math. 10.
verse. 33.
S. Paul says yea: With the heart we believe unto justice, but with the mouth
confession is made to salvation. And our Savior says: He that shall deny me
before men, I also will deny him, before my father which is in heaven. If they
were such crauens, as made more account of their own ease and safety, then of
the truth of their religion and glory of God; they were rather cockle
ouer-sowed by the enemy among the good-seede, Math. 13. verse. 25.
then like unto corn hidden in chafe. In vain for them also was that voice
sent from heaven, and recorded by S. John (which M. PER. takes for his text)
Go out of her my people; for these dastardly faint-harted fellows, would give
no ear to it, but loved better to hide their heads in some musty corner, then
with danger of their lives, to separate themselves from those abominations.
If then there were any such false hearted, dumb, and deaf reprobates hidden
among others, let the Protestants take them (if they please) for their worthy
ancestors: But no reason in the world to call them the true Church of God, that
had neither true love of Gods honor nor of their neighbors good and
conversion, otherwise, they would not have holden their peace, seeing Gods holy
name so miserably profaned, as they thought. Thus much of M. PER. position:
now to his proof.

If any man ask them where their Church was before Luthers days, he answers
out of this text, (Go out of her my people,) that it was ever since the
Apostles days.

Let us draw this to some form of argument, that it may appear how it
hangs together: A voice from heaven cried in S. John's days to the Church of
Rome; Go out of Babylon, that is; depart from the congregation of the wicked
Heathens and Pagans: therefore the Protestants religion, has been ever since
the Apostles days. Apply John Barber, and thou shall have a new pair of
sizors for thy labor. Should not a man leese his labor to confute
particularly such a senseless discourse? But yet a word to his next annotation
upon the text: Demanding whether the Church of Rome, he a Church or no? he
answers, That (if it be so taken as in truth it is) it is no Church at all.
His proofs are, That it is Babylon, that it peruerteth the true sense of the
Scripture, and ouerturneth the inward baptism: all which I have heretofore
confuted. Here I will but demand, whether this assertion of his does not
undermine and blow up his former? for if their hidden Church were no where but
in the Roman, for nine hundred years together, and that Roman were no Church
at all; then surely their Church was not at all, which had no being and
existence but in the other, which was not at all. I may not here omit to note
by the way unto the gentle reader out of S. Augustine, In illa verba, ps. 85.
TV SOLVS DeVS MAGNUS. Page 338.
How they rob Christ of his glory and inheritance bought with his precious
blood, who hold that his Church failed, and was fled into corners. Yea, S.
Hierome further affirms, That they make God subject to the Devil, and a
poor miserable Christ, who hold that his body the Church may perish, or be so
bidden that it cannot be heard off.

Wherefore, omitting such impertinent stuff, let us come unto those horrible
crimes that he charge the Church of Rome withal. The first is no less then
Atheism, to which I have fully answered in the preface of this book,
wherefore I do omit it here, and do come to the second crime of Idolatry,
Which (says he) is as gross among us, as ever it was among the Heathens. See
the foul mouth of a preacher: how proves he this? Marry it is to be seen in
two things: first they worship the Saints with religious worship, which is
proper to God. O most impudent! do we make Saints creators of heaven and
earth, omnipotent, infinitely wise and good, or give them any kind of honor
due unto God only? see that question, and detest the sons of the Devil, that
blush not to avouch such monstrous lies.

But we make the blessed Virgin Mary a Mediator of redemption.

Fie upon such an impudent face: but we call her a Lady, a Queen: be it so.
For so did Athanasius in Euang. de sanctiss. Deipar. apply those words of the
44. Psalm, The Queen stands on thy right hand, in a golden vestement, etc.

So did Gregory Nazianzene, in his Verses of her: For thou (says he) o Queen,
by the divine favor came to me.

So did holy Effrem, in his Oration to her: all which lived within four
hundredth years off Christ. To omit S. Chrysostomes Lyturgy, because they like
it not. But what of this, she is a redeemer? O senseless! that she is called
a Goddess (as they did call the Queen Elizabeth then living) I read not in
any of the books quoted by him. Missal. Breuiar.
A mediatresse of intercession, our hope, our life, and the like, she may be
called in a good sense; because we hope through the help of her most gracious
prayers to obtain the life of our souls: and so may it be said to her,
Prepare thou glory for us, defend us from our enemies, and such like, to wit,
by the means of her prayers. Again (says he) their Idolatry is manifest, in
that they worship God in, at, or before Images. Then are the Protestants also
Idolaters, because they worship God, in, or at the Churches; at, or before
their communion table. Whether we have commandment or not for Images, makes
nothing to Idolatry; but whether we give to Images the honor only due to God,
which we do not. Now to compare Images to adulterers, is to dote; and
deserves no answer.

Thirdly (says he) their Idolatry passes the Idolatry of the Heathens, in
that they worship a breaden God, or Christ under the forms of bread and wine.

O impious Atheist, and altogether unworthy the name of a Christian! Is not
Christ to be worshipped wheresoever he be? and that as well under the forms of
bread, as under the shape of a man? it is not the outward shape or show, that
makes Christ worthy of divine worship: but the substance of his Godhead there
present though hidden. But he is not there at all says he: which to be most
false, I have proved in that question.

The third sin is the maintaynance of adultery, first in the tollerating of
the stews.

Answer. It is one thing to tolerate an evil, another thing to maintain it.
God does tolerate many evils, but maintayneth none: so the stews in some
hot Countries are tolerated, to avoid a greater mischief; yet not
maintained but disgraced and punished, and diverse means used to persuade them
that live so viciously, to leave and detest that wicked kind of life. As our
state does tolerate usury, if it be under ten in the hundredth: and yet we
charge them not with maintaynance of usury, but rather think it a politic
devise, by tollerating the less evil to avoid a greater. Again, this is a
point of civil policy, and no part of the Catholic religion, which is in
many Kingdoms wholly embraced, where there be no stews tolerated. In some
hot Countries the civil Magistrate by experience finds it better, to
suffer some hot and incontinent lecherous companions to have such a remedy,
rather then to permit them to solicit their Wives and Daughters to
wickedness. I would to God that the wise saying of a most worthy Doctor were
not fulfilled in our Country: Take away the stews, and fill all the City with
adultery. Is not the City of London well reformed (trow you) by taking the
stews out of it? if the man had any forehead, knowing how their sweet
Gospel has infected both Court and Country with filthy and abominable
lechery, he would have been ashamed to reprehend them, who labor to break
the worser course of it, seeing they cannot extinguish it altogether.

He says secondly, That our law allows marriage beyond the fourth degree,
and by this means incest: for Anne the Aunt of Nicholas may be married unto
the child of Nicholas childs child, because she is beyond the fourth degree.

Behold the wisdom of this man: first what years shall Anne be off, before
that child of the fourth generation after Nicholas her Nephewe, be
marryageable? by that he be twenty years old, she must be six-score or there
about, and so a very fit match for that youth. Again, it is but a supposed
imagination of a raw head, that the Aunt is in steed of a Mother unto all
that descend of her Brother. These good fellows that find fault with us, for
allowing marriage beyond the fourth degree, do themselves maintain it in the
very second; for brother and sisters children may and do often marry together
among them: which was prohibited in S. Augustines days as a deformity, Lib.
15. de ciuit. 16.
even against the natural shamefastness ingrafted in so near of kin. And
Gregory the great being demanded at the first conversion of the English to the
faith, his opinion in this matter, answers thus: Cap. 6. inter. Aug. ad Greg.
That although a certain earthly law permitted brothers children to match
together; yet (says he) we have by experience observed, that issue proceeds
not of such marriage: and the holy Scripture teaches us, that we may not
reveal the turpitude of our kindred. Whence he concludes, that even those
newely converted Christians (to whom he granted as great favor as he might)
should wholy abstain from marriage in the second degree: so that brethrens
children marying according to their new doctrine, contrary to the ancient
Canons of the Church, do live in perpetual incest, and their children be no
better then bastardes; it is they then that allow incest, and not we. In
another case, the Protestants by their doctrine and practice do confirm and
ratify adultery: for the innocent party (for example the Husband) taking his
Wife in adultery, does not only put her away by divorce, but may also marry
another, his former wife yet living; which to be plain adultery no meaner a
learned man then S. Augustine, twelve hundred years past has most soundly
proved, and that out of the express word of God: and therefore did he entitle
that his treatise, De adulterinis conjugijs, of adulterous marriages.

The fourth sin of Papists is magic, sorcery, and witchcraft, in the
consecration of their Host, and in making holy bread and holy water and such
like; and by driving out of the Devil by the sign of the cross, by
exorcismes and ringing of bells, etc. For these things have no force either by
their creation, or by any warrant out of the word.

Answer. If it be sorcery and vvitch-craft to consecrate the body of Christ
(which is done by due pronunciation of Christ's words) then was Christ the
author of that sorcery, and he himself that first consecrated it, a sorcerer,
which only to insinuate is most damnable. See what wicked enemies of Christ we
have under the habit of Ministers: and what a logger-headed lie is it, to say
that we have no warrant in Gods word for the blessing of bread, water, oil,
and such like? when S. Paul says, That all things are sanctified and made holy
by the word of God and prayer. 1. Tim. 4. verse. 5. Hebr. 9. verse. 13.
And if in the old testament, The sprinckling of the ashes of a calfe did
sanctify them on whom it was cast: Why may not water with us do as much being
hallowed by prayer, and making the sign of the cross over it; by which we
request God to bless it through the virtue of Christ's passion, expressed by
the sign of the cross? and having received such blessing, we use it then more
confidently to such purposes as they are blessed for; not doubting but that God
will respect the prayers of his holy Church, and the good meaning of him that
uses them. And as for bells, they being dedicated to the service of God, for
the assembling of his people together to worship him, and having many devout
prayers said over them to that purpose; we doubt not but that the very sound
of them is terrible to the enemies of God, Iosue 6. verse. 5.
as being the trumpets of his army. And as the walls of Hiericho fell flat to
the earth at the sound of the Israelites trumpets and voices: so the furious
vvorking of the common enemy shall be abated, when he hears by the ringing of
the bells, Gods people called together to join in prayer against him.

The fifth sin is perjury, which they maintain; because they teach that a
Papist examined, may answer doubtfully against the intention of the examiner,
framing another meaning to himself. As for example, when a man is asked,
whether he said or heard Mass in such a place, though he did, he may say that
he did not, and swear to it, meaning he was not there to reveal it to him;
whereas in the law of nature he that takes an oath, should swear according
unto the intention of him that has power to minister an oath, and that in
truth, justice, and judgment. Let them clear their doctrine from all defense
of perjury, if they can.

Answer. If he had cited but one author, you should have heard a full
satisfaction of this matter: The truth is, that swearing a truth in his meaning
that swears it, although it be against the intention of him that ministers
the oath, may be lawfully used in two cases. The first, if he that ministers
the oath, have not sufficient authority to minister it. The second, when having
authority he asks something beyond the order of law, and against justice;
then he that swears is excused by the rule touched by M. PERK. himself,
because a man must swear as in truth, so in justice, that is, to do or say
nothing againg justice. And so when one enquireth after saying or hearing
Mass, as of a heinous crime, to punish good Christians for it, the man is
bound not to reveal it, as being against true justice, to make his neighbor
punished for so holy a fact.

The sixth sin is, that they reuerse many of Gods Commandments, making that
no^ sin which Gods word makes a sin: for example, If one steal some
little thing that causes no notable hurt, that is no mortal sin; Molanus.
and a merry or officious lie is but a venial sin, etc. If Catholics make
stealing of things of small value, and officious lies venial sins; then M.
PER. commits herein a mortal sin, in belying them so maliciously, as to
affirm them to make that no sin, which Gods word makes a sin: seeing that
by his own confession we make them and such like, sins, though not so
heinous because there is less malice in them. He goes on lying, when he
affirms us to say, that none is bound to salute his enemy: for we hold all
men bound to salute their enemies, and to afford them all common duties of
ciuillity; and though it be but a counsel to yield them the extraordinary
offices of friendship, yet we hold that it is much more Christan-like so to
do. As for rash judgment suddenly given without aduisement, I see not how
it can be more then a venial sin: for the party considering better of the
matter, changes his opinion straight way, and so does his neighbor no vvrong.
And if it be the part of a wise man sometimes to dissemble, according unto that
saying of the wise: Sapientis est loco dissimulare; then surely is it better to
dissemble and feign holiness, then wickedness. As for painting of the face in
a moderate and modest fashion, to amend the favor, when it is done without
any evil end or purpose, and without scandal, I see not how one can make any
more of it, then a venial sin: but to daube the countenance so as some leude
women do, to allure men thereby to unlawful lust, is without doubt very
damnable, and for no other is taken of Catholics. Touching begging, let him
name who holds it for unlawful to prohibit and forbid it, if sufficient
means be otherwise provided for the mainetaynance of the poor, for I know
none such. True it is, because the truth it self has so said: That we shall
have always the poor among us. Mat. 26. verse. 11.
But who doubts but that it is much better, to provide for them charitably in
some certain places of aboade, then to suffer them to wander up and down
idly, and to live dissolutely, as the greater part of them are thought to do.
Moreover, no author can be truly said to uphold or excuse blasphemy or
swearing, though when they deliver their opinions in schools concerning that
matter, they affirm that rash cholerike oaths (not being usual) are no
mortal sins, because they break out in manner against a man's vvil; choler
for the time troubling and hindering the use of reason.

M. PERKINS does lastly charge our writers with manifest lying, to justify our
doctrine, in that they plead all antiquity to be on our sides: whereas (says
he) it is as much for them as for us.

Hereof he yields no proof, and no marvel; for many of his brethren are
ashamed to deny this, and do ingeniously confess, that in many points of
religion the ancient Fathers are wholly for us. And in no one point that I can
hear off, will he or any of his pew-fellowes be tried by the judgment and
consent of antiquity: which is a most manifest proof, that in their own
conscience they know well enough, that al antiquity is flat against them; else
why should they so fear to stand unto their most upright determination, and
so fleet and fly from it? which point well considered off, is alone
sufficient to dissuade any man from their new doctrine. For it not agreeing
with the doctrine of pure antiquity, must needs be false and wicked; because
that was most true, holy, and good: And the holy Ghost does not now teach one
to be true, and afterward change. After his Lastly he has: Again, that our
manner is to prove our opinions by forged and counterfeit writings of men:
namely by S. James liturgy, by the Canons of the Apostles, by the books of
Dionisius Ariopagita, and so forth reckoning up some one and twenty pieces,
which he calls counterfeit; but he goes not about to prove any one of them
to be forged. It may therefore suffice for answer; that when he or any other
shall undertake to prove, that we use any forged writings to confirm our
doctrine, they shall (God willing) be answered. In the mean season the better
to content such weaklings, I have not past once (to my remembrance) alleged
any sentence out of these books, by him suspected for counterfeit. And as
touching the marrying of a Catholic with a Protestant, we dislike it more
then many Ministers, who will make no bones to marry them together; which no
Catholic Priest will do. Finally, we accord with him in leagues of amity as he
terms them, and hold that Catholic and Protestant Princes, may not combine
in league to defend each other in all causes, or else one should stand bound to
aid the other sometimes against both honesty and religion; which were very
absurd: So as where M. PERKINS says well (which he does seldom in this book
of his) I willingly agree with him, not sparing on the other side to reprehend
that which he speaks against the truth; which all indifferent men will (I
hope) take to be honest upright dealing. Here ends his book, were it not
that after finis put to it, he adds a further Advertisement, which may not be
left unanswered: wherefore, I have annexed hereunto both it and the answer,
before I come to the full period of this work.

Courteous Reader,
BEAR WITH THE FAVLTS IN PRINTING, WHICH CAN HARDLY BE FEW CONSIDERING THE
MANIFOLD DIFFICVLTIES OF THE time: And yet (besides the ouer-sights in
pointing) are not very many, which be thus corrected.

IN THE MARGENT THESE.
Generally a ss. is set in the quotation of Caluins Institution for the Section
or Number.

For. Page. Read. Beza in Neoph. 9. in Creophag. simil. ibid. Simler. sess.
17. 2. 11. number 1. and 2. Homil. in prae^rat. 48. In priorem ad Corint. Conc.
56. Canon.

IN THE TEXT THESE.
For. Page.) (Line. Read. declared 7) (15 declare Atheism 20) (9 Atheismes
was this 40) (35 was it pithagorically 63.) (22 pithagoricall, I say to
solemnly 86) (22 to be solemnly Euchirines 135) (24 Eucherius established
145) (17 establish Cesanis 155) (39 Caesarius Pomachius 156) (1 Pamachius
demised 180) (18 devised proof 181) (16 disproofe

The quotation of S. Augustine which is in psalm. 33. conc. 2. is omitted in
the 68. page.

Hier. cont. Lucif. cap. 6. wants page 209.

And in the Aduertisment, page the 25. for apud Dionysium 1. Cor. read apud
Ludolphum de vita Christi, part. 1. cap. 5. page 17.

AN ANSWER UNTO M. PERKINS ADVERTISEMENT.
M. PERKINS Advertisement to all favorers of the Roman religion, showing (as
he weeneth) that the said Religion is against the Catholic principles of the
Catechism, that has been agreed upon ever since the days of the Apostles,
by all Churches: which principles be four. The Apostles Creed: the ten
Commandments: the Lords prayer: the institution of two Sacraments, Baptism
and the Lords supper.

1. COR. 11. verse. 23.

I HAD once determined to have wholly omitted this goodly postscript, because
it contains (in manner) nothing else, but an irksome repetition of that,
which has been (I will not say twice before, but more then twenty times)
handled over and over, in this former small treatise: notwithstanding,
considering both how ready many are, when they see any thing omitted, to say
that it could not be answered; and also for that these points here reiterated,
are the most odious that he could cull out of all the rest to urge against us:
I finally resolved to give them a short answer; And further, also by proving
their new religion, to be very opposite unto those old grounds of the true
religion, to requite him with the like, that I die not in his debt. Thus he
begins.

The Roman religion established by the Council of Trent, is in the principal
points thereof, against the very grounds of the Catechism: the Creed: the
ten Commandments: the Lords prayer: the two Sacraments.

THE Catholic religion embraced and defended by the Church of Rome, was
planted and established there by the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, fifteen
hundredth years before the Council of Trent, and has been ever sithence, by
the Bishops of Rome their lawful successors, constantly retained, and most
sincerely observed and maintained: some articles thereof, called into question
by the Heretics of this latter age, were in that most learned general
Council of Trent, declared and defined. And great marvel it were, if the
principal points thereof, should be against the grounds of the Catechism,
which is in every point most substantially expounded, by the decree and order
of the very same Council. Or is it credible, that the Church of Rome (with
which all other ancient Churches and holy Fathers, did desire to agree; and
which has been ever most diligent to observe all Apostolical traditions)
should in the principal points of faith, cross and destroy the very
principles of that religion, that has been agreed upon by all Churches ever
since the Apostles days, as he says? Is it not much more likely and probable,
that the Protestants, who slander all Churches, ever since the time of the
Apostles, with some kind of corruption or other, and who hold no kind of
Apostolical tradition to be necessary: is it not (I say) more credible, that
they should shake those grounds of faith, which come by tradition from the
Apostles, and have been ever since by all Churches agreed upon? I suppose that
few men of any indifferent judgment, can think the contrary. But let us
descend to the particulers, wherein the truth will appear more plainly. Thus
begins Master PERKINS with the Creed.

First of all it must be considered, that some of the principal doctrines
believed in the Church of Rome, are; that the Bishop of Rome is the Vicar of
Christ, and head of the Catholic Church: that there is a fire of Purgatory:
that Images of God and Saints, are to be placed in the Church, and worshipped:
that prayer is to be made to Saints departed: that there is a propitiatory
sacrifice daily offered in the Mass, for the sins of the quick and the
dead. These points are of that moment, that without them the Roman religion
cannot stand, etc. And yet mark the Apostles Creed, which has been thought
to contain all necessary points of religion to be believed, and has
therefore been called the key and rule of faith: This Creed (I say) has not
any of these points, nor the expositions made thereof by the ancient Fathers;
nor any other Creed or confession of faith made by any Council or Church, for
the space of many hundredth years. This is a plain proof to any indifferent
man, that these be new articles of faith, never known in the Apostolic
Church; and that the Fathers and Councels could not find any such articles of
faith in the books of the old and new Testament. Answer is made, that all
these points of doctrine are believed under the article, (I believe the
Catholic Church:) the meaning whereof they will have to be this. I believe all
things which the Catholic Church holds and teaches to be believed. If this
be as they say, we must believe in the Church: that is, put our confidence in
the Church, for the manifestation and the certainety of all doctrine necessary
to salvation. And thus the eternal truth of God the creator, shall depend
upon the determination of the creature; And the written word of God in this
respect is made insufficient, as though it had not plainly revealed all points
of doctrine pertaining to salvation. And the ancient Churches have been far
ouer-seene, that did not propound the former points to be believed as articles
of faith, but left them to these later times. Thus far Master PERKINS:
Wherein are hudled up many things confusedly: I will answer briefly and
distinctlie to every point.

The first is, that in the Apostles Creed are contained all points of
religion necessary to be believed, which is most apparently false, as the
Protestants themselves must needs confess; or else grant, that it is not
necessary to believe the King to be Supreame-head of the Church: or that the
Church is to be governed by Bishops: or that we are justified by Christ's
justice imputed to us: or that there be but two Sacraments: or that the Church
service must be said in the vulgar tongue; or that all things necessary to be
believed to salvation, are contained in the Scriptures. To be short, not one
article of their religion (which is contrary to ours) is contained in this
Creed of the Apostles: therefore to affirm as de does, all necessary points
of religion to be contained in this Creed, is to cast their own religion flat
to the ground; and to teach, that not one point of it is to be believed: this
Creed may nevertheless be called the key and rule of faith, because it
contains the principal points of the Christian religion, and does open (as
it were) the door unto all the rest, and guide a man certainly unto the
knowledge of them, by teaching us to believe the Catholic Church, 1. Tim. 3.
verse. 15. Ioh. 16. verse. 13.
which being the pillar and ground of truth, directed and guided by the spirit
of truth, will always instruct her obedient children, in all truth necessary
to salvation.

Then says Master PERKINS: The eternal truth of God, the creator shall depend
on the determination of the creature.

Nothing less: for Gods truth is most sincere and certain in it self, before
any declaration of the Church: but we poor creatures that are subject to
mistaking and error, should not so certaynelie understand and know that truth
of God, unless he had ordained and appointed such a skillful and faithful
Mistress and interpreter, to assure us both what is his word, and what is the
true meaning of it. Like as pure gold, is not made perfect in it self by the
Gold-smithes touchstone; but other men are thereby assured, that it is true
and pure gold: even so the word of God does not borrowe his truth from the
Church; but the true children of God are by the holy Church assured, which is
the same his word. If we did hold (as we do not) that the written word
contains all points of doctrine necessary to salvation: yet were it most
necessary to rely upon the Catholic Churches declaration, both to be assured
which books of Scriptures be Canonical, which not; (whereupon S. Augustine (a
man of far better judgment then any of these days) said, Con. Epist. Iud.
cap. 5.
that he would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Church
moved him thereunto:) as also to understand them truly; because the words of
holy Scripture, without the true meaning and sense of them, do but deceive men
and lead them into error; and to that end have always been, and yet are, by
Heretics abused, to draw others after them into destruction.

The like may be said of other ancient Creedes, and confessions of faith, which
holding the Apostles Creed, did add some few points unto it: namely, such
as were in those days called into question by Heretics of greater fame, and
who were followed of many, not touching in particular diverse other articles
generally believed of all true Christians, or else by some few and obscure men
only questioned. Wherefore to argue that no other points of faith are to be
believed, but such as are expressed in ancient Creedes, is to cut of a great
part of our faith.

Lastly, it is most untrue to say that those ancient Fathers and Councels knew
not of these articles of faith by him mentioned: for they have most plainly
taught them in their writings: yea, and expressly condemned of heresy, most of
the contrary positions, now again revived and holden by the Protestants; as
in those several questions I have before proved.

Touching believing in the Church, which he thrusts in by the way, we use not
that phrase, as the very Creed shows; following therein S. Augustine with
others, who hold, that to believe in a thing, is to make it our creator, by
giving our whole heart unto it; in which sense we believe not in Saints, nor in
the Church: albeit some other ancient Doctors, take the words to believe in,
not so precisely, but say that me may believe in the Church and in Saints:
that is, believe certainly that the Catholic Church is the only true company
of Christians; and that to the lawful governors thereof, it appertains to
declare both which books be Canonical, and what is the true meaning of all
doubtful places in them: so we believe the Saints in heaven to hear our
prayers, to be careful to pray for us, and to be able to obtain by entreaty
much at Gods hands, in whose high favor they live. Thus much in answer unto
that which M. PER. objecteth in general, now to that he says in particular.

He charge us first, with the breach of the third article, Conceived by the
holy Ghost: Which (says he) is ouerturned by the transubstantiation of bread
and wine in the Mass, into the body and blood of Christ: for here we are
taught to confess the true and perpetual incarnation of Christ, beginning in
his conception, and never ending afterward.

Answ. Here is a strange exposition of the Creed. Is Christ's incarnation
perpetual, and not yet ended? then it is true to say, that Christ is not yet
incarnate; as we may say truly, that a man is not borne, until his birth be
accomplished and ended. But to the present purpose: because Christ's
incarnation began at his conception, cannot bread be turned afterward into
his body? how hangs this together? Belike he means that Christ's body was
but once conceived, and that was by the holy Ghost in his mothers womb:
therefore it cannot afterward be made of any other thing. This to be his
meaning, he declares in the question of the Sacrament; but it is too too simple
and childish. For we hold him not to be so conceived by bread, as he was by the
holy Ghost, who was the efficient cause of his conception: but that the same
body that was conceived by the holy Ghost, is made really present in the
Sacrament, by transubstantiation of bread into it, which has no opposition at
al with this article, as I have more largely proved in the foresaid question.
And whereas he says further, clean besides the purpose of this article, that
Christ's body has the essential properties of a true body, standing of flesh
and bone: we grant the same; but when he adds that local circumscription
cannot be severed from a body, he is deceived: for the greatest body of all
others, (which is the highest heaven) is not circumscribed by any place;
because there is no other body without it, whose extreamities might compass
in, and circumscribe that body of the highest heaven. And when he says, that
to be circumscribed in place, is an essential property of every quantity; and
that quantity is the common essence of every body: he makes himself but a
common mocking-stocke unto every simple Logitian, who knows that no accident
(such as every quantity is) can be of the essence and nature of a substance,
such as Christ's body is. Neither would any man say, (that cared what he said)
that to be circumscribed in a place is essential to every quantity, when all
numbers that be quantities, have no relation unto any place: neither is it of
the essence of any quantity to be actually circumscribed by a place; but it is
a property flowing out of the essence of one only kind of quantity, to be apt,
and fit to be circumscribed and compassed about with a place. And naturally all
bodies (except the highest heaven) have one place, out of which they pass (as
S. Augustine said) when they come into another: but by the omnipotent power of
God, any body may be separated from his place, or be in as many places at once,
as it shall please God to seat it; because to be circumscribed with a place
actually, is a mere accident unto a substantial body, and without the nature
of quantity; and God may not without blasphemy be disabled to separate a
substance from an accident. By this is confuted also his second instance:
Christ is ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father, therefore his body is not really and locally in the Sacrament. This
follows not, because it is in both places at once, as S. Chrysostom in
express terms teaches. Chris. lib. 3. de Sacerd.
O miracle! O goodness of God! he that sits above with his Father, at the
very same instant is touched with the hands of all men, and gives himself to
them that will receive and embrace him! See more of this in the question of the
blessed Sacrament, where M. PERKINS cites the very same authorities, which he
here repeteth: see my answer to them there.

Thirdly, he reasons thus: In that we believe the Catholic Church, it
follows that it is invisible, because things seen, are not believed.

We answer: that the persons in the Catholic Church are and ever were
visible, even to Jews and Heathens who persecuted them; but the inward
indowmentes of those persons: that is, their faith, hope, and charity; their
assistance by Gods spirit, and such like Christian qualities, are invisible and
to be believed. And even as a man is truly said to be visible, though he
consist as well of an invisible soul, as of a visible body: so the Church is
visible, for the visible persons, visible teaching and administering of
Sacraments in it; albeit the inward qualities of it be not visible.

His last objection against us out of the Creed, is: That the articles of
remission of sins; resurrection of the body; and life everlasting, contain a
confession of special faith. For the meaning of them is thus much: I believe
the remission of mine own sins, and the resurrection of mine own body to
life everlasting.

Answer. That is not the meaning, unless you add some conditions: to wit, I
believe the remission of my sins, if I have duly used the means ordained by
our Savior for the remission of them; which is after Baptism, the Sacrament
of Penance. Item, I believe I shall have life everlasting, if I keep (as Christ
willed the yong-man to keep) Gods commandments, or (at the least) if I do
die with true repentance. Now whether I have done or shall do these things
required of me, I am not so well assured, as that I can believe it: for I may
be deceived therein; but I have or may have a very good hope, by the grace of
God to perform them. Neither is there any more to be gathered out of S.
Augustine, as some of the words by himself here alleged do convince. For he
requires besides faith, that we turn from our sins, conform our will to
Gods will, and abide in the lap of the Catholic Church; and so at length we
shall be healed. See the question of certainety of salvation. Note also by the
way, the uncertainty of M. PER. doctrine, Page 270. and 275.
concerning this point: for he holds that it is not necessary to have a
certain persuasion of our own salvation, but that it is sufficient to have a
desire to have it: and that doctrine he puts there (as he says himself) to
expound the Catechismes, that propound faith at so high a reach, as few can
attain unto: yet here and else where, the good man forgetting himself,
charge us to cross the Creed, because we do not wrest faith up to so high
a strain; and so in heat of quarelling, often expounds this contrary to his
own rule. Now for proof of S. Augustines opinion herein (whom he only
cites) take these two sentences for the two points he speaks of. For the
first, that we be certain by ordinary faith of our salvation, let this serve.
Of life everlasting, De bono persevere. cap. 22. De correct. and great. cap. 13.
which God (that cannot lie) has promised to his children, no man can be
secure (and out of danger) before his life be ended, which is a tentation upon
earth. Secondly, that a man once truly justified may afterward fall: We must
believe (says this holy Father) that certain of the children of perdition
do live in faith, that works by charity, and so do for a time live
faithfully and justly (they were then truly justified) and yet afterward do
fall, and that finally; because he calls then the children of perdition. Thus
much in answer unto that, which Master PERKINS objecteth against our religion
out of the Creed, which (as you have seen) consists wholly upon his own
forced exposition, and vain illations.

Hence he proceeds to the ten Commandments. But before I follow him
thither, I may not omit here to declare how the Protestant Doctors do foully
mangle, and in manner ouer-turne the greatest part of the Creed. Observe
first, that according to their common doctrine, it is not necessary to believe
this Creed at all, because it is no part of the written word: secondly, that
Calvin doubts whether it were made by the Apostles or no; Call. lib. 2.
Instit. cap. 16. sess. 18
being then no part of the written word, not made by the Apostles, it must by
their doctrine be wholly rejected. Now to the particulers.

1. Concerning the first article, I believe in God the Father almighty, maker
of heaven and earth, they do err many ways. First, they do destroy the most
simple unity of the Godhead, Confess. fidei gener.
by teaching the divine essence to be really distinguished into three persons.
If the divine nature be really distinguished into three, there must needs be
three divine essences or natures: ergo, three Gods. Calvin also says, In actis
Serueti. page 872.
that the Son of God has a distinct substance from his Father. Melancthon,
that there be as well three divine natures, as three persons, in locis de
Christo.

Secondly, they overthrow the Father in the Godhead, by denying the Son of
God, to have received the divine nature from his Father: as Calvin, Beza, and
Whitakers do. See the Preface.

Thirdly, how is God almighty, if he cannot do all things that have no
manifest repugnance in them? But he cannot after the opinion of diverse of them,
make a body to be without local circumscription, or to be in two places at
once; which notwithstanding some others of them hold to be possible, In colloq.
Marpurg. art. 29. Li. 1. cont. Scargum, cap. 14.
as Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Andreas Volanus, etc.

Fourthly, though we believe God to be maker of heaven and earth; yet never
none but blasphemous Heretics, held him to be true author and proper worker
of al evil done upon earth by men. Such nevertheless be Bucer, Zwinglius,
Calvin, and others of greatest estimation among the Protestants. See the
Preface.

2. And in JESUS Christ his only Son our Lord. They must needs hold Christ
not to be Gods true natural Son, which deny him to have received the divine
nature from the Father: again, they make him according to his Godhead,
inferior to his Father. See the Preface.

3. Borne of the Virgin MARY. Many of them teach, that Christ was borne as
other children are, Dialog. de corpore Christi. page 94. De consil. part. 2.
276.
with breach of his Mothers virginity, as Bucer, and Molineus in union
Euangelij part. 3. and Calvin signifies no less in harmo. sup. 2. Math. verse.
13.

4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified, dead, and buried. Friar Luther
(with a great band of his followers) does toughly defend, that the Godhead it
self suffered; which to be blasphemy, Musculus does prove in his book of the
errors of Luthers Scholars: yet Beza with all them that hold Christ to have
been our mediator, according to his divine nature, can hardly save themselves
from the same blasphemy. For the chiefest act of Christ's mediation, consists
in his death: if then the Godhead did not suffer that death, it had no part in
the principal point of Christ's mediatio^. Hither also appertain all these
their blasphemies, to wit: that Christ was so frighted with the apprehension of
death, that he forgotte himself to be our mediator; yea refused (as much as
in him lay) to be our redeemer: Item, that he thought himself forsaken of God,
and finally despaired. See the Preface.

5. Descended into hell, the third day he arose again from the dead. It is
worth a man's labor, to behold their goodly variety of expositions about
Christ's descending into hell: 2. Apolog. ad Sanct.
Beza followed of Corliel our Countryman, thinks this to have crept into the
Creed by negligence; and so the French Hugonots, and Flemish Gues have cast it
clean out of their Creed: but they are misliked of many others, who had
rather admit the words, because they be found in Athanasius Creed, and also
in the old Roman Creed expounded by Ruffinus: but they do most peruersly
expound them. Calvin says, that Christ's suffering of the pains of hell on
the Cross, is signified by these words: but he pleases not some others of
them; because Christ's suffering and death also, goes before his descending
into hell, and the words must be taken orderly as they lie. Thirdly, diverse of
them will have it to signify, the laying of Christ's body in the grave; but
that is signified plainly by the word, buried. Wherefore some others of them
expound it to signify, the lying of his body in the grave three days, which
M. PER. approves as the best; but it is as wide from the proper and literal
signification of the words, as can be. For what likeness is there between
lying in the grave, and descending into hell? Besides, Calvin their great
Rabbin misliketh this exposition, as much as any of the rest, Lib. 2. Instit.
ca 16. sess. 8.
and calls it an jdle fancy. Fourthly, Luther, Smideline, and others cited by
Beza, art. 2. do say, that Christ's soul after his death went to hell, where
the Devils are, there to be punished for our sins, thereby to purchase us a
fuller redemption; which is so blasphemous that it needs not any refutation.
As ridiculous is another, received of most Protestants; that Christ's soul
went into Paradise, which well understood is true. For his soul in hell, had
the joys of Paradise; but to make that an exposition of Christ's descending
into hell, is to expound a thing by the flat contrary of it. Al these and some
other expositions also, the Protestants have devised, to lead their followers
from the ancient, and only true interpretation of it: to wit, that Christ in
soul descended unto those lower parts of the earth, where all the souls
departed from the beginning of the world, were detained by the just judgment
of God, till Christ had paid their ransom; and were not admitted into the
kingdom of heaven, before Christ had opened them the way thither.

6. Concerning Christ's resurrection, they do also err. For whereas a
resurrection is the rising up of the very same body that died, with all his
natural parts: they deny Christ to have taken again the same blood, Call. in
27. Math. Perkins page 194. In cap. 24. Lucae.
which he shed in his passion; and yet is the blood one notable part of the
body. Calvin also affirms it to be an old wifes dream, to think that in
Christ's hands and feet there remain the print of nails, and the wound in
his side, notwithstanding that Christ showed them to his Disciples, and offered
them to be touched of S. Thomas.

7. About Christ's assension into heaven, they do somewhat dissent from the
truth. For some of them say, that Christ's body did not pearce through the
heavens by virtue of a glorious body (least they should thereby be compelled to
grant, that two natural bodies may be together in one place, and therefore as
well one true body in two places at once) but that broad gappes were made in
the lower heavens, to make him way to the highest, which is very ridiculous,
and more against true Philosophy: they say also, 1. Cor. 15. verse. 21. Coll. 1,
18.
that he was not the first man that entered into the possession of heaven,
which is flat against the Scriptures, that call Christ the first fruits and
first begotten of the dead. Thirdly, they lock Christ so closely up in heaven,
Beza in c. 2. actorum
that they hold it impossible for him to remove thence at any time before the
last judgment (for fear they should otherwise be enforced to confess, that
his body may be in two places at once) which is to make him not Lord of the
place, but some poor prisoner therein. And as for Christ's sitting on the right
hand of his Father, they are not yet agreed what it signifies. See Conrad. L.
1. ar. 25 de concor. Caluinist.
L. 2. Insti c. 14. ss. 3.
Calvin plainly says, that after the later judgeme^t he shall sit there no
longer. That God shall then render to every man according to his works (as holy
Scripture very often does testify) all the pack of them does utterly deny.

8. I believe in the holy Ghost. First Calvin and his followers (who hold the
holy Ghost to have the Godhead of himself, and not to have received it from
the Father and the Son) must consequently deny the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Father and the Son, In the Preface.
as has been else where proved. Secondly, they make him much inferior unto
the other persons: for they teach in their French Catechismes, that the Father
alone is to be adored in the name of the Son. In cap. 6. and 17. Isa. and in
16. Marc.
And Calvin against Gentil says, that the title of creator belongs only to
the Father: and else where, that the Father is the first degree and cause of
life, and the Son the second. And that the In 26. Math. v. 64.
Father holds the first rank of honor and government, and the Son the
second; where the holy Ghost is either quite excluded from part with the Father
and the Son, or at most, must be content with the third degree of honor.

9. I believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints. First, where
as there is but one Catholic Church, one
as the Council of Nice expressly defines, following sundry textes of the word
of God; they commonly teach that there be two Churches: one invisible of the
elect; another visible of both good and bad. Secondly, they imagine it to be
holy, holy
by the imputation of Christ's holiness to the elected Brethren, and not by
the infusion of the holy Ghost into the hearts of all the faithful. Thirdly,
they cannot abide the name Catholic in the true sense of it: Catholic
that is, they will not believe the true Church, to have been always visibly
extant since the Apostles time, and to have bin generally spread into all
Countries; otherwise they must needs forsake their own Church, which began
with Friar Luther, and is not received generally in the greatest part of the
Christian world. Finally, they believe no Church, no not their own in all
points of faith: but hold that the true Church may err in some principal
points of faith. How then can any man safely rely his salvation, upon the
credit of such an uncertain ground and erring guide? may they not then as
well say that they do not believe the one Catholic Church: because they do
as well not believe it, as believe it? And as for the communion of Saints,
their learned masters do commonly cassier it out of the Creed, and that not
without cause. For by the Saints understanding (as the Apostles did) al good
Christians whither alive or departed this world, they that deny prayer to
Saints, and for the souls in Purgatory, have reason to reject the common
society and intercourse that is between the Saints, and the mutual honor and
help, which such good Christian souls do yield and afford one to another.

10. The forgiveness of sins. It is not easily to find what is their settled
opinion, touching the forgiveness of original sin in Infants. Some attribute
it to Baptism; but that cannot stand with their common doctrine, that
Sacraments have no virtue in them to remit sins, or to give grace. Others
say, that God without any means does then, when they be baptized, of himself
immediately justify them; but that cannot stand in their own doctrine,
because Infants want the instrument of faith to lay hold on that justice then
offered by God, and therefore cannot being so young, take it unto them. Others
will have Infants sanctified in their mothers womb, by virtue of a covenant,
which they suppose God to have made with old father Abraham, and all his
faithful servants, that (forsooth) their seed shall be holy; But this is most
fantastical, and contrary to the Scriptures and daily experience: for Isaac
was the son of promise, and yet Esau his son was a reprobate; Dauides
father was a Godly Israelite, and yet David affirms, Psalm. 50.
that he himself was conceived in iniquities; and we may see whole Countries
now turned Turks, whose ancestors were good Christians: therefore not all the
souls of the faithful, are sanctified in their mothers wombes. Secondly, how
evil soever they agree about the remission of sin; yet there is a perfect
consent among them, that such relikes of original sin remain in every man
baptized and sanctified, that it infecteth all and every work he does, with
deadly sin: yea that which remains is properly sin in it self, though it
be not imputed to the party; so that sin is always in them, though their
sins be never so well forgiven. And as for the Sacrament of Penance, by which
we hold al sins committed after Baptism to be forgiven; they do renounce
the benefit of it, and are at utter defiance with it.

11. The resurrection of the bodies. Whether Farel the first Apostle of the
Geneuian Gospel doubted thereof or no, let his successor Calvin tell you, who
answers Farels letter thus. Episto. ad Farellum.
That the resurrection of this our flesh does seem to thee incredible, no
marvel, etc. Again, many of them teach that Christ took not his blood
again, which he shed upon the cross: yea, some of them are so graceless, as
to say; that his precious blood wherewith we were redeemed, Vide Conradum, li.
1. art. 20.
rotted away on the earth. 1600. years ago. If then it be not necessary to a
true resurrection, to rise again with the same blood; why is it necessary to
rise again with the same bones and flesh, the one being as perfect a part of a
man's body as the other?

12. Life everlasting. First, Captain Calvin holds it for very certain,
that no soul does enter into the joys of heaven (wherein consists life
everlasting) until the day of doom. 3. Institu. 25. sess. 6.
These be his words: the souls of the Godly having ended the labor of this
war-fare, do go into a blessed rest, where they expect the enjoying of the
promised glory: And that all things are holden in suspense until Christ the
redeemer appear; whose opinion is yet better then was his predecessor Luthers.
For he teaches in many places, that the souls of the Godly departing from
their bodies, Enarra. in Genesis c. 26. In Ecclesi. c. 9. v. 10.
have no sense at all, but do lie fast a sleep until the latter day: Take
this one for a taste. Another place to prove, that the dead feel, or understand
nothing: wherefore Solomon thought the dead to be wholly a sleep, and to
perceive nothing at all. And again, the sleep of the soul in the life to
come, is more profound then in this life. And Luther with this one position of
his (as that famous historiographer John Sleidan records) ouerthrewe two
points of Popery: Li. 9. hist.
to wit, praying to Saints; for they are so fast a sleep, that they cannot
hear us: and praying for the dead; For they in Purgatory slept also so
soundly, that they felt no pains. A meet foundation surely to build such
false doctrine upon. In 20. Luc hom. 35.
But Brentius is most plain in this matter, who ingeniously confesses; that,
albeit there were not many among them, that did profess publicly the souls
to die with the body; yet the most unclean life, which the greatest part of
their followers did lead, does clearly show, that in their hearts they think
no life to be after this: yea, that many such speeches do sometimes proceed
from them. Finally, it is a gross error of theirs, to think that every mean
Godly man, shall be then made equal in glory with the Apostles, In 1. cap.
Petri 1. 1. Cor. 15. verse. 42.
which Luther teaches; whereas clean contrary S. Paul declares, that as one
star differs from another in glory: so also shall be the resurrection of
the dead.

I omit here many other particularities, that I be not over tedious: For these
their bickeringes against the very principles of our Christian faith, (not
leaving any one article of our Creed vnskirmished with all) will serve any
indifferent man for a warning, to beware of their profane doctrine, that
leads the high way to Infidelity. They use to cry out much against the
Antichrist of Rome, for corrupting the purity of the Gospel, as the wicked
Elders did against the adultery of Susanna: but the juditious Christian may
easily epsy, them themselves to be the true forerunners of Antichrist in
deed, by their so general hacking and hewing at every point of the ancient
Christian faith. Thus much concerning the Creed: now let us pass to the
Commandments.

First (says Master PERKINS) it is a rule in expounding the several
Commandments, that all virtues of the same kind are reduced to that
Commandment: Hence it follows, that counsels of perfection are enjoined in
the law, and therefore prescribe no state of perfection beyond the scope of
the law.

Answ. None of the counsels of perfection are enjoined in the ten
Commandments, though for some affinity, they may be reduced to some of them.
For example: It is commanded that I shall not steal, that is: to take any of
my neighbors goods against his will; but to give away all my own to the
poor, is beyond the compass of the law: so likewise it is commanded not to
commit adultery; but we are not commanded to vow perpetual chastity and
obedience. Such offices only that are necessarily required to the performance
of any commandment, are comprehended with in the same, but no others; though
some men take occasion of the commandment, to treat of the counsels of
perfection.

Secondly (says M. PER.) the Commandment, thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, etc. has two several parts: the first forbids the
making of Images: the second the adoration of them. He concludes out of
Deutronomy, that the Images of the true Iehoua are forbidden in the
Commandment, and consequently the adoration of such Images. Hence he will have
it to follow, that to worship God in or at Images with religious worship, is
abominable Idolatry.

Answ. First if the Images of God only be there prohibited, and then worship
done to them according to his own exposition, then it follows most clearly,
that there is no prohibition for either making or worshipping the Images of any
Saints; and therefore with a very evil conscience does he wrest the
commandment against them. Secondly I say, though God had forbidden us to
worship Images, yet does it not follow thereof, that we must not worship God
in, or at Images. For as God is every where; so may he be worshipped in all
places, and as well at or before an Image; as in the Church, and before the
communion table. Thirdly, we make no Images to express the nature of God,
which is a spirit, and cannot be represented by lines and colors, but only
allow of some such pictures, as set out some apparitions of God, recorded in
the Bible; not doubting but that such works of God, may as well be expressed in
colors to our eyes, as they are by words to our ears and understanding.
Lastly, touching religious worship to be done to Saints or pictures, the
Heretics cauilling consists principally in the diverse taking of the word
religious. For it is ambiguous, and principally signifies the worship only due
to God; Analogon.
in which sense to give it to any creature were Idolatry: but it is also with
the best authors taken some other time, to signify a worship due to creatures,
for some supernatural virtue or quality in them; and in this sense to term
it detestable Idolatry, is either detestable malice, or damnable ignorance. And
whereas (he says) that common reason teaches, that they who adore God in
Images, do bind God and his hearing of us, to certain things and places: I
say the contrary, that God may be worshipped in all places; but we rather
choose to worship him in Churches and before Images then in other places,
because the sight of such holy things, do breed more reverence and devotion
in us, and better keep our minds from wandering upon vain matters. If we
taught that God could be worshipped no where else, or by no other means, then
he had not lied so loudly. But let us hear the end of his discourse: thus he
argues. They that worship, they know not what, worship an Idol. This
exposition is false, unless they worship it with divine honor. But go on:
the Papists worship they know not what. I prove it thus: to the consecration
of the Host, there it required the intention of the Priest: but they cannot
have any certainety of the Priests intention, wherefore they are not certain
whether it be bread, or the body of Christ. ergo, worshipping of it, they
worship they know not what.

Answ. First, here is leaping from the Commandments to the Sacraments, which
is out of order: secondly, I return his argument upon him self. To their
service and in the administration of the Lords supper, the Ministers intention
is required: for if he intend to serve the Devil, and by giving them the
communion to bind them the faster to him; then do they (in saying Amen to his
prayers, and receiving the communion at his hands) join with him in the
Devils service. Now they have no more certainety of their Ministers meaning,
then we have of our Priests intention: yea much less of many of them, who are
mad-merry fellows, and care not greatly whereabout they go, nor what they
intend: must they therefore fly from their divine service and holy communion,
because they be not certain of their Ministers intention therein? Surely they
should, if his reason were ought worth. But in such cases we must persuade our
selves that Gods Ministers do their duty, unless we see great cause to the
contrary; and thereupon are we bold to do our duty to the blessed Sacrament:
If he should fail in his, yet our intention being pure to adore Christ's holy
body only, and nothing else there, we should formally be the true worshippers
of Christ, though materially we were mistaken in that Host; which to term
Idolatry, is to style our Savior JESUS Christ an Idol, and therefore
blasphemy in the highest degree.

His third objection is out of the fourth Commandment, which (as he says)
gives a liberty to work six days in the ordinary affairs of our calling,
which liberty (says he) cannot be repealed by any creature: the Church of Rome
therefore erreth, in that it prescribes other set and ordinary festival
days, to be observed as straightly, and with as much solemnity as the Sabbath
of the Lord.

Answ. Does not the Church of England also prescribe the Nativity of our
Savior, and of S. John Baptist, the feasts of the Apostles, and many others
to be kept holy, and command that no man work in the affairs of their calling
those days? does their own Church also err therein? How say you then to the
Church of the Israelites, which kept the feasts of Easter, Whitsontide, and of
the Tabernacles, as straightly and with as much solemnity, as they kept the
Lords Sabbath: was it also misled to the breach of Gods Commandments? or
must we not rather thereby learn, that six days in the week, were at the
first left us free to labor in; but yet so, that by the decree and
commandment of our spiritual Governors, any of them might (upon just
occasion) be made festival, and thereupon every good Christian bound to keep
them, by their obedience unto their Governors? to think the contrary is a
high point of Puritanisme.

Fourthly (says M. PER.) the fist Commandment enjoyneth children to obey
father and mother in all things, specially in matters of moment; as in their
Marriages and choice of their calling, and that even to death: and yet the
Church of Rome against the intent of this Commandment, allows that
clandestine Marriages and the vow of religion shall be in force, though they
be without and against the consent of wise and careful parents.

Answ. It is very false to say that children must obey their parents in all
things: for if parents command them any thing either against Gods law or the
Princes, they must not obey them therein. And touching clandestine and privy
Marriages, they are of force as well in the Church of England, as in the Church
of Rome: yea more too. For by the Church of Rome always they have been
forbidden very severely; and since the Council of Trent, are made void and of
no force, where the Council can be published. Concerning entering into
religion, childrens vows (during their minority) may be annullated and made of
no force by their parents: marry, when they come to riper days, if their
father stand not in necessity of their help, they may forsake him to follow
Christ in a more perfect kind of life: as S. James and S. John forsook their
father Zebedee, and followed Christ. Math. 4. verse. 22.


Fifthly, The last Commandment (says M. PER.) forbids the first motions to
sin, that are before consent. He proves it thus: Lusting with consent is
forbidden in the former Commandments: thou shall not commit adultery, and thou
shall not steal: therefore if the last forbid no more, it is confounded with
the former. Again, the Philosophers knew that lust with consent was evil, even
by the light of nature; but Paul a learned Pharisee, knew not lust to be
sin, that is forbid in the Commandment. Lust therefore that is forbidden
here, is without consent. Romans 7.
Wicked then is the doctrine of Rome, that requires our consent to every
mortal sin.

Answ. Their doctrine is most reasonable and godly: For the first motions to
sin, are rather the actions of the evil spirit, tempting us to evil; then
of a man, in whose mind they are before he is aware of them; and who as soon
as he begins to mark them, disliketh them and chaseth them thence: and how
can he carry a right opinion of the mild goodness of God, that thinks him so
hasty with his frail creature man, as to punish him eternally for such a
thought, as is thrust into his mind at unawares, and may come upon him in his
sleep, went he never so well disposed to bed? Se more of this in the question
of original sin. To his reasons to the contrary I answer to the first, that
lust with consent is not expressly forbid in the former commandments, but the
act of adultery and stealing: yet, it might well have been reduced unto them,
as it is in the other commandments. Nevertheless, because our frailty is more
prone to the wicked lust of concupiscence, and desire of our neighbors goods;
it pleased God for the better bridling of them, to give us particular precepts
against them; specially considering, that it was also very hard, by the dim
light of our darkened reason, to discern them to be such capital sins. And
whereas he says, that the Philosophers knew the inward consent of our mind,
without any exterior acts to be mortal sin: I take him to speak at
random, and more then he can prove. Sure it is, that many learned Jews, who
should know more then Philosophers, knew not so much: Cap. 5.28. and 29. Romans
ca. 7. verse. 7.
as may be gathered out of S. Mathewe, and out of Josephus lib. 12. Antiq. cap.
13. and David Kimhy upon the 66. Psalm verse. 17. And S. Paul's own confession
rightly understood witnesses the same: For (says he) I had not known
concupiscence to have been sin, unless the law had taught it to be sin.
Wherefore it was very expedient, after the inhibition of the acts of adultery
and theft, to forbid in plain and express terms, the lusts and desires of
them.

Lastly (says M. PER.) the words of the second Commandment (and show mercy
unto thousands on them that love me, and keep my Commandments) overthrows
all humane merits. For if the reward be given of mercy to them that keep the
law, it is not given for the merit of the work done.

Answ. Either simple was this man's judgment sometimes, or else most peruersly
bent to deceive the simple. For God speaks there, neither of the reward that
is rendered in heaven for good works; neither of any reward at all, that is
rendered unto the person himself that keeps Gods commandments: but of a
superaboundant favor, that God of his bounty will show unto thousands of
others, for one man's sake that loves him and keeps his commandments:
therefore very peuishly does he draw hence any thing against merits.

And to begin here where M. PER. leaves, to show how their new doctrine
and inuentious, does cross and make void the commandments of God. First in
that, that he promises mercy and favor unto thousands for ones sake, that
keeps his Commandments, we gather: that God in regard of his Saints (who so
holily observed his Commandments) does grant unto us many favors and graces:
also, that the satisfaction of one may serve for another; for else God would
not punish children unto the third and fourth generation, for the offense of
their great grandfather, unless their punishment served to satisfy for their
ancestors offense: hence also we gather, that some men do keep Gods
Commandments, otherwise God did in vain promise to favor thousands for
their sakes that kept the Commandments, if he knew well that there should be
none such. Therefore most ungodly is that position of the Protestants, that it
is impossible to keep the Commandments: and which alone overthrows all the
ten Commandments. For as all men skillful in the true nature of laws do
hold: there can be no just law, that is impossible to be kept, by the greater
part of them to whom the law is given; because laws are both to direct our
actions, and do also bind every man to observe them. Now what reasonable
lawe-maker will beat his brain to direct a man to do that, which he knows
before hand, not to lie in the man's power to do? and as tyrannical should he
be esteemed, that would bind a man under a great penalty, to do that which he
knew to be impossible for him to do. Which two points S. Augustine does in
one sentence confirm, saying; De fid co^t. Manich. cap. 9.
Who does not cry out that it is folly to give him Commandments, in whose
power it is not to perform them? and who does not say that it is unjust, to
condemn him for not doing just things, when he could not do them? The
Protestants therefore affirming the Commandments not to be possible to be
performed, do make them no laws at all; and so they at one blow, do beat
down all the ten Commandments. But let us come to the particulers.

1. The first Commandment, as it forbids us to worship false Gods: so does
it also include a commandment to worship a right the only true God, which is
done principally by Faith, Hope, Charity and Religion. The Protestants by their
perverting of many articles of our belief (as has bin showed) have lost the
true faith, and by their new certainety of faith, leave no place for hope: for
they are past hope of salvation, that make themselves so assured of it as they
do. 1. Epist. 5. verse. 3.
And as for charity which S. John defines to be the keeping of Gods
Commandments, they must needs confess themselves to be far from it, which
hold that to be impossible: and with the principal part of true religion
(which consists in offering a true, real, and external sacrifice unto God,
as in that question has been proved) they are at utter defiance.

2. Touching the second Commandment after our account; as God is honored by
swearing in justice, judgment, and truth: so is he also by vows made unto him
of Godly and religious duties, which the Prophet David signifies, Psalm. 75.
verse. 13.
when he says: vow ye, and render your vows unto the Lord your God.
Here-vpon many Catholics have, and do continually vow perpetual poverty,
chastity, and obedience, the more fully and freely to serve God; which holy
vows the Protestants disalowe wholly: neither do they allow of any other
vows, for ought I have heard: they do therefore diminish the service of God,
and pare away a part of that which is reduced to the second Commandment.

3. And whereas in the third we are commanded to keep holy the Sabbath day,
which is principally performed by hearing (attentively and devoutly) that
divine service, which was instituted by Christ, and delivered by his Apostles,
which is the holy Mass: they may not abide it, but serve God after the
inue^tion of their own brains, with a mingle-mangle of some old, some new,
odly patched together.

4. In the fourth we are commanded to obey our Princes, as well as our parents,
and all other our Governors in all lawful matters: yet the Protestants hold,
that our Princes laws do not bind us in conscience.

5. The fifth Commandment, teaches that no man be killed by private authority:
yet Protestants hold it lawful to take arms, even against their lawful
Princes for the advancement of their Gospel, and have in that quarrel killed,
and caused to be killed, millions in Germany, France, Flanders, and Scotland.

6. The sixth forbids adultery, which is allowed of by Protestants in some
case. For they permit one party after diuorcement to marry again, the other
yet living; Mar. 10. verse. 11.
whereas our Savior says: Whosoever dimisseth his wife and marries another
commits adultery upon her. And if the wife dimisse her husband and marry
another, she commits adultery. Moreover, incest is also forbidden in this
Commandment; now by the Canons of the Catholic Church, and the authority of
the ancient Fathers, it is incest for one Cosen german to marry with an
other: yet is it not seldom practiced; yea, it is generally allowed of in the
Church of England.

7. The seventh Commandment, condemns with theft, usury, and al withholding
of our neighbors goods, which was gotten unlawfully: yet Protestants
commonly make no conscience to take ten in the hundredth, which is plain
usury; and as for restitution of evil gotten goods, it is clean out of
fashion among them.

8. The eight probibiteth us to bear false witness against our neighbor: and
yet do Ministers (the master Protestants) in their pulpit (where truth should
only be taught) most commonly bear such safe witness against Catholics, that
the very stones may be astonished at their most impudent slanders, to wit: that
Papists believe in stocks and stones: that they will not be saved by Christ
and his passion, but by their own works: that they rob God of his honor,
and give it to Saints; and a hundredth such like most notorious and palpable
lies. Wherefore as they Preachers be guilty of bearing false witness: so the
auditors deserve to be seduced by them, who hearing them to lie so shamelesly
in some things, will nevertheless believe them in others.

9. and 10. Of the ninth and tenth. I have spoken already; wherein they err
grievously, in teaching every man to sin damnably, by having any evil motion
cast into his mind by the Devil, albeit he resists it presently, and
forthwith chase it away. In which conflict and ouercomming of temptation, the
grace and power of God is perfited as S. Paul witnesses: and S. James calls
the allurement of concupiscence temptation only; and then first sin when it
conceiueth (that is) gets some liking of the party.

Now to conclude this passage, if you please to hear to what height of
perfect observance of the Commandments, the Evangelical preachers have
brought their followers in Germany unto, by teaching the Commandments to be
impossible, and that only faith justifies, and that good works have no reward
in heaven, and such like; Iacobus Andreas a famous Lutheran shall inform you,
who writes thus. De Planetis.
That the whole world may see these men alienated from the Papacy, and to put
no confidence in works; therefore they do no good work at all. In stead of
fasting, they feast and are drunken day and night: in lieu of Alms, they
oppress and pil the poor: they have changed praying into cursing and
blaspheming the name of God so profanely; that no Turks nor Saracens commit
the like impiety against Christ: for humility, there reigns pride, disdain,
cruelty, and riotte in apparel, etc. and much more to the same purpose. And
that this truth may be confirmed by the testimony of two sound witnesses;
Musculus a man of no small account among them, thus reports of his Brethren
in the Lord. Such now a days is the condition of the Lutherans, De prophetia
Christi.
that if any man list to behold a great number of Knawes, robbers, malicious
persons, coseners, usurers, and such like deceivers, let him but enter into a
City where the Gospel is taught, and there he shall find good store of them:
and a little after. Surely it is true, that among Heathens, Jews, Turks, and
other Infidels, none can be found more unruly, and that less esteem of
honesty and virtue, then the Evangelical Brethren; with whom all things
pass current, and nothing almost is blamed (except virtue:) For the Devil
has shaken of all their bands, and turned them loose. Having done with the
Creed and ten Commandments, we must now come to our Lords prayer.

Master PER. begins with it thus. The Lords prayer is a most absolute form
of prayer: now in this we are taught to direct our prayers to God alone, Our
father, etc. and that only in the name and mediation of Christ; for God is our
father only by Christ: therefore to use any mediation of Saints is needelesse.

Ans. We allow our Lords prayer to be a most perfect form of prayer: yet
hold that many other sort of prayers may be made unto God very acceptably, as
sundry other prayers used by Christ and set down in the Gospel do teach us:
and therefore to argue that because one prayer of Christ's making is directed to
God, that no other may be made to any Saint, is very childish. We gather prayer
to Saints out of S. Paul's requesting the Romans and Corinthians, and others to
pray for him: and out of the mediation of the woman of Cananea to Christ for
her daughter: and the Disciples speaking to Christ for her; with such like both
out of the old and new Testament. For if it had been either needless or
bootelesse, to have prayed unto God any otherwise, then in the name and by the
mediation of Christ; then S. Paul would not have requested the help of mortal
men's prayers to God for him: and if poor sinners prayers may help us, much
more may the intercession of the glorious Saints do, who are in far greater
favor with God: See the question of intercession of Saints. Again, if that
only form of prayer were to be used, neither were it lawful to pray to Christ
himself; neither could it be proved thereby, that we should pray in Christ's
name. For there is no express mention of Christ's name; neither any petition
for Christ's sake. For God may be truly called our father, in that he
immediately creates and gives us our souls, which is more then our bodies,
that we receive from our carnal fathers.

Secondly, he hoppeth to the fourth petition. Give us our daily bread: in
which words we acknowledge (says he) that every morsel of bread is the mere
gift of God: what madness then is it for us to think that we should merit the
kingdom of heaven, that cannot merit so much as bread? It is false that we
cannot merit our bread: Math. 10. verse. 11. 1. Cor. 9. verse. 14.
For Christ teaches, that he who goes to preach the Gospel, is worthy of,
that is: meriteth and deserves his meat; which S. Paul testifies, saying:
that our Lord ordained, that those who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. And do not day laborers deserve their bread, before they eat it?
and others that buy their bread, do I hope deserve it. What ignorance then is
it, in the very principles of our faith, to avouch that we cannot merit bread?
which notwithstanding we pray God to give us; because, neither could we deserve
and yerne it, without his help and assistance; neither would it do us any
good without his blessing.

Thirdly, in the next petition: Forgive us our debtes; four opinions of the
Roman religion (says he) are directly overthrown. What four at one blow!
what a Hercules have we here? let us hear which. The first is humane
satisfaction: for the child of God is taught here to pray for the pardon of his
sins; now to pray for pardon and to make satisfaction be contrary.

Answ. This is a silly overthrow: for it is so far of, that prayer and
satisfaction are contraries, that prayer it self is one of the three works of
satisfaction: Fasting, Praying, and giving of Alms are not contrary, but the
very works of satisfaction. Lib. 1. de Simbolo. cap. 6. in Enchir. cap. 69.
And our Lords prayer is esteemed by S. Augustine (who is as soon to be
believed as M. PERKINS) sufficient of it self, to satisfy for the light
daily offenses that just men fall into: besides Christ himself prayed for
pardon of these mortal sins, for which notwithstanding Gods justice was
fully satisfied by Christ his sufferings; wherefore satisfaction and to sue for
pardon, are not so contrary, but they may well stand together.

Now to the second downfall: merits are here also overthrown. For we
acknowledge our selves debtors, and we daily increase our debts: now it is
madness to think that they, who daily increase their debts, can deserve or
purchase any good of the creditors, in a word, this must be thought upon, etc.

And good reason too. First then I answer, that venial sins and small debts
that just men daily incur, do not hinder the daily merit of their other
good works. As a servant hired by the day, by committing some small fault,
does not thereby loose his days wages: again, though he should commit such a
fault, that might make him unworthy of his days hire; yet, if his Master did
forgive him that fault, his wages were notwithstanding due to him: and so the
asking pardon for our sins does not overthrow, but rather establish and
fortify our merits.

The third opinion imagined to be confuted by this petition, is: that temporal
punishment may be retained after the crime it self, and the eternal is
remitted: but this cannot stand (says he.) For we owe to God obedience, and
for the defect of this payment, we owe to God the forfeiture of punishment.
Sin then is called our debt, in respect of the punishment: And therefore when
we pray for pardon of our sins, we require not only the fault to be pardoned,
but the whole punishment; and when debt is pardoned, it is absurd to think
that the least payment should remain.

Answ. Here is a most absurd collection: For when we in our Lords prayer crave
pardon of our debts, we confess that we are in his debt, and that there is
payment of punishment yet due unto us, the remission whereof we then require:
now this prayer is made by the best men after their conversion (as he
confesses) who standing in Gods favor, and therefore free from eternal
punishment, do notwithstanding crave pardon and release of some punishment, by
M. PERKINS own interpretation: Whereupon it follows most evidently out of
this petition, that after eternal punishment is forgiven unto the just, there
is some other punishment remaining, of which they crave pardon; and
consequently this opinion of ours is (by this very petition and M. PER. own
exposition of it) much strengthened and confirmed, and nothing at all weakened.

The fourth point of our doctrine hence impugned by M. PER. is that a man in
this life may fulfill the law. Whereas in this place every servant of God is
taught to ask daily pardon for the breach of the law: answer is made, that
our daily sins are venial, and not against the law, though besides the
law: but this which they say, is against this petition: for a debt that
comes by forfeiture, is against the band or obligation. Now every sin is a
debt causing the forfeiture of punishment, and therefore is not beside, but
against the law.

Ans. I grant that every sin is a debt, causing the forfeiture of
punishment; but this punishment may be small and short, and so the sin
venial, and the debt not against the law directly, yet against the band of
some moral duty: as the mispending of time, using of some jdle words, and the
committing of such like light faults, which I am bound in reason to avoid; but
not by any prescript law directly. And thus in fine we see, how foully M. PER.
was mistaken, that thought to overthrow four points of our doctrine at a clap,
when not so much as one is thereby any whit at all stirred.

He says further, In this clause (as we forgive our debtors) it is taken for
granted, that we may certainly know that we repent and believe, and are
reconciled by God; which all Roman Catholics deny.

Answ. Nothing less, because much more is required to the one, then to the
other. For it is far easier to discern, whether I do yet bear any evil
will to my neighbor, then to know assuredly, that I do heartily repent me of
al my sins, and that for the love of God; and further that I have a firm
purpose not to commit hereafter, any kind of mortal sin: these things (as
every one may plainly see) are far more difficult, then the other of
forgiving them that trespass against us.

In the last words: and lead us not into temptation, we pray not (says he)
that God should free us from temptation, Psalm. 26. verse. 1.
for it is otherwhiles good to be tempted: but that we be not left unto the
malice of Satan, and held captive of the temptation: for here to be led into
temptation, and to be delivered, are opposed. Now hence I gather, that he who
is the child of God truly justified and sanctified, shall never fall wholly and
finally from the grace of God; and I conclude on this manner. That which we
ask according to the will of God, 1. Ioh. 5.
shall be granted: but this the child of God asks, that he might never be
wholly forsaken of his father, and led captive into temptation: this therefore
shall be granted.

Answ. If this argument were sound, never should any Christian that says our
Lords prayer, fall finally and be damned; because they all make this petition,
and that according to the will of God, 1. Tim. 2. verse. 4.
who would have all men saved. Many things then besides saying our Lords
prayer, are required to salvation, for want of which many that have often said
that prayer fall finally. Again, he mistaketh the true sense of that petition:
for therein we do not ask that we continue not in sin, which we asked in
the former petition (forgive us our trespasses) but we pray that we be not
overcome by the Devil, by yielding our consent to the temptation, and so fall
into sin. Lastly, he forgets himself much when he says, that it is good
to be tempted: for he holds for certain, that the very first motions to
sin in us (which is the beginning of the temptation) are mortal sins; and
so by himself, it is good to fall into mortal sin, if it be good we should
be tempted.

Finally (he says) this clause (Amen) signifies a special faith concerning
all the former petitions, that they shall be granted, and therefore a special
faith concerning remission of sins.

Answ. It signifies a special hope and confidence to obtain them, but no
certainety of faith, unless upon a condition which is uncertain: that is, if
we do our parts, God will not fail of his; if we do heartily repent us, and
use the Sacrament of Penance duly, we shall assuredly obtain remission of our
sins. Hitherto M. PER. has argued against us out of the Lords prayer: now
I will briefly show how the Protestants doctrine contrarieth it.

I have in my answer to his objections, touched some points already: I add,
that one position of their doctrine crosses three of the first petitions. I
prove it thus: In every petition we must be assured (as M. PER. holds) or at
the least have a good hope to obtain that we pray for, or else it booteth us
not to pray: but according to the Protestants doctrine no man can be assured,
nay can have any hope to obtain the three first petitions: for if original
sin do continually dwell in us, and infect all our actions with deadly sin
as they teach; Gods name cannot be sanctified in us, that are infected with
such an unclean leprosy: neither secondly, can God reign as a King in us, if
sin possess and command all our members: and thirdly, Gods will cannot be
done by us on earth as it is done in heaven, if we cannot keep his laws and
commandments, which they in heaven do: wherefore the Protestants have no
assurance to obtain the three first petitions, who are by their teachers
assured, that they are not to be expected or hoped for: nor they cannot
(according to their own rules) from their heart make the said petitions, being
out of all hope to obtain them.

In the fourth, we ask as well to be made partakers of Christ's blessed body in
the Sacrament, which is the food of our souls: as for our daily corporal
susteinance. For so do the ancient Fathers expound that petition: as namely S.
Ciprian in oratione Dominica: S. Hierome in 6. Mathaei: S. Ambrose li. 5. de
Sacrament. c. 4. where he has these memorable words of the blessed Sacrament:
that before the words of Christ it was bread, but after it is the body of
Christ. Why then (says he) is it called here bread? he answers, that it is
called bread not simply, but supersubstantiall bread. For so does the greek
word Epiousion signify, as well as daily:) it is (says he) not such bread as
passes into our body, but it is the bread of eternal life that vpholdeth the
substance of our souls. Now you may be well assured, that Protestants who
will not believe any such bodily presence, do not pray to God to give it them.

And touching forgiveness of their debts to God, and sins; they are so
assured of that before hand, by the certainety of their new faith, that they
can no more request of God forgiveness of their sins, then they can ask,
that God will make them reasonable creatures, which they see that he has done
already. And they holding the first motions to evil in temptation, to be
mortal sins, which no mortal man ordinarily can now avoid; how can they
pray God not to suffer them to be lead into temptation, when they teach it to
be impossible to escape the venime of it? And if they understand it so, as M.
PERKINS teaches: to wit, that they there pray, not to be left to the malice of
Satan, they cannot without loss of the certainety of their faith pray so;
because they hold themselves assured of that before hand.

Neither can they pray God generally to deliver them from all evil, affirming
as they do, that we must needs fall into mortal sin at every step almost,
which is the greatest of all other evil. And finally; if it belong to God to
deliver us from sin, and all other evil; then Calvin and his followers do
wickedly blaspheame, who teach God to be the author and worker in us, of all
error, sin, and wickedness. Thus much of the Pater noster.

Now before I come to the Sacraments, I may not omit to speak a word of the
Aue Maria, which in old Catechismes follows immediately after the Pater
noster. The Protestants have cassierd it, and may not abide to hear it once
said; but therein, as much as in any other such matter, they disgrace their
doctrine and discredit themselves. For all the words used of old therein, are
the very words of the holy Ghost, registered in S. Lukes Gospel; and therefore
they bewray either great ignorance, or a wicked spirit to dwell in them, that
cannot endure to hear the words of Gods spirit. Luc. 1.
Besides, in holy Scripture it is prophesied, that from henceforth all
generations should call the Virgin MARY blessed. In what terms then can we
more conveniently so call her, then in the very same that were composed by an
Archangel, are penned by the Evangelists, and by them commended unto all good
Christians? besides, the sense of them is comfortable unto us, as containing a
remembrance of the incarnation of the Son of God for our redemption, and we
on our parts do thereby give thanks to God for that inestimable benefit, and
congratulate our Savior with humble thanks therefore, saying: Blessed be the
fruit of thy womb, JESUS. I need not in such clear evidence of Gods word,
allege the testimony of any ancient Father: he that list to see how it has
been used in the purest antiquity, let him read S. Athanasius in euang. de
deipara S. Ephem. de laudibus B. Mariae. S. Basils and S. Chrisostomes
lyturgies, which can with no more reason be denied to be theirs, then the
rest of their works. One short sentence I will set down in commendations of
it, out of that most reverend and devout Bernard. The Angels triumph, Apud
Dionisi. Corinth. 1. part. in Euang. cap. 5. 17.
and the heavens do congratulate with them; the earth leapeth for joy, and
hell trembles when the Aue Maria is devoutly said. Good Christians then must
needs take great delight in it, even as the badde may not abide it.

Now let us come to the last part of the Catechism, which is of the
Sacraments, where M. PERKINS does briefly repeat his arguments, used before
against the real presence: I might therefore, send the reader unto the first
Chapter of this book for the answer; but because the matter is of great
importance, I will here again give them a short answer. First (says he) the
real presence is overthrown out of these words, he took bread and brake it:
ergo, that which Christ took, was not his body, etc.

A simple overthrow, Christ (in deed) took and brake bread, but presently
after blessing it, made it his body by these words, this is my body.

Christ said not under the form of bread, or in bread; but this, that is:
bread is my body.

Answ. It is false to say that this word (Hoc, This) does demonstrate bread:
for it is of a different gender from it, both in Latin and Greek; and if he
had said, that that bread had been his body, his word was so omnipotent, that
it had been of force to make it his body; so that M. PER. makes a false
construction, which nothing helps his error.

Bread was not given for us, but only the body of Christ; and in the first
institution, the body of Christ was not then really given to death.

Answ. This makes nothing at all against the real presence, but does greatly
fortify it: For Christ gave us in the Sacrament, that which should be put to
death for us, this is my body that shall be given for you. Now not bread, but
Christ's true body was given to death for us: ergo, Christ gave us to eat not
bread, but his true real body.

The cup is the new Testament by a figure, why not then the bread the body
of Christ by a figure?

Answ. A goodly reason, if there be one figure there must needs be two. How
follows this? if those words of S. Paul be obscure, why did he not rather
clear them by conferring them with S. Mathewe, and S. Mark, who deliver it
plainly thus: this is my blood of the new Testament that shall be shed,
etc.? But he that delights in cauilling, must seek darkness.

Christ did eat that supper, but not himself?

Answ. A Protestant cannot say that Christ did eat of that Sacrament, as M.
PERKINS does, because he has no warrant for it in the written word: yet we
do grant that he did so, and hold him most worthy to taste of that heavenly
food.

We are bid to do it til he come: Christ then is not bodily present.

1. Cor. 11. verse. 26.
Answ. We are bid by S. Paul to show the death of our Lord til he come to
judgment, which we may very well do, his body being present* as certain
noble Matrons preserved of their husbands blood, to represent more freshly
unto their children, the slaughter of their fathers.

Christ bid us to do it in remembrance of him; but signs of remembrance are
of things absent.

Answ. We see one thing and remember an other. By Christ's body really present,
we remember the same to have been nailed on the Cross for our redemption: as
Goliath sword was kept in the tabernacle, in remembrance of the cutting-off of
Goliathes head with the same sword* and the women before rehearsed kept their
husbands blood, and might much easier have preserved their bodies embalmed, to
keep the better their deaths in fresh memory.

If the real presence be granted, then the body and blood of Christ are either
severed or joined together: if severed, then Christ is still crucified: if
joined together, then the bread is both the body and blood of Christ; whereas
the institution says, the bread is the body, and the wine is the blood.

Answ. The body and blood of Christ, are (by force of Christ's words)
consecrated a part, so that if they could be naturally separated, they should
be also severed in that Sacrament, as they might have been at Christ's death,
when all the blood was powered forth of his body; but ever sithence Christ's
resurrection, they are so joined together, that they can be no more severed: so
that we grant under one kind of the Sacrament to be both Christ's body and
blood, which is not wrought by the words of the institution, but by the
necessary and inseparable conjunction of Christ's body with his blood, ever
since his glorious resurrection.

condemns the administration of the Sacrament under one only kind: for the
commandment of Christ is, drink ye al of this, Math. 26. verse. 27. and this
commandment is rehearsed to the Church of Corinth in these words: do this as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. ver. 25. and no power can reuerse
this commandment, because it was established by the sovereign head of the
Church.

Answer. He began to set down the institution of the Sacrament out of S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 11. here he leapeth back to S. Mathewe, because he fitteth him
better in this point: to whom I answer, that Christ there spoke only unto
his twelve Apostles, who were afterward to administer that holy Sacrament to
others; and so some thing there-about is spoken to them, which may not be
extended unto laymen, but unto Priests only, who were to succeed the Apostles
in that ministry. All men do confess these words: hoc facite, do ye this:
that is, administer ye this Sacrament, to be spoken only to the Apostles, and
in them to all of the Clergy alone: even so, drink ye al of this, was in like
manner spoken unto them only as Clergiemen; and therefore it is a commandment
only to Priests so to do: and as for others, they may either drink of it, or
not drink of it, as it shall be thought most expedient by their supreme
Pastors; and this may be gathered out of those very words, drink ye al of
this. For why should the Apostles have a special charge more to drink of that
cup, then to eat of that food? unless it were to signify, that whereas all
men should be bound to receive Christ's body: they should be further bound to
receive that holy cup also; from which bond other men should stand free. But
to come to the purpose, when they quarrel with us for taking away from the
people one kind of the Sacrament: we answer, that we do them no hinderance
thereby; because we give them both the blessed body and sacred blood of Christ
together under one kind: yea, whole Christ, both God and man; because they be
so united that they cannot be separated. But what can they answer, when we
complain upon them, for that they have defrauded the poor people, of both
body and blood of Christ, and in lieu of that most precious banquet, do give
them a cold breake-fast, of a morsel of bread and a suppe of wine? this is a
most miserable and lamentable exchange in deed: our blessed Lord give them
grace to see it, and deliver them speedily from it. Here is the place to show,
how the Protestants do not only bereave their unfortunate folowers of this
most heavenly food of Christ's body: but that they also deprive them of the
manifold and great graces of God, derived unto us in 5. other sacraments: but
because I have touched it in the Preface, I will omit it here, and make an end
with M. PER. as soon as I have requited him, by propounding briefly some
arguments for the real presence, as he has done against it. Let this be the
first.

new Testament, which is more perfect then the old, requires accordingly
Sacraments of greater grace and perfection then the old had: they had Manna,
which for substance and taste far passed our bread, and in signification was
equal to it: Wherefore, either we must grant our Sacrament of bread and
wine, to be inferior to theirs of the old Testament; or else acknowledge and
confess it to be the true body and blood of Christ, which does surpass theirs
exceedingly, as the body does the shadow. This argument is confirmed by our
Savior himself, who in express terms does prefer the meat, John. 6. v.
48.49.
that he was to give to his Disciples, before that of Manna, which their
Fathers had eaten in the wilderness.

flesh to eat, and his blood to drink: and when they marueiled how that
could be, he assured them; Ibid. v. 55
that unless they did eat his flesh, they should not have life in them; and
further certified them, that his flesh was truly meat, and his blood truly
drink: whence it is most plainly deduced, that he who never fails of his
promise, gave them his true flesh to eat.

this is my body: this is my blood. What could be more certain or more
perspicuous?

S. Paul: and they al uniformly deliver it to be not the figure of Christ's
body, but his body; and that his body which should be given for our redemption
on the cross: ergo, it was that his true real body, which was nailed to the
cross for us.

S. Paul demands thus: the Chalice of benediction which we do bless, 1.
Cor. 10. verse. 16.
is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread that we
break, is it not the participation of the body of our Lord? if then we do in
receiving the blessed Sacrament participate Christ's body, and communicate his
blood, they surely are there really present.

S. Paul says: He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgment to himself, 1. Cor. 11. verse. 28.
not discerning the body of our Lord: and before, is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ: ergo, the body and blood of Christ are there present; or else
why should a man incur that guilt, but by his unworthy receiving of it, and
by not discerning Christ's body to be there present?

Lucae 22. verse. 15.
In S. Luke we have, that our Savior marueillously desired (desiderio
desideraui) to eat that this last banquet with his Disciples. S. John adds:
that whereas he loved his that were in the world, Ioh. 13. v. 1. and 3^
unto the end he loved them: and knowing that the Father gave al things into
his hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God, etc. What coherence (I
say) with this exceeding love and infinite power of Christ, to be showed in his
last supper, if he has left only bread and wine to be taken in remembrance of
him? any mean man might easily have done as much; and Helias departing from
his Disciple Heliseus, did much more: for he left a more noble remembrance of
himself behind him, to wit: his cloak and double spirit. But Christ
bequeathing us his true natural body to be the food of our souls, and comfort
of our hearts as we believe and teach, he then (in deed) showed his infinite
power and love toward us, and that he came from God, and as God bestowed an
inestimable gift upon us, such a one as never any other did, or could possibly
do.

Ioh. 6.
that they should eat Christ's flesh, and that his body was truly meat: and
therefore believed Christ's words without further question.

new Testament, and one of the chiefest legacies by Christ bequeathed unto us
Christians. Now what law or conscience will permit, that any legacy should be
interpreted figuratively? to wit: that for a house, goods, or lands
bequeathed and given by last will and testament; you should understand a
figure of a house to be given, or the signification and representation of some
goods or lands. If this be most absurd and ridiculous in the testament of any
ordinary man, about temporal goods: how much more pernicious and
intolerable is it, to suffer this in the eternal Testament of the Son of
God, and that in his divine and inestimable treasures? And thus at length by
the grace of God I come to the end of this book, wherein (good Christian
reader) if thou find any thing, that may confirm thee in the true Catholic
faith, or further thy knowledge therein; give God (the Father of lights, from
whom all good gifts descend) the whole praise: If any thing be amiss, impute
it partly to my slender skill, oversight, or negligence; and partly to the
want of a convenient resting place, commodity of books, and conference: all
which, these times of persecution do deprive us of.

To the most blessed and holy Trinity, be al honor and glory both now and for
ever. AMEN.
FINIS.

