Astrolabium Vranicum Generale.

A Necessary and Pleasant solace and recreation for Nauigators in their long
Iorneying, Containing the use of an Instrument or general Astrolabe: Newly for
them devised by the Author, to bring them skilfully acquainted with all the
Planets Stars, and constellacions of the Heavens: and their courses, mouings,
and apparences, called the (Vranicall Astrolabe.)

In which, Agreeable to the Hipothesis of Nicolaus Copernicus, the Starry
Firmament is appointed perpetually fixed, and the earth and his Horizons
continually moving from West toward the East once about every 24 hours.

Fraught also by new devise with all such necessary supplements for Judicial
Astrology, as ALKABITIVS and CLAUDIUS DARIOTTVS have delivered by their Tables.

Whereunto for their further delight he has anexed another invention,
expressing in one face the whole Globe terrestrial; with the two great english
voyages lately performed round about the world.

Compyled by JOHN B^^GRAVE of Reading Gentleman, the sam^ well willer to the
Mathematics. Anno. 1596.

Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for William Matts.

To the Right Honorable-Lord, the Lord Charles Haward, Baron of Effingham, Lord
high Admiral of England, etc.
RIght Honorable, for so much as my self, with the whole progeny of our name,
have been always exceedingly bound, Next to the Right Honorable our good
Lord the Lord Burleigh, Lord high Treasurer of England, Unto the late right
Honorable Sir Fraunces Knolles the elder Knight, Treasurer of her highness
most honorable household, deceased, in regard of their sinceare justice, and
charitable respect of most injurious and wicked practices heretofore vehemently
prosecuted against us, for no less then the living we all possessed. Both
whom therefore (under your Lordships good favor) I can not, but in all my
best endeavors, during life remember, Not forgetting as in duty I am bound, the
Right Honorable Sir William Knolles Knight, now Controller of her Majesty's
said most honorable household, and such other his right worshipful and
honorable minded offspring, as still remain our good favorers. Amongst whom,
the right Worship. M. Robert Knolles more then a year passed of his accustomed
kindness advertised me, that your L. I know not by what means, understanding of
my endeavors in these Mathematick Sciences, was pleased to take further notice
of me by my personal presence. For the which, as the time has not bin fitting
by reason of your L. most serious important and honorable employments, as well
to the seas as otherwise this year 1596 well known to the whole world. So
have I bin willing to catch hold of the opportunity thereof so far: as in the
mean time to hammer out (if selfliking deceive me not) a rare piece of
Mathematicke stuff, to bring unto your L. view, together with my self: tending
both to the profit and pleasure of all worthy english Gent. that either addict
themselves to contemplacion at home, or to Marine traueyles abroad. Which if it
may receive favorable allowance at your good L. hands, I shall think my self
suffiicie^tly defended against all ignorant or maligna^t detractors, and be the
rather hereafter encouraged to go forwards with like matters. Thus praying unto
God for the long preseruacion of your Honor, I cease.

Your Lordships most humble, John Blagraue.

To the courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, the ears of my guilty conceit being continually troubled with
such a noise and clamor for my (Organum Vranicum,) and the second part of my
Mathematical Jewel, so long and largely promised, as the greedy Auditors are
wont to make at a Stage Play: calling, Come away how, with boys throwing
vollyes of stones rattling at the gates of my otherwise buisied employments, for
staying so long: Makes me here in haste (God grant to your liking) to come
up the Stage, with a little, but rare piece of Mathematicke Musickly pleasure,
not impertinent to the matter to be acted: to stay your languishing
expectations, both worth the acceptacion (which I dare boldly aduouch against
the doggedst detractor that shall contradict) and sufficient to entertain the
time until Midsomer or Michelmas Term at the farthest, when as (if God
permit) the stately Comedy of Queen Vranya her Pageants, shall abundantly
offer themselves to your pleasant view, Sollace your selves I pray you
heerewith the whiles, and be bold with me if in any thing you doubt. You shall
have me God willing once every Term in London ready to your wish, at a poor
lodging within Master Greenes Wharfe near unto Charing Cross: and at Master
Ralfe Iacksons at the sign of the Swan in S. Paul's Churchyard, or at Master
William Matts Stationer, at the sign of the Plough, over against S Dunstons
Church in Fleetestreete, who has the Impression of this Book, you shall ever
know whether I be at any time in the City: With whom, I have taken order to
furnish with these Instruments and their supplements any that shall want them.

The Contents of the Chapters of this work, of the Vranicall Astrolabe.
Cap. 1. OF the parts of this new Astrolabe. Cap. 2. Of the Celestial
proiectinent in this new Astrolabe, and how the longitudes and latitudes of the
Stars are thereby had. Cap. 3. Of certain abbreuiated terms or phrases of
art appertayning to this new Astrolabe. Cap. 4. How to place Carects of the
Planets in this Astrolabe to serve there the whole week after. Cap. 5. How by
this new Astrolabe to find the true place of the perpetually. Cap. 6. How to
rectifye the true place of the Sun to all places of the world. Cap. 7. How to
rectifye the place of the or of any other Planet, to any other Meridian. Cap.
8. How to know the declinacion and right ascenscion of any Planet, fixed
Star, or point of the heavens, and their degree of Culminacion. Cap. 9. How
to find the true Meridian in any Country by help of this Astrolabe. Cap. 10.
How to attain the latitude or Poles Eleuacion in any country unknown, and to
choose out the Vertical point in the noone-line, the Horizontall point in the
North line, and the Zenith line serving thereunto. Cap. 11. How to take the
Meridian altitude of the Sun or any Planet or Star, and thereby to get the
latitude in any Country. Cap. 12. How to know what day of the year it were if
it were forgotten. Cap. 13. How to know what it is a clock at any time either
night or day, by the Sun, Planets, or Stars. Cap. 14. Another more easy way
to find the hour by the Stars. Cap. 15. Another easy way by the. Cap. 16.
How to know the Meridian altitude of the, or any other Planet, Star, or point
of the heavens in any Country, and what hour of the day or night any of them
shall culminate or come to the Meridian of that place. Cap. 17. How to know the
hour of Sunne-rising and setting, and the length of the day and night,
together with his oblique ascension, and his difference of ascenscion any day
in the year. Cap. 18. To know the hour of rising or setting of any other
Planet, Star, or point in the heavens, and their diurnall and nocturnall
arches, and their oblique ascenscions and difference of ascenscions in any
country. Cap. 19. How to set particular degrees on the Almicantiser for any
particular latitude. Cap. 20. How to know the Amplitude of rising or setting of
the Sun or Stars. Cap. 21. To know what Stars do never rise or set in any
latitude, and which do once a day touch the Zenith point, or Horizontall point.
Cap. 22. To know any day and hour what Stars or points in the heavens are in
or near the Meridian, or do rise or set in any latitude. Cap. 23. How to know
the hour, distance of any Planet, Star, or point of the heavens from the
Meridian, any day and year proposed in any latitude. Cap. 24 How to know the
height of the Sun or of any other Planet or Star for any hour of the day
any year in any latitude. Cap. 25. How you shall most easily learn to know
all the constellacions and Stars in the element it self. Cap. 26. Of the 4
Cardines, and the sundry rising and setting of the fixed Stars with the
Planets. Cap. 27. Of the 12 houses, and setting the Figure. Cap. 28. Of the
aspects of the Planets and Stars, and how to find them. Cap. 29. A new
devise of the Author to get the Planetary hours most easily in all latitudes,
and of their Lords regnant. Cap. 30. How you shall know to set forwards and
backwards any of the fixed Stars unto their true places for any ages past, or
to come. Cap. 31. How by help of this Astrolabe to get the longitude and
latitude of any Planet, yea, or of any Star or Comet seen. Cap. 32. A ready
way by help of this Astrolabe hereafter to observe the motions of Comets.
Astrolabium Vranicum Generale. Here follows the book of the use of the
Vranicall Astrolabe, Newly devised by John Blagraue of Reading, Gentleman.
Cap. 1. Of the parts of this new Astrolabe.
THis Astrolabe has three general parts, that is to say, the Celestial, the
Zenitfer with his Cursor, and the Almicantifer with his Pointer.

I call that part the Celestial here, which in other Astrolabes is called the
Mate^, of which I will largely speak in the next Chap.

The Zenitfer being but as a plain rule of one ynch breadth, moves upon the
Celestial in stead of a Reete used in other Astrolabes: and has a circular
Lymbe thereto annexed near unto the Center, which I call the Circulus
horarius, or hour circle, with the 24. hours, and their parts thereon, as
you see. Neither is it material of what quantity that hour circle or lymbe be
of, so it be concentricke to the Astrolabe, and placed so, that it hide fewest
Stars in his moving. And for service of this circle, there is written at the
upper end of this Zenitfer Meridies, and at the lower end Media nox, and
therefore the fiduciall line thereof from the Center upwards to Meridies, is
generally called the Noone line, the other part from the Center downewardes
unto Media nox the North line. Then has it 90 Zenith lines standing in ascents
one above another like Organ pipes, in stead of the 90 general Horizons before
time used, issuing or growing out of the 90 Zenith points: for the lowest
points of these 90 lines nearest unto the center unto which their numbers are
set from 0 to 90, do represent the true Zenithes of all places. These 90.
Zenith lines, are by certain thwart curued lines parted every one into 90
uneven parts, of which some run out infinitely, and those parts I call the
Altitude roots, or the Almicantare roots, and for breuities sake sometimes
Roots without any addition. These Roots do help us to general Almicantares,
or circles of Altitude for any Latitude by a rare devise by me first found out.
They are numbered on the outer side of the Zenitfer from their extreme points
inwards toward their said Zenith points, ending at them with 90. Also to the
Fiduciall line of this Zenitfer is anexed a scale, in which are planted the
Radiall degrees of the proiectement on both sides of the Scale, because they
require double numbering for sundry purposes. And of those which bound on the
Fiduciall line, those at the noone line are numbered from the Equinoctial
intersection both ways, vz. toward Meridies, as far as the Zenithfer will
give leave, which are about 36, and toward the Center, ending there at 90.
which 90 radiall degrees of the noone line toward the Center do serve (with
the other 36) to descry the declinations of the fixed Stars and Planets, but
chiefly they serve for the 90 Zenithes which appertain to the 90 general
Horizons, and for distinction sake I call them the 90 Vertical points, and
they exactly answer unto the 90. lower ends of the 90 Zenith lines, which
before I called the 90 Zenith points, in so much that the fiduciall line of the
Cursor in his moving, cutteth the Zenith point, and the Vertical point of any
latitude both at once. The other Radiall degrees in the North line, are numbered
from the center toward Media nox, ending at the Equinoctials intersexion
therewith at 90, and do serve for the 90 intersections of the 90 general
Horizons therewith, and therefore I call them the 90 Horizontall points. And of
those radyall degrees which bound on the other side of the Scale, which indeed
serve to the getting of the 12 houses generally, as is showed in the 27 Cap.
The Norther 90 toward Media nox are numbered inwards toward the Center, ending
there at 90 contrary to the former. And the Souther of those radiall degrees
are numbered from the Center outward toward Meridies two to one, as far as
they will go, (that is to say) every 10 make but 5, and these do serve but in
stead of roots to the other, and therefore I call them the Domifieng roots.
Also there adioyneth unto the Radiall scale of the North line between the
center and the Zenith lines a certain scale of slope lines numbered in the
midst, beginning but from 60 and ending at the center with 90, which I call
the Domifieng Scale, for that the two extremes of every of those slope lines,
do help to get 8 of the 12 houses in that latitude, whose number it shows, as
in the 27 Cap. is manifested: and unto the outer edge of this Domifieng scale,
are also anexed part of the former radiall degrees, all having relacion to them
on the North line. Then has this Zenitfer a certain runner or Cursor, whose
fiduciall line always runs exactly square to the fiduciall line of the
Zenitfer. And at the common meeting of both those fiduciall lines, this Cursor
has iointed unto him a kind of Labell or loose scale, which I call the
Almicantifer, who to supply the general use of the Almicantares, has no
manner of matter on him but another Cursor, which I call a Pointer.

But now for any man that desires to have this Astrolabe more particularly
commodious for one latitude, vz. for the country or place of his abode, then
shall he have a kind of Reete or moouer made, carrying a circle or limb of
hours of equal diametre to the Celestial, and within it the Horizon circle
of that place particularly described after Stophlerus, and graduated into his
360 prospectiue degrees, as in the fourth book 4. Cap. of my Jewel is taught,
together with the arches distinguishing the 12 houses, as in Stoph. lib. 1.
propo. 6. is taught, writing to each house his number and significations. And
unto the noone-line furnished with the former radiall degrees, numbered from the
Horizon circle, into twice 90. both ending at the Vertical point, you shall
need to annexe but only one of the 90 Zenith lines, vz. that which serves to
your latitude and his roots, with the Cursor: Neither need your Almicantifer
have his sliding pointer, but in stead thereof, the particular degrees of
altitude serving to that latitude, which are compounded of his 90 Zenith
roots, and the 90 radiall degrees in the North line, as in the 19 Cap. is
taught, all which shall better appear by such Astrolabes as I mean to set
abroad ready furnished.

Cap. 2. Of the Celestial proiectment in this new Astrolabe, and how the
longitudes and latitudes of the Stars are thereby had.
Needless it is to stand upon the Fabrication, or long particularizing of this
Instrument or his parts, since they are but the Copernician representation of
the constellations fixed, and the 90 general Horizons moving.

The Fixed part which in other Astrolabes is called the Matter, I call for
breuities sake the Celestial, For that in it I have prospectiuely proiected
the Globe Celestial, that is to say, the Globe of the fixed Stars, with the
Zodiac, and his North Pole (marked with D) the Images of each constellation,
and the Stars appertaining, in such sort as in the Globe they are usual,
with each fifth circle of Longitude and Latitude of the Zodiac, Every six of
those fiues of the Longitude including a sign in the heavens, being 12 in the
whole, which 12 are distinguished with twisted lines somewhat bigger from the
rest, and unto them near unto the Limb are written the names of the 12 Signs
as they pass in order, Aries, Taurus, etc. together with their natures and
quallities. Also, those three Signs of the watery triplicitie are filled up
with waves, and the three fiery with flames, and the three earthy with big
pricks, and the three ayry left white. Then are there seven several
magnitudes of Stars, each bigger and brighter then other, whose fashions are
set down with their numbers in the Sign before the breast of Orion, by which
they are easily herein descryed. The excentricke circle Orbs or Lymbe, lying
wholly within it, is the Zodiac divided into his 12 Signs by the foresaid 12
master circles of longitude, and every Sign into his 30 prospectiue degrees.
Also the degrees are made with, diverse distinguishments, for the Gradus
masculini, feminini, lucidi, tenebrosi, vacui, fumosi, puteales, fortunam
augentes, and debilitantes, all which are sufficiently to be descryed by the
two Directoria Zodiaci there placed. Then is there a little within the Zodiac
a row of Carecters of the Planets placed at every 10 circle of longitude,
signifying the faces of the Planets, and likewise another row without the
Zodiac at the beginning of the terms of the Planets, every face and term
continuing unto the carect next him in sequens of the Zodiac, all which will
better appear, if you join unto this book Claudius Dariot his introduction
to the judgment of the Stars, which by good hap is now newly imprinted in
english together with this, and a second part therewith, which at the first
impression was omitted. And specially you must note and remember well, that the
very outermost circle of this Zodiac, is the clipticke circle, within which
is contained the North-halfe or Hemispheere of all the Stars and
Constellacions in the heavens, and without it so many of the South Stars and
Constellacions, as the proiectment would admit. Then is there also lying within
this Astrolabe a black concentricke circle, representing the Aequinoctiall
circle, and proiector of this work, but without any divisions, because they
are better supplied by the limb. Also there is a scale of the radiall degrees,
whereon this proiectement is made, placed at the master circle of longit.
beginning the Sign numbered from the Equinoctial both ways, which
Equinoctial cutteth the said eclipticke circle in the points B and C
beginning and, and those points are called the two Aequinoctiall Intersectiones
which do move upon the poles of the Zodiac backwards, or in precedentia, of
the Signs every 67 years almost a degree equally: carrying about with them all
the foresaid circles of Longitude and Latitude, leaving the Stars stock
still in their places, By which means it comes to pass, that although the
fixed Stars have no manner of motion at all, yet they seem from time to time
to have gone as is said every 67 years almost a degree forwards, as the
ancient Astronomers thought: where as in very deed (as Copernicus shows)
the Zodiac and all his circles do slide so much backwards from them: And by
reason this sliding back of the Aequinoctiall points, is as I have said
performed on the poles D and his opposite of the clipticke, therefore it
comes to pass that the fixed Stars could thereby never change their
Latitudes, but keep the same Latitudes as ever they did. This sliding back,
is called Precessio Aequinoctiorum, of which we will entreat more in the 30
Cap. And now will return to this proiectement: In which it is very easy to
imagine every square into five equal parts, and so thereby to know the
Longitude and Latitude of any Star therein sufficient for any common use. As
for example, the great Star in the left foot of Orion, placed in the Sign,
if you imagine the spaces between each five circles of Longitude and Latitude
divided into five parts, then shall you conceive that the middle prick of
this Star is here in longitude about 9 degrees 30 minut. of, and in latitude
South from the clipticke circle about some 31 degrees 30 min. and so for any of
the rest.

Cap. 3. Of certain abbreuiated terms or phrases of art, appertayning to
this new Astrolabe.
BEcause this Astrolabe is newly devised and his tackling, much differing from
all other heretofore both in fashion, use, and names, I have therefore here
thought good to premise certain abbreuiated terms thereunto fitly
appertaining, least otherwise such long iteracion of diverse circumstances as at
every time I mention them I should be driven to use, should make my writings
yrkesome, and my book over long. Which tediousnes to avoid, I have further
not only couched diverse precepts and propositions almost into every Chapter,
but also incorporated the examples with them, yet in another letter, to the end
you may if you list first read over every Chapter, leaving out the example
even as though it were not. And if you understand it so, it is well, if not,
then read it, and practice the example withal.

Are all one in signification, but in this practice the one is taken in the
noone line, the other in the Zenith line of the place, as in the 1. Cap. is
noted. The Vertical point, The Zenith point,

The Horizontall point, is always that radiall degree of the north line,
reckned from the center which is equal to the latitude, or poles elevation,
explaned both in the 1. and 10. Cap.

The Zenith line, explaned in the 1. and 10. Cap.

The North and South degrees, are the 90. radiall degrees on the noone and
north lines, on each side of the Vertical point explaned in the 10. Cap.

The East and West Hemispheares are thus, in every constitucion of this
Astrolabe, the Fiduciall line of the Zenitfer deuideth the Celestial, in half
of which, that half Eastwards of the noone line toward vi. of the clock in
the morning, I call the East Hemisphere, the other half I call the West
Hemispheare.

To play the Almicantifer in the East or West Hemisphere is as much to say, as
to keep him moving wholly on the East, or West side of the noone line
accordingly.

To apply the pointer to any Star or Carect, is to lead the Zenitfer, and
the Almicantifer about, till you may cause the Apex of the pointer to touch the
carect, or the middle prick of the Star.

To labell the Hour to the Sun or Stars, or them to the hour. explaned in
the 13. Cap. To prepare the Zenitfer to any altitude. explaned in the 13. Cap.
To prepare the Zenitfer to the Horizon, is explaned in the 17. Cap. To prepare
the Almicantifer to a particular latitude, explaned in the 19. Cap.
Also when it is said, Place the Zenitfer, or Labell to any Planet, Star, or
point: it is meant, that you must place the siduciall lines thereunto, and that
with relation to the center. The complement of any degree is so much as it
lacks of 90. degrees.

Lastly, you shall understand, that in writing of this whole work, my meaning
was that every man should have the furniture of this Astrolabe (whether
general or particular) made of metal, as commonly the furnitures of Globes
are, For which, if any man shall repair or send unto me either by him self,
or by Master Matts the bookeseller, dwelling at the sign of the Plough over
against S. Dunstons Church in Fleetstreete, who shall easily at all times send
any letter or notice weekly unto me by our Carryers, I will take such order
that he shall have them as reasonably done as may be. And to the end that
every man may see how it ought to be made in metal, I have caused a rude
pattern of each furniture in metal to remain with the said Master Matts.
Notwithstanding, for such as will not go to that little charge, I have upon
better aduisement caused the Zenitfer and Cursor to be imprinted with the
Astrolabe, to be set either on pastboord, or cuttlers scale to serve the turn:
But in stead of the Almicantifer and his pointer, then must they use a thread
and pearl, which shall do in a manner as well, for the pearl shall in all
actions supply the steed of the pointer. And in steed of the ledge of brass
in the beginning of the next Cap. mentioned, he may happily cause a breadth of
lantornes horn to be riuetted over the Zodiac, under which to place the
Carects of the Planets, made of paste-boord, quilles, or such like.

Cap. 4. How to place Carects of the Planets in this Astrolabe, to serve there
the whole week after.
FOR this purpose you shall take a pair of Compass, and pitch his one foot
in the line beginning at 25 degrees from the-cliptickes pole, and extend the
other in the same line unto 7 degrees of latitude, and with that quantity
describe a blind circle, on wh ch blind circle so made you shall place a
narrow hoope of lattin brass, riuetted on the Matter with 4 or 8 riuets at the
most, with so many thin bouisters under every river, that the hoope press not
hard on the Matter, to the end that you may thrust under it some 9 Carrects, 5
of them carrying two Apices or pointers ioynted together, made all of thin
metal and very narrow, vz. 7 for the 7 Planets, and 2 for the Moons cap, and
Cau. draconis, there to stick very fast till they be weekly removed, and let
one of the Apices of each Carect be less and sleighter then the other, which
you shall better understand by such as I have, and shall cause to be ready made
to your hand then by manifold words.

These things provided for, then at the beginning of any week of any year
proposed ( Admit for the beginning of the first Sunday in March, which shall be
Anno Domini 1598.) you shall then by my Organum Vranicum, which God willing,
long before that day shall be extant, or by your Ephemeris, or other Tables of
the Planets motions get the true places of every of the 7 Planets as well in
Longitude as Latitude, and of the and, (which on the said Sunday being the 5
day of March 1598 you shall by Stadius his Ephemerides, find the to be 25
degrees 3 minutes in, the 2 degrees 40 minutes in, her Latitude then 4 degrees
30 min. North, 2. degr. 32 min. in, in Latit. 2 degr. 44 min. North, 9 degr. 26
min. in, in latit. South 0 38 min. in, 1 degr. 39 min. in, in lat. 2 degr. 13
min. North, 10 degr. 51 min. in, in latit. 1 degr. 40 min. North, 4 degr. 26
min. in, in latit. 2 degr. 58 min. North, 6. degr. 16 min. in, the is always
opposite, vz. 6 degr. 16 min. in, both which, and likewise the never have
latitude.) Which places you shall reddily find out in this Astrolabe, by
means of the circles of Longit. and Latit. thereon described, and unto them
set the chief Apex of each Planets Carect accordingly, carefully providing
that you set the Apex of the his Carect justly to the-clipticke circle
mentioned in the 2 Cap. at his exact degree and minute, because he has no
Latitude, and he is the Chiefetaine guide in all our work following, and so
likewise the and, as for all the rest, you shall place their apices unto the
parallel circle, expressing his Latitude at his degree of Longitude reckoned in
the same parallel by help of the circles of longitude: Which done, you shall
then again either by your Vranicum or Ephemerides, get in like sort the places
of them all for the beginning of the next Sunday following ( which will be the
12 day of March that year 1598. the then being 1 degr. 57 min. in, the 27 degrees.
8 min. in, her latit. 1 degr. 47 min. North, 1 degr. 56 min. in, 10 degr. 24
min. in, 4 degr. 10 min. in, 16 degr. 46 min. in, 28 degr. 32 min. in, 5 degr.
54 min. in, as for their latitudes they alter little or nothing in 6 or 7
days.) and to those places accordingly sought in this Astrolabe, you shall set
the petty Apices of each Carect. There shall they serve you for all that week
to singular effects, and presently you may note thus much, that if the petty
Apex happen to be thus placed in sequens of the Zodiac from the chief Apex,
then be sure the Planet is direct, if in precedens, (as in) then is he
Retrograde, if just one upon another, then Stationary. And full easy will it
be to imagine the spaces between the two Apices of each Planets carect, into
seven equal parts for the seven days of the week included between them, as
in the 2. Cap. you imagined the Squares into five parts, and so reddily to
conceive where each Planet is any of those seven days, which in none of them
can exceed twice 7 Degrees, (the Moon excepted) whose gate in common accoumpt
is every two hours one whole Degree, and every four and twenty hours twelve
Degrees. Wherefore for her, either you must rely upon your Almanacke, or have
four single Carects at the least to be set two days in sunder apeece, that is
to say, the one to be set at the Moons place for Sunday noone (for
Astronomers always begin their day at noone, because the Meridian is Horizon
rectus) the second to be set for Tewsday noone, the third for Thursday noone,
and the fourth for Saturday noone, and so by adding or subducting of 12 degrees
for a day, and two degrees for an hour, her place shall sufficiently well be
had. Her motion is very swift, and her Prosthapheresis, or Aequacions, caused
by her epicicles, may happily breed error of 7 or 8 degrees in one week, from
that common accoumpt of two hours to a degree, otherwise two Carects might
have sufficed, but in two days her greatest gate being but 12 degrees either
before or behind one of the carects, can breed no error to be regarded, if
you reckon it from that carect unto which she is nearest.

Cap. 5. How by this new Astrolabe to find the true place of the Sun
perpetually.
IN my Organum Vranicum shortly like to come forth, you shall have the
Calendar of the year, the Cicle of the Sun, and all such necessary
supplements. And therefore in this Astrolabe, which I do appoint to be always
anexed thereunto, and to be but the back side, or Dorsum Vranici, I have framed
no Calendar at all or Theoricke of the as commonly all other Astrolabes have.
Yet to serve the turn until the Vranicum come forth, or for them that would
content themselves without the other, as happily some will in regard of the
charge of the other, which can not well be framed but of metal, I have in the
12 Signs of the Zodiackes Orbs placed the 12 letters of the 12 Months, vz. I
for January, F for February, etc. at such degree and minute of the-clipticke as
they do make their entrance the Radical year of my said Vranicum, being the
year after Christ 1600. by help of which you shall for ever it you will, find
the true place of the Sun within 3 or 4 minutes, so you regard but three
obseruaunces which I shall here deliver you. The first is, concerning the
Leap year, and is remedied by rebating some quarter of a degree for every
year following the Leap year till it be Leap year again. The second is,
concerning the five odd days in the year above 360. and is remedied by
rebating for every day of the month, proposed but one minute. The third is,
concerning ages past or to come, the remedy whereof, I will show in the end of
this Cap. Now therefore for the time present, vz. for some 20 years if need
be before or behind the year 1600. it serves fitly as it is upon every Leap
year, (because his root 1600 is a Leap year) without any obseruacion more
then for the five odd days which is general in every year: and for any
common year with very little trouble, as I shall show in this manner:
Wherefore if you will know what degree and minute the Sun is in upon any day
and year assigned. First, seek by the Zodiac for the letter of the Month
in which your day is ( vz. For the letter I serving for June, which is placed
at the 20 degree and somewhat more in, and the number 6 ascribed thereto,
signifies 6 minutes more then the 20 degrees, the exact place of that letter
I.) And from that letter (vz. I) number forwards so many degrees of the
Clipticke as your day ( the 8 of June) proposed is within your month (June)
proposed, rebating so many minutes, according to the second obseruaunce before
mentioned ( vz. for your 8 days, reckon 8 degrees in sequens of that 20 degrees. 6
min. of lacking 8 min.) and where that accoumpt falls out ( which you shall
find upon that reckning and rebating of 8 minutes, to be 27 degrees 58
minutes of.) there shall be the true place of the if it be a Leap year ( as
this year 1596 is) and there ( vz. at the said 27 degrees 58 minutes of) you
may place the Carect of the Sun for that day, as in the last Chapter is
taught. But if it shall be the first year after the Leap year, then shall
you rebate a quarter of a degree, or 14 min. (if you will be precise) if the
second year, then rebate half a degree, if the third, rebate of a degree, and
then every Leap year it returns to his own place again. And this for
almost twenty years either before or behind the Radical year 1600 shall
serve passing well and reddye within some four or five minutes, but for any
time after the year 1600 you shall need but add, and for any time before
subtract some half quarter of a Degree (or 8 minutes if you will be precise)
for every 20 years. ( As for Example for the place of the the 8 day of March
in the year 1700. because between the year 1600 and 1700, there are five
times 20 years, therefore I add five diquarters of a degree (or to be precise
five times 8 minutes which makes 44 minutes) unto the foresaid 27 degr. 58
min. in, and it makes 28 degrees, 42 minutes, which is the true place of the
on the 8 day of June, Anno. 1700.) And because you shall work the more
certain, I have to every of the 12 letters of the months, set the number of
the minutes of that degree where his right place should be, which place is also
descryed by a little stroke or string cutting the true place of the same
Degree, and leading thence to the letter, if it be not placed directly
therewith.

Also you must not forget for ages past or to come, to add or subtract the
Aequacion of the 8 Speere, as in the 30 Cap. shall be showed according to the
words Adjective or Ablative there mentioned, for that will from time to time
alter this true place of the Sun, even unto 1 Degrees, about 800 years to
come, or passed. Although some others have ouerslipped in their Theoricks of
the both this, and the third obseruacion before. ( For example you shall by the
30 Cap. find the 8 Spears Aequation 12 minutes ablative for the year 1700,
and so will the true place then be but 28 degrees 30 minutes for the 8 of June.)

After many words thus spent, the precept is briefly thus: Suppose every
degree of the-clipticke to be a day of the year, rebating for every day a
minute, and for every of the three common years 14 minutes, and thus far it
serves for all times. But now i^ your time be after 1600, you must for the
motus equalis compositus add 8 degrees for every 20 years, and for every 20
year before 1650 add 5 min. for the 8 spheeres equation: and contrariwise, if
being before 1600 and after 1650 you must subduct as much. Note, that I have
been sithence informed that our honorable Lords departed the 3 of June, but
let the 8 of June now stand for the example, nothing hurtful.

Cap. 6. How to rectifye the true place of the Sun to all places of the world.
MY good meaning determining this Astrolabe as a fit recreacion or play-game
for travelers by Sea, to drive away the tediousnes of their iourneying, may
soonest of all deceive them in getting the true place of the, whether by the
Ephemeris, or by the last Cap. or by my Organum Vranicum, if they have not a
special regard to the changing of their Meridians as they travail: for which
cause, I have caused a new description of the terestriall Globe to be made
after my fashion in one face, where others make them still in two faces: and
both that terestriall and this celestial, are principally meant by me to serve
unto my Vranicum, and to be placed in the inner sides of his case as necessary
appendices, though of itself it be an Instrument sufficient without these. Of
this terestriall I do at this time (although having many extraordinary
conceits to apply him for Navigations, and other necessities to write of)
determine to deliver but this Chapter, therein to let you understand, that in
the limb circle about it which represents the Aequinoctiall circle at the
Meridian cutting upon London, I have placed a rundle with a cross, and at the
opposite Meridian the number of 12. signifying 12 hours, and between these on
both sides are 11 other rundles for hours, so is that whole circle divided
into twice 12 hours, and numbered both ways from the cross rundle, signifying
how many hours the Sun or any Planet or Star has to go from our Meridian
at London (when any of them come unto it) before it can come to the Meridian of
another place, or being in another place, how many hours it must go ere it
come to ours. And in regard that the gate of the is every 24 hours a degree of
the-clipticke, therefore you must add or subtract from his place found either
in the last Cap. or the Ephemerides, or my Vranicum, according to the rate
thereof, vz. for every 12 hours, about 30 minutes of a degree, and for 6
hours 15 minutes, etc.

As for example, admit you being a trauayler should be the fifth day of March
1598 in the 4. Cap. mentioned in the great City of Quinsay in the country of
China, and there seeking for the true place of the Sun at noone, had found it
25 degrees 3 minutes in as in the 4. Cap. it was. Now because the Meridian of
Quinsay appears in this Terestriall by the said hour rundles almost 9 hours
distant from the Meridian of London or rather of Anwerp if you work by Stadius
Ephemerides, or the last Cap. and that toward the East: Therefore the comes
so much sooner to the meridian or noone at Quinsay, for which cause you must in
this case rebate so much of the Suns diurnall gate of 60 minutes, as 9 hours
comes to, vz. 22 minutes, so will the Sun that day at noone in that
country be but 24 degrees 41 min. in, which in the 4 Cap. was found to be 25
degrees 3 minutes in. And if your place had been so much Westwards, then
should you have added 22 minutes unto 25 degrees 3 minutes in. You may also
perform the same reddily by the next Cap. applying the Labell unto 30 minut.
of the sextans, for so much is the semidiurnall gate of the Sun commonly.

Cap. 7. How to rectifye the place of the or of any other Planet to any other
Meridian.
THere is more need to have regard of this matter for the, because her motion
is very swift even every two hours about a degree, then in any other of the
Planets: and for reddyer performance hereof, the Horarium Planetarium in the
29 Cap. mentioned, shall yield you special help, if you imagine the 10 hours
of the Arch of the sextans to be 10 degrees, and cause the planetary Index to
be numbered for this purpose into 12 hours from the Center outward.

Now when you will rectify the true place of any Planet ( admit of the) at
noone any day proposed ( admit the 5. day of March 1598) to another Meridian
(admit to the Meridian of Quinsay.) First you shall get the semidiurnall gate
of the Planet by taking the motion of the day proposed ( vz. 2 degr. 40 min.
in) out of the motion of the day following ( being the 6 day of March, and the
Moons place or motion then 15 degr. 1. min. in) and take half the remain (
vz. 6 degr. 10 min.) which you shall seek in the arche of the sextans ( as
though they were 6 hours 10 min.) and thereto set the Index, there let him
stay. Then as in the last Cap. is taught, seek the hour distaunce of the
Meridian of the other place (vz. of Quinsay) from yours, vz. from that of
Anwerpe (for Stadius) but for my Vranicum from London, (admit the hour
distaunce 8 hours and an half) and that distaunce seek in the Index planted
as before by the numbers reckned from the Center outward unto 12, and mark
what parallel cutteth the Index there ( vz. at the said 8 hour thereof) and
follow it to the arche of the Sextans, which shall there show you (4 degrees 30
minutes) the motion of the Planet answerable to that hour distaunce of their
Meridians, which if it be Westwards from your Meridian, you shall add to, if
Eastwards (as here it is) then subtract out of the place of the Planet found (
vz. out of 2 degrees 40 minutes of) and so shall you have (28 degrees 10
minutes in) the true rectified place of the Planet to that Meridian proposed.

Note, that for,,,,, and the, whose semidurnall gates seldom exceed minutes,
you may take 3 or 4 hours of the Sextans for one degree, and work as before
most exact.

Cap. 8. How to know the declinacion and right ascencion of any Planet, fixed
Star, or point of the heavens, and their degree of Culminacion.
THere are in the Matter, or Celestial of this Astrolabe, to avoid confusion,
only two sorts of circles delineated, and those are the circles of
the-clipticks longitude and latitude in the 2. Cap. mentioned, issuing from his
Pole D to his opposite. And the very like unto those ought to have been
delineated, issuing from the Poles of the world, limitting the right assentions
and declinations of the Stars, in regard of the Equinoctial, and are
commonly called Meridians and Paralells, which because the nature of this
proiectement does cast the Meridians into straight lines issuing from the
Poles, both lodged in the Center unto every of the 360 degrees of the
Equinoctial, or rather of the limb and the parallells into concentricke
circles, they are therefore supplied by playing about the radiall degrees of
the noone-lines on the Center, by the degrees of the limb, and might as well
be done by a thread and pearl applied to the radyall degrees of the Scale
planted at the beginning of.

Further you shall understand that country is said to have a right Horizon,
unto which some one of the Meridians is Horizon, that is to say, where the
Aequinoctiall passes by the Zenith or point directly over head, called the
Vertical point, and both the poles of the world even with the Horizon, and
neither of them elevated, all other Horizons where either Pole is elevated, are
called oblique Horizons.

Now therefore when you are to get the right ascension of any Planet-Starre, or
point of the heavens assigned, you are but to learn what Meridian and Parallel
cutteth the same, and if you do but lay the noone-line thereon, it shows you
in the limb the right ascension, and in the scale of the Radiall degrees on
the noone-line the declinacion. For example, the Suns Apex placed at the 26
degree 3 minut. of by the 2 cap. lay the noone-line thereto, and it shall show
you in the limb 356 degrees 25 minutes his right ascencion, and among the
radiall degrees of the noone-line 1 degr. 30 min. his declinacion, and that
Southwards of the Equinoctial. For the 5 day of March 1598 likewise apply the
noone-line unto the chief Carect of there placed at 2 degr. 27 min. in, and in
latitude 2 degr 44 min. North, and it shall show you in the limb 182 degrees
his right ascencion, and among the radiall degrees, 1 degr. 10 min. his
declinacion South from the equinoctial the same 5 of March 1598. Again, if
for any Star, as admit the great Star of the first light in or near the
eye of the Bull, called Oculus tauri, the noone-line laid thereon, shows in
the limb 63 degrees 30 min. his right ascencion, and 16 degrees his
declinacion North from the equinoctial, though he be in latitude South from
the-clipticke, and it cutteth in the Zodiac the 5 degree 35 min. of his
degree of culminacion: for always ye degree of the-clipticke which coascendeth
or cutteth any Meridian or right Horizon with any Star, or other point of the
heavens, is called the degree of his Culminacion, because the Meridian of any
place is called Culmen Celi.

Cap. 9. How to find the true Meridian in any country by help of this
Astrolabe.
THE Meridian circle of any latitude, is that great circle of the Sphere which
passes by the Zenith or vertical point of that place, and a line drawn by
his two intersections with the Horizon there, is called the Meridian line.
Also, that Star which in this Astrolabe you see in the outermost tip of the
tail of Vrsa Minor, is commonly called the Pole star, in Latin Stella
polaris, or Cinosura, which in this age is some 3 degree distant from the true
North point or pole of the world, although the ordinary sort take it to be the
Pole it self, yet in every age to come by reason of the foresaid sliding back
of the equinoctial points, he shall draw nearer and nearer to the Pole until
the year 2220 after Christ, and then shall he be but 30 minutes from the Pole,
and his longitude shall be then 0 in, from whence he will then begin to
elongate again from the Pole till he come to 0 in about the year 15120, at
which time his distance from the Pole shall be 47 degrees 30 minutes. And
whereas Petrus Nonius says, that in times past he has been 12 degrees 24
minutes from the Pole, and is now 3 degrees 30 minutes, happily he means from
the creation of the world.

This Pole-Starre in our age is found to culminate with the 6 degr. 20 min. of,
and to be 88 degr. 24 min. declining North from the equinoctial: on which 6
degr. 20 min. of if you lay the Noone-line, you shall first thereby see what
Stars do continually culminate or come unto the Meridian with it, and you
shall find it to cut on the fair Star of the third light, in the pummell of
the chayer of Cassiopeia, and another of the same light the northermost of the
girdle of Andromeda, and in the opposite part, vz. by the North line, you shall
see the 60 degr. 20 min of to culminate almost with the innermost of the three
in the tail tail of Vrsa mayor called Alioth, and two of the Stars of, But
that of Cassiopeia, and that of Vrsa mayor are best for this purpose. Having
thus by your Astrolabe found out a Star or two which have the same degree of
culminating any Meridian as the Pole-Starre has, now shall you need but in
any starry night to hang up some line, or erect some round pole or staff
perpendiculer to your Horizon, and then watch the going about of the Stars,
until some one of those two Stars come with the said Pole-Starre very even
and directly with your perpendiculer, for then be sure that those two are both
directly in the Meridian: Wherefore you shall then speedily plant another
perpendiculer just between your first and the said two Stars, and there let
them remain continually, for they shall serve you for many good purposes at
any time after both day and night, in stead of a Meridian, I could set you
down many ways more, but this is most pertinent to this Instrument, and is of
all other the readyest, especially when as by the 22 Cap. following you shall
beforehand know what hour these Stars will come to the Meridian, that you
need not watch long for them.

Cap. 10. How to attain the latitude or Poles elevation in any Country
unknown, and to choose out the Vertical point in the noone-line, the
Horizontall point in the North line, with the Zenith line serving thereunto.
THe Latitude of any place, is the distaunce of his Vertical point from the
Aequinoctiall, counted by the degrees of his Meridian circle on the South part,
and is always equal to the eleuacion of the Pole of the world above the
Horizon counted in the same Meridian on the North part, either of which can
never exceed 90 degrees: for which cause, there are in the Zenitfer 90 Zenith
lines described, to serve every turn. And the reddiest and most sure way to
get the latitude in any strange place, having by the last Cap. settled your
Meridian, is to take the Meridian altitudes of some one North Star that never
comes South of the Zenith there, both above and under the Pole, then take the
greater Altitude out of the lesser, and of the remain add the one half to
the lesser, so have you the latitude or Poles Eleuauion sought, whose
complement is the Equinoctials eleuacion above the South point of the Horizon.

For example, admit the first Star of the tail of Vrsa mayor called Alioth,
if you observe his coming to the Meridian above the Pole-Starre, and there
find his altitude to be 84 degrees high, and afterward finding him again in
the Meridian under the Pole (which will be some 12 hours between) and there
but 19 degrees high, then take 19 out of 84 there rests 64, half that being
32 added to 19 makes 51 our eleuacion here at Reading, and so much is our
Zenith, or Vertical point, all is one, distant from the Equinoctial, and that
51 taken out of 90, leaves the complement 38 the Equinoctials height above the
Horizon in our Meridian.

Now, if you will choose out in the noone-line of the Zenitfer the Vertical
point fitting thereunto, reckon thereon from the Equinoctialls intersection,
with the noone-line by the radiall degrees and numbers thereon set between the
Center and Meridies, your latitude found, for there shall be your Vertical
point desired ( vz. for our Eleuacion here at Reading, the Pole being 51
degrees high, I reckon that by the numbers in the noone-line, and there I
conclude is our Vertical point, or of any Country having like latitude.)
Likewise reckon on the North line from the Center toward Media nox, your
said latitude found ( vz. the said 51 degrees 40 minutes,) and there shall be
the place or point of your Horizons intersection, with the North part of your
Meridian (51 degrees 40 minutes under the Pole) which I call the Horizontall
point. And between the Vertical and Horizontall points thus found, you shall
always find 90 Radiall degrees complete and no more, which 90 degrees are the
true intersections or crossings of the 90 Almicantares of that latitude with
the North part of the Meridian, which for breuities sake I will hereafter call
the North degrees, and those 90 degrees of the noone-line from the Vertical
point toward Meridies, I will call the South degrees, both which in a
particular would be numbered from the two Horizontall points, unto the Zenith or
Vertical point, there ending at 90 accordingly.

Now for the Zenith line in the Zenitfer appertaining to your latitude found,
it is easily chosen by the numbers ascribed to the inner ends of those 90
Zenith lines, as in the 1 cap. is showed, which 90 inner ends are ye 90 Zenith
points, and do answer by the fiduciall line of the Cursor, unto the 90
Vertical points of the noone-line, ( vz. the 51 Zenith line must be chosen for
our latitude here at Reading,) every of them carrying his 90 Almicantare
roots distinguished by the curued lines, and numbered from their outermost end
inwards toward their Zenith points, as in the 1. Cap. is showed.

Your Vertical point, Horizon^^^ po^^^, and your Zenith line appertaining thus
found, you must in any wise mark them specially from the rest except your
memory be good, the reddier to find them in all your actions.

Cap. 11. How to take the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, or any Planet or
Star, and thereby to get the latitude in any Country.
IT is a matter very easy and common, either by a Quadrant with a line and
plummet, or by the circle or this Astrolabe hanged perpendiculer, furnished
with a rule and two sightes to take an altitude: for the Sun, by suffering
the Sunne-beames to pearce the sight-holes, and for Stars by applying the
sightes to your eye, which altitude of the Sun or any Star being taken in
the direct South or North by help of your Meridian set by the 9 cap. is called
the Meridian altitude. But if you have no Meridian set, place your Quadrant or
Astrolabe toward the South or North, and thereby observe the several
altitudes of the Sun or Stars as they rise higher and higher, and the
highest shall be the Meridian altitude. Where note, that such Stars whose
declinacions exceed the latitudes complement, do come twice unto the Meridian
at 12 hours between, yet never come South of the Zenith, or Vertical point.

The Meridian altitude thus had ( As for example here at Reading the 2 of
October 1596 about 3 of the clock in the morning, I observed the coming of
the Star oculus Tauri to the Meridian, and there took his Meridian Altitude
by a Quadrant 54 degrees) take it out of 90 degrees ( vz. 54 out of 90) so have
(...) (35) the complement or vertical distance of the Planet or Star (
oculus) proposed, from the Zenith of your being. Now if this Meridian Altitude
happen on the North from your Zenith, then must you place the North line of
your Zenitfer on the center of your Planet or Star found out in this
Astrolabe: but if it happen South of your Zenith, ( As here this Meridian
altitude of ocul. did from our Zenith at Reading) then bring the noone-line
thereto. And from that touching of the Stars center therewith, ( which you
shall find to touch at 16 degrees, as they are on the noone-line there
numbered) you shall reckon inwards toward the center of the Celestial so many
degrees as the said vertical distaunce amounts unto, ( vz. the said 35
degrees) and the end of that reckoning shall assuredly show you (51) in the
noone-line the Zenith point of your being, whose number ascribed ( vz. the
said 51) is your latitude desired, ( thereby I might conclude, that the
latitude here at Reading was 51 degrees) whose Horizontall point and Zenith
line you may easily find out by the last Cap.

Cap. 12. How to know what day of the year it were if it were forgotten.
GEt the Latitude by the 10 or 11 cap. ( admit our latitude 51 degrees) and the
meridian altitude of the by the last cap. ( admit 25 degrees) reckon the
complement thereof ( vz. 65 degrees) in the noone-line from the Vertical point
toward Meridies, and look what radiall degrees it falls at ( you shall
find it at 13 degrees Southwards from the Equinoctialls intersection) and
apply that degree by moving about the Zenitfer unto the clipticke circle,
according as you guess the time of the year to be, vz. If you think it to be
between Midsomer and Christmas, then apply the same 13 degr.) unto the
autumnall hemicicle, where and are, ( where it must needs touch upon the 24
degree of) if between Christmas and Midsomer then unto the vernall hemicircle
of the others Signs ( where it must needs our the 6 of) and there shall most
assu^edly be the tru^ (...) the Sun for that day. Which bring had: then you
may easily by the 5. Cap. euersed as well find the day answerable thereto, as
there you found the Suns place answerable to the day vice versa. Provided
that the Suns place be rectified as in the 6. Cap. if need be.

Cap. 13. How to know what it is a clock at any time either night or day, by
the S^nne, Planets, or Stars.
YOu must always intend that the Planets are weekly placed, as in the 3. Cap.
is taught. Also observe this rule general, to keep the noone-line of the
Zenitfer still upwards, by turning about your Astrolabe, imagining your face
turned still to the South, except when you are specially to deal with the
North line, then keep him upwards, and then imagine your face turned toward
the North. Now when you desire to know the hour of the day or night, you
shall as in the last Cap. is mentioned, either by a Quadrant, or this
Astrolabe, take the Altitude of the Sun at any time in the day or in the
night of any Star. ( For Example this year 1596 the 2 of October in the
morning at my poor house at Swallowfeyld by Reading, to see how the time
passed, I took the altitude of the Sun 15 degrees high, And the same evening
I took the altitude of the great Star Arcturus 10 degrees high toward the
West) Which had, then shall you prepare your Almicantifer unto that altitude,
thus: In the Zenith line chosen by the 7. Cap. for your place (vz. in the 51
Zenith line for us here about Reading) seek out among his Almicantare roots
the number of that Altitude taken, ( vz. in the morning I sought 15 for the,
and at night 10 for Arcturus) and there plant the Cursor, then reckon on the
North line from your Horizontall point found by the 7 inwards toward the
center the same altitude again ( vz. from the Horizontall point of our
latitude, being the 51 degrees. of the Northline counted from the center, I
reckoned inwards for the 15 degrees, and for Arcturus 10 degrees, the one fell
out at 36 degrees from the center, the other at 41) and thereto, set the
pointer of the Almicantifer, which poynter and Cursor so set, I call the
Almicantifer prepared: Then lead about the Almicantifer, which must also lead
after him the noone-line, until the pointer come to touch exactly either the
Apex of the Suns Carect, or the very center of the Star by which soever you
deal, and this I call the applying of the pointer to any Planet or Star:
There hold the Zenitfer fast, and slide down the Cursor to the center,
applying there his Fiduciall line labell-wise to the Sun, which shall show
you in the hour circle the hour desired, and this I call labelling of the
Sun to the hour circle: Yet upon these conditions, that if you deal for the
East Hemispheare, that is to say, if your altitude taken were on the East part
of the Meridian, vz. between the North and South Eastwards ( as for the it
was) then in this leading about shall the Almicantifer play leftwards of the
noone-line toward 6 of clock in the morning of the hour circle which I call
the East Hemispheare, and so to lead the noone-line after it leftwards, but if
your altitude taken were on ye West part (as for Arcturus it was) then shall
the Almicantifer play and keep on the right side of the noone-line toward 6
of clock at night, and lead him about rightwards after him ( According to
which precept, the said 2 of October in the morning, I applied the Almicantifer
his pointer prepared as is said unto 15 degrees. to the Apex of the ( placed as is
said at 20 of) in the East Hemispheere, and there did I labell to the Sun,
which showed me half an hour past 8 in the morning, the hour desired.
Likewise at night I applied the pointer prepared, and planted for 10 degrees
unto Arcturus in the West Hemispheare, because Arcturus was in the West, and
then again I labelled to the which showed me in the Hour circle half an
hour past 7 of the clock at night, the hour desired: For always (Locus
Solis ostendit horam.) And I dare boldly say, that never was seen before this
more facillitie to know the hour by the Stars, by any other Astrolabe, or
Instrument whatsoever.

Cap. 14. Another more easy way to find the hour by the Stars.
Having your Meridian planted about your dwelling place, as in the 6 Cap. is
taught, see into the element if any Star you know well (as by the 25 Cap. you
shall easily know hem all) be even therewith either on the South or North part.
And upon that Star sought in the Celestial, place accordingly the North line
or noone line (either of them now esteemed from the Zenith point) and there
labell to the, so shall the hour sought show it self in the hour circle
under the fiduciall line of the Labell or Almicantifer now used Labell-wise
after the woonted manner, this needs no example.

If you have no Meridian perpendiculers set, you may at any time presently set
them with two sticks by the Pole-Starre it self sufficient for this purpose.
I my self always kept a standing mark ready set in such sort, that some
tree, chimney top, or gable end, should be directly South from the same. If no
Star be in the South or North, it is not hard to guess the distaunce of the
nearest you see, and place your noone or North line accordingly, especially by
two Stars, on either side one, to mark what part of their distance your
Meridian cutteth, and accordingly to place the noone or North line between
them.

Cap. 15. Another easy way by the.
TAke the hour which the shade of the gives on any Sunne-dyall, seek the
same hour in the hour circle, and labell it to the Moons Carect planted by
the 3. Cap. and then holding fast the Zenitfer, labell to the Suns Carect,
which shall show in the hour circle the hour desired.

Cap. 16. How to know the meridian Altitude of the Sun, or any other Planet,
Star, or point of the heavens in any country, and what hour of the day or
night any of them shall culminate, or come to the Meridian of that place.
THE Carects being planted by the 3 Cap. you shall but apply the noone-line to
the Apex or Center of the Planet, Star, or point desired, and the degrees
thereon found between the Vertical point and it taken out of 90, leaves the
Meridian altitude desired, whether it be North or South, and there also if you
labell to the Sun, it shall show you in the hour circle the time when that
Planet, Star, or point, comes to the Meridian. ( For example, the
noone-line brought to the Suns chief Apex, being planted by the 3 cap. at
263 min. in, his place for the 5 of March 1598. you shall find him by the
degrees of the noone-line 53 degrees distaunt from our Vertical point here at
Reading therein, vz. from the 51 degr. thereof, which 53 taken out of 90,
leaves 37 the Meridian altitude. In like manner for any Star, Admit oculus
tauri the noone-line applied to his middle prick, you shall find it distaunt
from our Vertical point 35 degr. that taken out of 90, leaves 54 his Meridian
altitude, As if you make trial by obseruacion, as in the 8 Cap. is taught, you
shall find it so. And if you there labell to the, you shall find it to cut in
the houre-circle 4 of clock in the after noone, and almost half an hour
past, which is the time that oculus tauri shall come unto the Meridian the said
6 of March 1598. But when you work for the Sun as before, he only is
himself the pointer of hours, and therefore must needs be in the Meridian at
Noone, or 12 of clock. But if it be for any North Star that never sets,
and that you would know his meridian altitude under the Pole, apply the North
line thereto, and the degrees thereof between it and the Horizontall point is
your desire, and there also labell to the Sun, and it shall show you the
hour.

Cap. 17. How to know the hour of Sunne-rising and setting, and the length of
the day and night, together with his oblique ascencion, and his difference of
ascencion any day in the year.
YOur day and year proposed ( Admit the said 8 day of June this year 1596 in
the 3 Cap. mentioned, when our most noble Lords lanched from Plimmouth toward
Spain) and the Suns Apex placed by the 3 cap. ( unto 27 degrees 58 min. of)
Then shall you set the Cursor unto the outer end of the Zenith line of your
country, ( vz. unto the 0 almicantare root of the 51 Zenith line being for
the latitude of Plymouth,) and there fastening the Cursor apply the pointer
unto the Horizontall point ( of Plymouth, being the 51 degree of the North
line) and this I call preparing of the Zenitfer to the Horizon. Now, first to
begin for the Sunne-rising, being thus prepared, you shall according to the
precept in the 9 Cap. let the Almicantifer play on the East Hemicicle, and
there apply his pointer to the Suns Apex ( at 27 degr. 58 min. in) there hold
fast (...) Zenitfer and Labell to the Sun, so shall appear in (...) ^oure
circle (4 of clock in the morning, and somewhat less) the time of the
Sunne-rising for your (8 of June 1596 at Plymouth) day and year proposed. And
if there also you labell to the East point or 6 of clock in the morning of the
hour circle, it shall show you in the limb of the Celestial (56 degr. 20
min.) the oblique ascencion of the Sun for that time and place he is in,
which taken out of the right ascencion of his place ( of 27 degr. 58 min. of,
being 87 degr.) had by the 8 Cap. there shall remain (31 degrees. 10 min.) the
difference of ascencion. In the very like manner work for the Sunne-se^ting,
by letting the Almicantifer to play on the West Hemicicle, and there apply the
pointer again to the Suns Apex ( vz. to the foresaid 27 degr. 58 min. of)
and there labell to the, so shall you see in the hour circle (some 10 min.
after 8 of clock at night) the hour of Sunne-set: and the space of hours
numbered between Sunne-rising and setting ( being 16 hours) is the length of
the day, and those (16 hours) taken out of 24 hours, leaves (7 hours) the
length of the night. Also the hour of Sun set ( vz 8 doubled any day, makes
(16 hours) the just length of the day as before. And here also if you labell
to the West point of the hour circle, it shall show you in the Celestialls
limb (118 degrees. 30 mi.) the oblique descencion ( in the said 51 latitude) As
for the difference of descencion, it is all one with the difference of
ascencion.

This Chapter is most easily to be performed by the particular moouer in the 1
Cap. mentioned: For if you move it about leftwards ( vz. from West toward
East, according to Copernicus Hipothesis, and contrary to all other Astrolabes)
till the East part of the particular Horizon come to the Sun, the Labell laid
thereon, shows the hour of rising, and continuing that moving till the
Wester part of the Horizon come to the Sun, the Labell there applied, shows
the Sun setting: yea, and more then that, the Labell there at both places
shows the amplitude of the Sun rising and setting, by the prospectiue
degrees of the Horizon. Note, that if you would be curious, you should at Sun
rising apply the Labell a quarter of a degree short, and for the Sun setting
a quarter of a degree further on in the-clipticke, then the Suns Apex is
planted in regard of the Suns diurnall motion, being every 24 hours almost a
degree, for that the Apex is set but just for noone, the reason whereof is
showed in the 6. Cap. Note also, that for the rising and setting of Stars,
and the other Planets, they are to be done by the particular in all respects as
for the Sun, saving that you must remember semper locus solis ostendit horam:
Also, the getting of the assencions and descencions have all one working with
the general.

Cap. 18. To know the hour of rising or setting of any other Star, Planet,
or point in the Heavens, and their diurnall and nocturnall arches, and their
oblique assencions and difference of assencion in any Country.
IN all these cases where we entreat of the hour, it is intended that the
Suns place is set by the 3. Cap. ( admit at 26 degr. 3 min. in Pisces, for
the 5 day of March 1598.) Now to know the time of rising or setting of any
Planet, Star, or point proposed (admit the great Star Arcturus) for any
time and place proposed, you shall prepare the Almicantifer to the Horizon
proposed in all respects as in the last Cap. you did ( vz. the Cursor planted
unto the outermost end of the 51 Zenith line, and the pointer unto the 51
Horizontall point serving with us here at Reading.) And then for the time of
rising, you must let the Almicantifer play on the East Hemicicle, and there
apply the pointer to the center of (Arcturus) the Star or point proposed, and
there holding fast the Zenitfer, labell to the Sun, so shall you find cut in
the hour circle ( about 20 min. past 6 of clock in the afternoon) the hour
and time of his rising. And there also if you labell to the East point of the
houre-circle, it shows in the limb of the Celestial (280 degrees) the
oblique ascencion of the same Star or point (Arcturus) in the (51) latitude
proposed, which taken out of the right ascencion (209) had by the 8 Cap.
leaves (19 degrees) the difference. Note, that if happily you think your
hour circle with the smallest to direct you to the oblique ascencion exactly
when you lay the Labell on the East or West points, know that he must cut the
like part of the Degree where he lights as the noone-line or North-line do in
the degrees where they are. Note also, that to know the oblique ascencion, is
as much to say, as to know what d^gree of the Aequinoctiall does rise with any
Star or Planet on any oblique Horizon. As for the hour of setting, let the
Almicantifer prepared as before, play on the West Hemicicle, and aply the
pointer there again on the said Star (Arcturus) or point proposed, where if
you labell to the Sun ( at 26 degrees 3 min. in,) it shall show you in the
houre-circle (20 min. past 10 the next morning) the time of his setting: and
the hours reckoned on the houre-circle between his time of rising and setting
( being 16) is his diurnall arch, which taken out of 24, leaves (8 hours) his
nocturnall arch.

Cap. 19. How to set particular degrees on the Almicantifer, for any particular
latitude.
I Do not stand making special Chapters of the use of the particular moouer in
the 1 Cap. mentioned, because it consists but of the very same Horizon circle
and 12 houses of one particular latitude, which old 1 Stophlerus, and our old
english Laureat G. Chaucer, have so largely and plainly written of: withal,
being a thing most commonly in use, and differing in nothing, but that they
according to the ancient Astronomers, appointed the Starry Heavens to move
rightwards from East toward West, upon the earth or fixed Horizon of the
place. And I according to Copernicus cause the earth or Horizon to move
leftwards from West toward East, upon the Starry Firmament fixed: In so much,
that if in this my Astrolabe you hold still that particular moouer with one
hand, and with your under hand turn about the Celestial, then is it iumpe
Stophler again. In which motion (a pretty thing to note) one that stands by
shall hardly perceive any other but that the Reete moves, although in deed
you turn about the Matter, strongly confirming Copernicus Argument, who says,
that the weakness of our senses do imagine the Heavens to move about every
24 hours from East to West by a Primum mobile, where as in deed they have
been always fixed, and it is the earth that whirleth about every 24 hours
from West to East, of his own propper nature allotted unto him, as most fit
for the receptacle of all transitory things, being appointed in a place where
nothing is to stay him from his continual moving: but of those things I have
more just occasion to entreat of in my Organum Vranicum very shortly to come
forth. But now if the said particular moouer should also have his particular
Almicantares like the Reete of my Jewel tediously cut out, they would much
obscure this fair face of the Celestial, very needless: because the
particular Zenith-line of the place, with his 90 roots annexed to the
noone-line for the Cursor to play upon, and the particular degrees by this
Cap. prepared on the Almicantifer, shall serve in all respects as well or
rather better. And the manner of preparing them is in a manner already set
down in the 13 Cap. Yet is it more easily to be done by a particular, whose
radyall degrees on the North line, which before I have termed North degrees,
are or should be ready numbered from the Horizontall point, toward the
Vertical point, ending there at 90 degrees, which in the general can not be
suffered. Wherefore keeping the fiduciall line of the Almicantifer even with
the North line, then sliding the Cursor from root to root of the 90 roots of
your particular Zenith line, set nickes in the Almicantifer at every degree,
from degree to degree of the 90 North degrees, numbered from the Horizontall
point, toward the Vertical point, correspondent to each root as they pass
in order, till the whole 90 particular degrees be in manner as in the 13 Cap.
is showed by those nicks placed on the Almicantifer, and then distinguish them
by tennes, and set numbers unto them accordingly, so are they very ready for
diverse special purposes in one latitude, and if need were, a man may by the
two edges on both faces set the like in for four latitudes, and those will
near be sufficient for any one region or province, or else he might have it
made with some channel to receive a slip of velome or paste-boorde, whereon
with pen and ink speedily to prepare it for any latitude.

Cap. 20. How to know the amplitude of the rising or setting of the Sun or
Stars.
THE true East and West points of any Horizon are the Intersections of the
Equinoctial therewith: and that is the cause why in describing the general
Horizons, they make them all to meet at two points which are those, and for
that cause it is manifest, that there can no Planet, Star, or point of the
heavens, rise or set directly in the true East or West points of any Horizon,
but only such as are situate for the time being in the Aeq^inoctiall circle.
Wherefore those that are North from the Equinoctial, must needs rise and set
Northwards from the true East and West points, and those that are Southwards*
rise and set Southwards, and that more or less, according to their distaunce,
and the obliquitie of the Horizon proposed. And the degrees of the Horizon
circle between the true East and West points, and their rising and setting,
are called the amplitude of rising and setting, which in the particular moouer
are immediately seen by the degrees of the Horizon circle, as in the 17 Cap is
said: but by the general it asks a little pains in this manner. Get the
oblique ascencion of the Sun, Star, or point proposed for the time and
place* by the 17 or 18 Cap. (which for the Sun was in the Horizon of Plymouth
the day of the prosperous setting forth of our said noble Lords, found in
the 17 Cap. 56 degrees 20 minutes of the Celestialls limb,) and thereto apply
the noone-line, and there hold the Zenithfer fixed: where it you have the
Almicantif^r by the last Cap prepared for the first latitude, vz. unto the
Zenith line, nearest unto the noone-line, whose Horizontall point is in the
center of the Astrolabe, and then running the Cursor down by the roots of the
same first Zenith line, keeping the fiduciall line of the Almicantifer still on
the Sun, Star, or point proposed, until the Cursor among the roots, and
the or Star among the prepared degrees do cut like number, for then is the
complement thereof, the degrees of the amplitude sought. But if your
Almicantifer be not prepared, th^n must you prepare him and his pointer as in
the 13 Cap. is taught, first to one degree of altitude, then to another, making
still proffers to the or Star, till the pointer touch upon it, ( which will
fall out at 41 degrees of that first Zenith line and latitude) and the degrees
so found, taken out of 90, leaves (49 degrees) the amplitude ( of the) sought.

Cap. 21. To know what Stars do never rise or set in any latitude, and which
do once a day touch the Zenith point, or the Horizontall point.
THis matter is most easy, (your Vertical point and Horizontall point chosen
by the 10 Cap.) to be done by the bare moving about of the Zenitfer, for in
that motion, such Stars (as the tail of Vrsa mayor, and the head of Perseus,
and such like) as touch the Vertical point be sure ( in our 51 latit. here at
Reading) do come once in 24 hours to the Zenith of that place: And such as do
not reach unto the (51) Horizontall point, ( as all Vrsa mayor but 2 Stars
Vrsa minor, Cassiopeia, Cepheus etc) do n^uer et* And such as touch upon the
Horizontall point, (as Caput Me^^^se lucida lyre, the ring of Andromedaes
cheine etc.) do once in 24 hours touch upon the Horizon of the (51) latitude
proposed, yet do not set under it. By the particular moouer, these things are
most plainly perceived, and reddily done by the moving of the Horizon circle
about.

Cap. 22. To know any day and hour what Stars or points in the Heavens are
in or near the Meridian, or do rise or set in any Latitude.
THis matter is as easy as the last. Labell the Sun ( admit placed at 20
degrees 10 min. in for the 2. of October 1596) to any hour in the hour circle
( admit to 8 of clock at night) and so shall the noone-line of the Zenitfer
show (the two Stars, called Caude Capricorni, and Lucida Hidri, but a little
past, etc.) such Stars as are the same instant in the South, and the 12
degree of Aquarius in the medium Celi under the noone-line. And there holding
fast the Zenitfer, being prepared unto the Horizon (51 here at Reading)
proposed, lead the Almicantifer about the East Hemispheare, and look what
Stars (as part of Perseus, one of the heads of, the Bulls head, the sin of
the Whale, etc.) you shall find the pointer to touch upon: the same
assuredly, do even that moment emerge and rise on the Horizon. That done, the
Zenitfer still remaining and prepared to the Horison as before, lead the
Almicantifer about the West Hemispheare, and you shall find the pointer to
touch upon such Stars (vz. one in the arm pit, another in the bow of,
etc.) as are even then ready to set and go down under the Horizon. This is
also most easy by the Horizon circle of the particular, which being but set to
the hour, the Stars rising appear in the East Hemispheare, and those
setting: in the West and those in the Meridian: under the noone-line.

Cap. 23. How to know the hour distance of any Planet, Star, or point of the
Heavens from the Meridian, any day and year proposed, and in any latitude.
THat is to say, how many hours any Planet, Star, or point (admit oculus
Tauri) not being in the South at any time assigned, ( admit at 10 of clock at
night the 5 of March 1598.) will be before he come to the Meridian of any place
( admit our Meridian here at Reading in the 51 latitude) proposed, or if he be
past, how many hours he is past: You shall labell the hour given in the
houre-circle ( vz. 10 of clock at night) to the planted as in the 3 Cap. ( at
26 degr. 3 min. of) there hold fast the Zenitfer, and labell to your Star
(oculus Tauri) or point proposed, so does the labell show in the houre-circle (
five hours almost Westwards, and therefore past the Meridian) the hour and
part that the Star or point is distant, which if it be on the East part, then
is not that Star or point come to the Meridian, if Westwards (as here it
was) then is he past the Meridian (5 hours) so many hours.

Cap. 24. How to know the height of the Sun, or of any other Planet or
Star, for any hour of the day any year in any latitude.
Seek your hour proposed ( admit 10 of clock in the morning the 2 of October.
1596 in our 51 lati.) in the houre-circle, and labell it to ye Suns carect ( at
20 d. 10 mi. in) there hold the Zenitfer fast. Now if the particular degrees be
planted on the Almicantifer, as in the 19 Cap. is taught, you shall, (keeping
the fiduciall line of the Almicantifer on the Star or Sons Apex,) need but
to slide the Cursor too and fro on the Zenith line of the (51) latitude
proposed, until the Cursor among the roots of that (51) Z^nith-line, and the
Suns Apex or center of the Star ( admit of oculus) among the particular
degrees of the Almicantifer, do cut like number, ( which you shall find for
the to be at the 25 root, and 25 particular degrees, and for oculus tauri at
the 3 root, and 3 particular degrees,) for those shall be the degrees of the
Sun or Stars altitude sought. But if your Almicantifer have not the
particular degrees, then must you as in the 13 Cap. is taught, prepare it to
some degree at a venture, and make a proffer to the Sun or Star, to see if
the pointer will touch it: if it do not, prepare it again and again if need
be, further off, or nearer, as the cause requires, till it do hit, as in the
20 Cap. you did, which with a very little practice will be as easy as the
particular. This and the 20 are the only two hardest in the book, and
therefore spare not so little pains as they require.

Cap. 25. How you shall most easily learn to know all the Constellations and
Stars in the element it self.
EVen as a lofe of dowe or paste, after it is new moulden round and copped, if
you then put it into a press, will become a flat cake: Even such a cake made
of the round Sphere or Globe pressed, is the Celestial of our new Astrolabe,
which I would have you now for this purpose imagine to be a lofe or round Globe
again: and that every of his circles had their due conuexities in such sort,
that a little pretty fellow like Tom Thumb might easily seat himself under
them as under a Canapy in the very center of the concauity, with this conceit,
if at any hour of any night given ( admit at 10 of clock at night the said 5
of March 1598) you having first placed that hour of the houre-circle unto the
Suns Carect placed by the 3 Cap. ( unto 26 degr. 3 min. of,) there fastening
the Zenithfer: And then going abroad, by help of your Meridian set, as in the
9 Cap. do place your Astrolabe flat on some stool, plain level with the
Horizon, with his noone-line directed toward the South, even with the said
Meridian line, and the North line toward the North. Then with a privy skonce
and candle, one while viewing your Astrolabe, another while hiding the light,
and viewing the element, you shall soon perceive all the Stars of any
constellacion in the heavens which are then above your Horizon, in the like
proportion one from another, and differing in their magnitudes, as in the
Celestial they are described: in so much, that your little pretty fellow
sitting in the center under this conceited canapy of Stars and images, if it
were transparent as glass or crystal, should there plainly see the Stars
in the element, each answering his match in this canapy, by the visuall lines
from his eye, especially if the noone-line be elevated according to the
Equinoctialls height, or latitudes complement, because the proiectment is
polare.

But if this do not satisfye you sufficiently, then is best for you having
placed your Zenitfer as before by the hour proposed, to see by the 22 Cap.
what Stars are under or near the noone-line, and of which magnitude they
are, ( you shall find at 10 of clock the 5 of March 1598 the great Star of
the first magnit. in the breast of the Lion, called Cor Leonis, directly under
it, and the bright Star of Hydra of the 2 magnitude not much past) and by the
16 Cap. learn their meridian altitude ( which for Cor Leonis, you shall by the
16 Cap. find 52 degrees, and for lucida hidri 33 degrees,) which had, go
forth with an Astrolabe or Quadrant with his fightes set to that altitude
directly toward the South, and you shall wellneere find your Stars desired
even with your sight holes, and you be not too long about it. Also at any time
you may lay the noone-line to any Star (admit Arcturus) you desire to know,
and then labell to any hour of the night proposed, ( admit 10 of clock) then
mark what degree of the clipticke the labell there cutteth, ( you shall find
1 degr. 30 min. in) and seek by the 5 Cap. what month and day thereof that
the Sun comes to that degree, ( you shall find on the 12 day of May anno
1598) for on that day be sure to find that Star in the South at 10 of clock
at night, where you may make trial of his Meridian altitude as before. And
having thus or any other way attained the perfect knowledge of some few, you
shall easily by them descrye the rest by their situation unto them, and
imagined distaunces to others, some being in straight lines from two other,
some making a triangular, some a quadrangular form of sundry shapes: And this
shall suffice an ingenious conceit in a few nights to learn to know most of
the constellacions and their Stars, who shall the whiles find the time spent
in heavenly pleasure and delights.

Cap. 26. Of the 4 Cardines, and the sundry rising and setting of the fixed
Stars with the Planets.
THE Meridian and Horizon of every place do always cross each other in half
on the North and South points of the same Horizon: which crossing, makes of
those two circles 4 semicircles, which are called the 4 Cardines. Unto either
of which when any Planet comes, especially if he be accompanied or strongly
aspected with some other forcible Planet, Star, or constellacion, he works
special effects, whether it be in natiuities or other causes, especially at
any such time, look assuredly for some present alteracion of the weather in
that Horizon, because there they do strongly affect and aspect the ascendent
Horizon and Climat, either by conjunction, opposition, or quartile, which are
the strongest: the other, as the and, are counted of less force. And whosoever
will take upon him to judge of Aspects or Eclipses, if he have not an eye
whether they aspect the Climat, or to judge of the weather, and not specially
regard the effects of the fixed Stars with the Planets, shall find it to
prove but lost labor, and happily be counted a common liar, as some of our
unskillful Prognosticators are, and the rest little better thought of, because
of their negligence or ignorance. But to come to my purpose again, you shall
understand, that when any Star rises together with any Planet on the Horizon
(if with the, then is it called the Cosmicall rising and if setting at Sun
rising the Cosmicall setting, if rising the Sun setting, the Acronicall
rising, if setting with the, the Acronicall setting.) The Cosmicall rising is
easily known by applying the Almicantifer prepared to the Horizon unto any
Planet in the East Hemicicle: there hold fast the Zenitfer, and play about the
Almicantifer, and look what Stars the pointer touches on in the East
Hemicicle, be sure those do rise at the same time Cosmically with that Planet,
and those he touches on in the West Hemicicle, do then Cosmically set with the
same Planet, then rising. Likewise, if you put over the Almicantifer so
prepared, causing the Planet to lie in the East Hemicicle, applying the pointer
thereto, and there holding fast the Zenitfer, do lead the Almicantifer about,
then be sure that such Stars as the pointer lights on in the East
Hemicicle, shall rise acronically with that Planet setting, and those in the
West Hemicicle, shall set acronically together with the Planet setting: and
what time of the year any of these shall happen, is easily conceived by that
has been said in the last Cap. and elsewhere: For unto the Star proposed, if
you apply the pointer prepared to the Horizon, and there holding the Zenithfer,
do remove the Almicantifer till the pointer touch or cut the Clipticke either
in the East or West Hemicicle. Then by the Ephemer. or my Vranicum you may
easily know when and what day any Planet shall come unto those points of
the-cliptick so cut, and the degree of the for that day also labelled, shows
there in the houre-circle the hour of the day (the Zenitfer being never
stirred all the while) when any such rising or setting shall happen.

For example, this year 1596 some 5 or 6 days together before the end of
September, after long sitting all day writing this present book, I was in the
euenings hindered of my recreating walks by sudden rising of the wind with
showers of rain, though the days were reasonable fair, I therefore sought
this my new Astrolabe, and found the Pleiades or 7 Stars to rise in the
euenings cosmically with Jupiter, being retrograde all the while, also being
then retrograde, for retrogradacion causes rain, especially in without all
fail more or less as he shall be affected or aspected. Also the 2 of October
1596 I was sodeinly overtaken riding from Reading to my poor house at
Swallowfeild at even, with a most stormy rain that continued an hour or two
after very extreme, it made me look my Astrolabe again, where I found spica
virguis the Sun and had set all together acronically within one half hour
or less that this storm began, and then an hour after that Jupiter was to
rise as before cosmically with the Pleyades. Now I leave it to our sufficient
Prognosticators to judge whether these might be efficient causes sufficient or
no, and do commend this my Astrolabe unto them as a most needful thing for
them, wishing them to have a special regard of the rising, setting, and
culminating of the fixed Stars. The common countreyman seeing any day
inclined to moisture, can say, that it will surely rain when the Sun and the
wind come together, neither will it indeed rain till then for the most part,
how likely so ever. And wherefore then should not we believe the learned, that
affirm the rising of Orion, Arcturus, Corona, etc. to provoke tempestious
weather, the Kid and Goat winds, the Hiades, Pleiades and Succule rain, and
especially happening with any forcible Planet or strong aspect, the more
violent. Were it not for consuming the time, I could recite examples of all
these and diverse other that I have upon like occasions noted to my self, but
dare presume no further, least I should be billed amongst the common liers, as
others are happily causeless: for no doubt the Almighty has the reign in his
hand, to alter all at his pleasure when they have all done their best. Yet that
which is most to be condemned in them is, that they agree seldom in one
conjecture, which must needs bewray shameful ignorance in some of them at the
least.

Cap. 27. Of the 12 houses, and setting the Figure.
LEarned men considering the Sun not only at his coming unto the 4 chief
points of the-clipticke, vz. the two Equinoctial and the two Solstitiall
points, to cause the Spring, Autumn, Summer and Winter, but also that in every
other of the 12 Signs he makes some alteration of the year and seasons. Even
so, finding such special effects to happen by the coming of the Planets unto
the 4 Cardines, either with the fixed Stars or without, as in the last Cap.
is touched, they did imagine that the Planets and Stars might have also some
forces and effects in other mean places between: and therefore took upon
them to add 8 semicircles more unto the 4 Cardines, crossing with them at the
two meridian Horizontall points, making up the number of 12, which they call
the 12 houses. Those on the particular moouer are ready drawn, so that
applying but the hour in ye moouers limb to ye Sun, your Figure is set
immediately and most excellently by this Astrolabe, fully fraught with all his
needful tackling, his Lords, terms, faces, triplicities, aspects, Planets and
Stars in their places, natures of the 12 houses, and of the 12 Signs, the
gradus masculini, feminini, lucidi, tenebrofi, vacui, fumosi, etc. and what
not? appertaining to the Judiciary art, as if you read Alkabitius, Claud.
Dariotus which is englished, Gwydo Bonatus, and others their introductions to
that art, comparing the 2 Cap. therewithal, you will easily conceive.

But to find these 12 houses in any country (admit here at Reading) by the
general for any day and year proposed, ( admit at 10 of clock the 5 day of
March 1598) you shall labell the hour proposed ( vz. 10 of the clock) sought
in the hour circle unto the Sun, placed by the 4. Cap. ( at 25 degrees 3.
min. in) there does the noone-line show you (22 degr. 30 min. of) the degree of
the-clipticke, beginning the 10 house and the North line (22 degr. 30 min. in)
the degree beginning the 4 house, where also (holding fast the Zenitfer) play
the Almicantifer prepared to the (51) Horizon, on both sides of the noone-line,
so shall the pointer cut the clipticke in the East Hemicicle at (28 degr. 30
min. in) his degree beginning the first house commonly called the ascendent or
Horoscope, and in the West Hemicicle at (28 degr. 30 min. in) the descendent or
degree beginning the 7 house, so have you the 4 Cardines, Angles, or principal
houses of any figure in a manner as ready, as by the particular moouer, which
(having as the common manner is, drawn your Scheame or Figure for the 12
houses) you shall plant therein accordingly.

But now for the other 8 houses, mark where the Horizontall point ( vz. the 51
degr. of the North line) touches on the Celestial, and thereto set a mark,
or rather the Apex of some loose carect provided of purpose, (which will happen
between the two near feet of Vrsa mayor) and there let him rest till anon.
And now shall you choose out in the domifying scale annexed to the North line,
which slope line serves unto your latitude ( vz. the 51 slope line) as in the
1 Cap. is touched: unto whose two extremes or ends, you must severally prepare
the Zenitfer by the domifying roots, or double radiall degrees numbered in the
noone-line scale outward with Capital letters in stead of Figures, in all
respects as in the 13 Cap. you did for the degrees of altitude: That is to say,
setting the Cursor to the like number among the said domifying roots as the
radiall degree, (which also for this purpose is numbered with Capital letters
annexed to the inner end of the slope line ( vz. to the 42 radiall degr. of
the North line reckned by the capital numbers toward the center) shows:
whereunto the pointer must be set, if you work for the 2, 8, 6, or 12 houses, or
to the outer end of the slope line furthest from the center ( vz. to the 57
radiall degr. numbered also by the capital letters on the outside of the
Zenitfer) if for the 3, 9, 5, or 11 houses. And first being prepared as is said
to ye outer end, the^ to get the 6 and 12 houses, you shall apply the pointer
in the West Hemic. to ye Horizon point before left at ye carect or Apex
(between the two near feet of vrsa mayor as is said) and there hold fast the
Zenitfer, and then playing about the Almicantifer, his pointer shall cut the
clipticke on the West Hemicicle, at the (16 de. 30 mi. in) beginning of the 6
house, and in the East Hemicicle at the (16 de. 30 mi. in) degree for the 12
house, set those two into your figure, and then removing the Zenitfer, aply
again the pointer in the East Hemicicle, to ye same Horizon point at the Apex,
and there the Almicantifer still prepared as before played about, his pointer
shall cut in the cliptick on the West Hemicicle the (20 de. of) degree for the 8
house, and the (20 degrees. of) degree Eastwards for the 2 house, then place those
two also in the Figure, so have you 8 of the 12 houses. Now for the other 4,
you shall new prepare the Zenitfer to the inner end of the slope line serving
the 5, 9, 3, and 11 houses, ( vz. by placing the Cursor at the 57 domifying
root in the noone-lines scale, and the pointer at the 57 radiall domifying
degree of the North line, answering the inner end of the 51 slope line) and
then apply his pointer in the West Hemicicle unto the foresaid Horizon point
left at the Apex, and there holding the Zenitfer fast, and playing about the
Almicantifer: his pointer shall cut in the-clipticke on the West Hemicicle, the
(5 degree 30 min. of) beginning of the 9 house, and in the East Hemicicle the
(5 degree 30 mi. of) beginning the 3 house. That done, then remove the
Zenithter (30 degrees further) by astrological diagram Fig: Celi 5: Martij Hor:
10 1598
applying the pointer again to the said Horizon point in the East Hemicicle,
and there playing the Almicant. it shall show you on the East the (22 degr. of)
for the 5 house, and on the West the (22 degr. of) degree for the 11 house, now
set them all into your scheame, and so is your Figure set.

Note, that if in playing about the Almicantifer you chance to meet with any
notable fixed Star any thing near, it shall not do amiss to set him also in
your figure. Also I am to note unto you, that there are two things that fall
out unluckily in this practice, which you shall thus salve. The first is, that
the breadth of the Zenitfer hides from the pointer the Horizon point set at
the Apex in the East Hemicicle. This is salued two ways: the one is, when the
Almicantifer is prepared to set the Cursor at so many degrees of the North
line. as he is at in the Noone line, and so will the East and West points of
the houre-circle change their places for the time: The other way general to
all four remooues of the Zenithfer. For so soon as you had gotten the 4
Cardines, if you had made in the Celestialls limb on each side of the
noone-line two marks, the one 30 the other 60 degrees distant from it, that
shall serve as well and in stead of the four times, applying of the pointer to
the Horizon point before used, as if you try both ways you shall find, and
produce one truth.

And whereas for diverse latitudes, some of the domifying roots do go out of
the Zenitfer, those may easily be supplied with help of a thread and pearl
added to the pointer, or with help of a pair of compasses thus: First, cast
away 45 out of your radiall number showed by the slope line ( vz. out of the 57
casting 45, there remains 12) and set ye Cursor unto twice so many of the
domifying roots of the noonelines scale as the remain comes unto, ( vz.
unto the 25 domifying root) and there apply the pointer unto the like number
of the domifying radiall degrees of the North line ( vz. unto 25 degr. reckoned
on the North line from the equinoctials intersection toward the center) and
then the Cursor remaining, do apply the fiduciall line of the Almicantifer even
with the fiduciall noone-line of ye Zenitfer outward, there does ye pointers
Apex show ye true place of ye root wanting, where if you pitch one foot of
your compass, or fasten a thread, and with the other or with the pearl
extended to the domifying radyall degree of the slope line, ( vz. unto the 57
radiall domifying degree,) offer to describe a circle, it shall cut
the-clipticke as before the pointer did at 22 degrees of and of, so the
noone-line stand at his due place as before, vz. at 30 or 60 degrees of the
Celestialls limb from the first constitution.

Cap. 28. Of the aspects of the Planets, and how to find them.
THere are in Astronomy three chief cardinal aspects (as I may term them)
vz. the Conjunction marked thus, and is, when as two Planets meet in one
degree and minute of longitude. The Opposition marked thus, when as they are
just six signs in sunder. The Quartile marked thus, when as they are three
signs distant. Also, there are two other of less force, vz. the Trine marked
thus, and is at four signs distaunce. And the Sextile marked thus, at two
signs distaunce. Which aspects are easily descryed even by the very view on
this Astrolabe, when as the Planets are thereon planted by the 4 Cap. for who
can not espy quickly when any Planet is coniunct, or 2, 3, 4, or 6 signs off
from any other, or from any notable fixed Star. And yet for your better
understanding, I have from the beginning of drawn the radiall lines of each
aspect, and set the Carecters on them: But now Alkabitius Bonatus, and
Dariottus will tell you, that the Tryne and Sextile are good, the and bad, the
conjunction of good Planets good, of evil Planets bad, and that the
conjunction and may be allowed so long as they are within one degree of
another, and the and when they come one within danger of another beams,
which for or is at 9 degrees before and behind for at 8 degrees, and at seven,
the at 12, the 15 degrees, and so far off their application and separation
begnneth and ends, etc. Also Io. Stophlerus notes in this place, propos. 55.
that though a Planet might have 10 degr. of latitude, yet could it not make 30
min. difference in the aspect, and that only in the or and not to be regarded.
Also aspects are said to be dexter aspects, when the beams project in sequens
of the-clipticke, and Sinister when in precedens.

Cap. 29. A new devise of the Author to get the Planetary hours in all
latitudes, and of their Lords regnant.
THose hours which in these days we call Planetary hours, for that
Astronomers have held opinion the Planets to have their several dominions in
every of them, have been sometime called Horae inequales, and Horae
temporariae. Their nature is to divide every natural day between Sunne-rising
and setting into 12 equal parts, and every natural night into other 12. But
because in all oblique Horizons the days and nights lengthen and shorten with
the Summer and Winter, therefore these hours growing great and less according
to the time and latitude, are called Inequales and Temporariae, they are
numbered in the day time from Sunne-rising, ending at Sunne-set with 12, and
there the hours of the night beginning, do end the next morrow at Sunne-rising
with 12.

Th^se hours are most easily had by a special Instrument called Horarium
Planetarium, which I my self have newly devised, general to all Horizons,
which was never done before me that I have seen, and placed it at the top of
the Celestial, comprehended in the Sextans of a circle, whose arche contains
the hours of Sunne-rising and setting, and within, it is filled with a number
of straight lines, all parallel to the base of the Sextans, representing the
common, equal, and usual hours either of day or night, which are numbered on
the Sextans side downwards to 12, for the hours going before the sixth
Planetary hour, and thense back again outward for the hours after. And it
must have riding on his Center a Labell or Scale of the Planetary hours of
equal length to the side or base, divided into six equal parts, numbered
from the outer end inwards, ending at the Center with 6, and thense back
again, ending at 12 where it began. This Labell or Index is also numbered from
the Center outward unto 12 for the use of the 7 Cap. Now when the common hour
of any day or night is given, (admit 10 of clock 40 minutes afternoon the 12
of December 1583, being the hour of the nativity of my near kinseman Master
Walter Seint-Iohn, son and heir to Sir John Seint-Iohn Knight of Lyddiard in
the County of Willshire deceased) and that you would know the Planetary hour,
you shall by the 17 Cap. first get the hour and minute of ye Sun setting
that day, if the hour given be of the day or of the Sun rising, if the
question (as that nativity was) be of the night (vz. you shall find it about 8
of clock in the morning) and unto that hour ( vz. 8) sought in the Sextans
arche, set the fiduciall line of the Planetary Scale, where immediately you
shall see the houre-line equal to your hour given (vz. the 10 houre-line
reckoned in the Sextans side inwards for that midnight will be the 6 Planetary
hour) to cut off in the Planetary Scale the Planetary hour desired. (vz. it
shall cut parts of the 9 Planetary hour.) And if now you desire to know what
Planet bears dominion that hour, resort unto the domineering Table which I
have placed at the lower corner of the Celestial, and therein seek the day or
night of the week proposed, accounting Sunday for the first, Monday the
second, etc. wherein your hour was given, (vz. Thursday night being the 5
night I seek the figure 5 by the title (Noctes) and follow that range of
Carects until you come under your Planetary hour found, ( vz. under the
hour figure of 9) and there shall you find the Planet domineering that hour.

Note, that if you had no domineering Table, you might easily make it by heart,
beginning the first hour on Sunday with the, and then reckoning the Planets on
your fingers ends thus,,,,,,,.,,,,, etc. till you have done 24, so shall you
find the 25 in this accoumpt to be, and thereof Monday is called dies Lune,
and on Tewsday will fall out if you reckon on, and thereof called dies Martis,
even so Wensday, dies Mercurij, of, Thursday dies Iouis, of, Friday dies
Veneris, of, Saturday, dies Saturni, of, and all by reason of this accoumpt of
the 7 Planets.

Cap. 30. How you shall know to set forwards and backwards any of the fixed
Stars unto their true places for any age past, or to come.
I Have in the 2 Cap. sufficiently showed by what means the fixed Stars are
in appearance from age to age, forced out of one sign and degree into another,
through the sliding back of the Equinoctial intersections with the-clipticke:
preceding orderly and equally almost every 67 years a degree, which is called
the Medius, or Aequalis motus precessionis seu fixarum. The gate whereof, how
much it is in one day, in one year, in 4, in 20, in an 100, and in a 1000
years, is set down in the first column of the Tabula Radicalis, in the left
corner of the Celestial. Wherefore if you would know where the equal place
of any Star (admit of Arcturus) shall be any time to come, (admit for the
year after Christ 2000 complete) take 1650 (for that all the North Stars
are in this Celestial placed and rectifyed for that year) out of the year
proposed, and by that first column gather the equal motion aunswerable to
that remain. (vz. 1650 taken out of 2000 leaves 350, for which 350 years, I
take in the said column the motion of one 100 years three times, and of 20
years twice, and of 4 years twice, and of one year twice, for that three
times 100, and twice 20, and twice 4, and twice one, do make 350, and of that
collection there amounts 4 degrees. 53 min. almost.) And so much can I say that
those North Stars will then be gone forwards from their places, where now in
the Celestial they are set in regard of their equal motion. But now there is
found out by skillful artes-men a certain librament or ballaicing of the
Equinoctial and the Poles of the world, as the studied in the Theoricks well
know, which at one time helps forwards this equal motion, and at another
time pulls it back again, even unto 71 min. or 1 degr. 11 min. all is one,
making by that means the true motion unequal. Therefore I have within the
Radical table placed an instrument of my devise to equate the same, which
consists (as the Radical table does) of two parts, the one for the ablative
Aequations, the other for the Adjective, each part having two limbs joining
together, the outermost carrying the said 71 minutes two ways for the
ballaicing too and fro: the innermost being double, in which are written the
years from Christ's birth for 3440 years after, numbered from the twice
about, for that in so many years the Anomalye of this ballaicings compleateth
twice, and therefore that inner limb is double. Wherefore if now you would
know this Aequacion for any year ( admit the year 2000) seek the same year
2000 in that double limb, and you shall find in the outer limb the minutes
of equation that answer thereunto (vz. almost 70 min. ablative) to be added or
subducted too or from the equal motion before gotten according as the words
Adiectiuae or Ablatiuae do admonish. (vz. whereas the equal motion of the
fixed Stars was before found for the year after Christ 2000 complete to be
gone forwards 4 degrees. 53 mi. you must now pull out 70 minutes, so will there be
left 3 degrees. 43 min. their true motion in that 530 years, according to which,
the true place of Arcturus, which for the year 1650 is placed in this
Celestial 18 degr. 55 min. in, shall then be 22 degr. 38 min in. And so for
any other North Star, for they all remove alike.) And likewise for any of
the South Stars, but that you must for them work upon the year 1570, as
before you did by 1650. Also for any age past (as if it had been for 350
years before 1650. vz. the year after Christ 1300 complete) you should have
found the Equation as much adjective, and by that means the true motion of 350
years backwards 6 degr. 3 min. to be pulled back from their now place, (so
that Arcturus was then but 12 degrees 52 min. in.

Cap. 31. How by help of this Astrolabe to get the longitude and latitude of
any Planet, yea, or of any Star or Comet seen.
Having a Meridian exactly set as in the 9 Cap. is taught, you shall observe
the coming of any Planet, Star, or Comet to the Meridian either in the South
or North parts, (as for example the 2 of October 1596 I observed the coming
of to our Meridian here at Reading) and there take his meridian altitude
(which I found 50 degrees.) as is taught in the 11 Cap. and presently (except you
have some clock or watch truly set) get the hour and minute if you can by
taking the altitude of some known Star, as in the 13 Cap. is taught, (I
found it a quarter of an hour past one and better after midnight) which done,
seek that hour and minute in the hour circle, and labell it to the planted
by the 4 Cap. ( at 20 de. 10 min. of) and there hold fast the Zenitfer, and
number the vertical distance or complement of the Merid. alti. before-taken
(vz. 39 de.) on ye nooneline from ye Zenith point toward Meridies, if your
Merid. alti. taken were South, or toward Media nox, if North, ( which here
being South, will fall out at the 12 radiall degree numbered from the
Aequinoctiall) where make a prick on the Celestial, for there shall be the
true point or place of the () Star, Planet, or Comet, observed for that
instant, and the circles of the-clipticks longitude and latitude cutting that
point, shall show you his longitude and latitude sought ( vz. the circle of
longitude passing by that vertical distance or prick made, showed me in the
clipticke 8 degrees 30 minutes almost of, the longitude of, and the circle of
latitude cutting that prick, showed me almost 2 degrees Southwards from
the-clipticke his latitude.) And this serves for the, or any Planet, Star,
or Comet seen. And now by help of this latitude thus gotten, you may as
easily get the true places of the Stars seen in any other place as well as
in the Meridian perpetually, for that their latitudes never alter, and of,, or,
20 or 30 days after: for that theirs alters little in that time, and of for
a day or two after, but not for the, because her latitude changes swiftly,
neither for, because in our Clymat we never see him: In this manner.

Take the altitude of any Star, Planet, or Comet, whose latitude is
foreknowne either by this Cap. or otherwise at any hour and minute known,
taking good heed whether he be in the East or West Hemispheare. Then prepare
the Zenitfer to that altitude taken, then labell the hour and minute to the,
and there hold fast the Zenitfer. Which done, apply the pointer to the circle
of latitude of the Star or Planet either in the East or West Hemicicle,
according as the Star or Planet was at taking his altitude, so shall the
circle of longitude passing by the pointer so applied, show the longitude of
the Star or Planet in the-clipticke.

Note, that Io. Stophlerus lib. 2. prop. 38. recites 7 propositions which some
lying Astronomers (as he terms them) have taken upon them to teach on the
Astrolabe, which he there condemns to be most false, and not possible, and
therefore spends a Chapter to forewarne every man to take heed and not to
meddle with them. And these are the 7, the first, to know the longitude of
the, the second, the longitude of,,,, or, the third, to get their latitudes,
the fourth, to know whether a Planet be direct or retrograde, the fifth, to know
the longitude of any Star in the Reete, the sixth, the latitude of fixed
Stars, the seventh, the longitude of Stars not in the Reete. And now I am
to rewarne all men, that they are all possible by this Astrolabe, and by my
Jewel also, and the whole 7 saving the 4, are performed by this one Chapter:
because I would not have them now daunted with that 38 propos. of Stophler who
meant it no doubt only, by that Astrolabe whereof himself wrote.

Cap. 32. A ready way by help of this Astrolabe, hereafter to observe the
motions of Comets.
BEcause I have seen some 4 or five years past a book entitled Noua theoria
Cometarum as I remember, set forth by one Reslyn, who taking occasion upon
that great Comet or Blazing-Starre, which Anno 1570 was seen so long in the
Constellation of Cassiopeia, in a manner fixed without motion, to imagining
therefore that Comet to happen in the very Pole of the Theoricke, and that to
be the cause why he moved not, thereupon runs on a course, with recital of
diverse Comets and their motions, but concluded no certainty to my remembrance,
ending his book with this saying, Est quodam prodire tenus si non datur vltra.
But our late learned countreyman, Master Digges, in his Scala Mathematica
found, because he had no Parallax, that he must needs be beyond the Speere of
the. Well no doubt there can not any weighty thing come to perfection at the
first, second, or third assay, and therefore to the end it may be a general
care to observe the motions of Comets when they happen, I have thought good to
advertise every man in this Cap. that either on this Astrolabe or on the Globe,
it is a most easy matter when any Planet appears, to prick down his place
even by the very view of his situation among the fixed Stars, seeing by the
25 Cap. before you may so easily learn to know them all.

As for example in July this year 1596 there appeared a Comet with a streaming
tail upwards in the North-west, which upon Tewsday the 20 of July aforesaid,
about 9 of the clock at night, I first took heed of between the two hinder
legs of Vrsa mayor almost in a straight line, (but somewhat lower, and two
parts of the way) between the Star of the fourth light in the near hocke of
the near hinder leg, and the two Stars of the third light in the further
foot behind, according whereunto I made a prick in the Celestial of this
Astrolabe. The 21 of July the same hour, I saw him directly in the straight
line aforesaid, and distant from the said two Stars twice their distance.
The 22 day the same hour I saw him a little above the straight line, and but
their distance off. The 23 of July the night was dark. The 24 of July I saw
him above those two Stars of the third light, and to make an equilater
triangle with them: all which, I noted down every night with pricks, then
followed a few clowdy and dark nights, and after that 24 day he was no more
seen. This Comet was seen of many others some fortnight before I saw him, as
near as I could guess by their relacion even about the brisket of Vrsa mayor,
a little behind the hocke of the near leg before, which also I pricked
down: and have caused those pricks and the trayle of his gate to be graven in
the Celestial, in the Constellacion of Vrsa mayor if you mark it, (though not
done fully to my purpose) to the end to incite others hereafter to do the
like, that posterity at the last may find out whether there be any regularity
in their motions. If the Comet chance to come to the Meridian either in the
North or South (as this did not in sight) then by the last Cap. you may get his
longitude and latitude every night, and so prick down every days motion the
more exactly.

FINIS.

