EROMENA, OR, Love and Revenge.

Written originally in the Thoscan tongue, BY CAVALIER GIO. FRANCESCO BIONDI,
Gentleman extraordinary of his MAJESTY'S Privy CHAMBER.

Divided into six Books.

And now faithfully Englished, By IA. HAYVVARD, of Graies-Inne Gent.

SIC OMNI TEMPORE VERNO


LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger, for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
Shop in PAVLS Churchyard, at the sign of the Bear. 1632.

TO THE NO LESS SINGVLAR FOR VERTVE, THAN EMINENT FOR HONOR, The Excellently
worthy, and worthily Right Excellent Princess, The Lady FRANCIS. Duchess
Dowager of RICHMOND and LENOX.
Illustrious and Right Noble MADAME;
TWO special reasons embolden, or rather oblige me to expose this Translation
to the common view, under your Gracious patronage; The one is, because its
Original was by the Author composed at the command of that Worthy Pillar of
this State, your deceased Duke of blessed memory, under whose princely tutelage
it also boldly presented it self to the public eye, so as it was chiefly
beholding to that renowned Peer for both it is life and being: The other, that
this Eromena, though a Princess, yet necessitated (for being an alien borne)
to implore a protection in this Monarchall I Will, comes now, as well to express
to your Grace the greatness of her obligation to the honored memory of that
noble Peer, for having so courteously protected her in Italy, as also to sue
for and request the further continuance of a like favor (here in this I Will) at
the hands of your Illustrious Grace, who are the now remaining part of that
divinely composed piece of Excellency, whereof he was the residue; which
(considering your known noble demerits, and princely courtesy) she hopes to
obtain, for that fame has assured her, that your Grace is as well a
Patroness of Virtue, as pattern of Honor, especially finding them so
innately habitual, and so constantly permanent in that Sex, and therewithal
in a Princess, their choicest seat of residence: Vouchsafe then ( Right
Excellent Lady) that my obligation to obey so meriting a Princess, may excuse
my boldness in ushering her Excellency in real perfections so excelling,
into so excellent a presence as that of your Graces; Where with all submissive
and reverent respects I leave her to apologize (as I am persuaded her no way
defective heroical goodness will) in excuse of my necessitated boldness;
whilst I (wishing that she prove as capable and fortunate, as (I am confident)
she is both desirous and zealous to manifest her twofold obligement to so
highly-deserving a Patroness) with your gracious benign permission,
submissively kissing your Princely hands, with all respective humbleness
retire my self.

Your Graces most humbly devoted in all dutiful observance JAMES HAYVVARD.

THE TRANSLATOVR to the understandingly judicious READER.
Stripped now of her Italian vail, presents her self to thy view Cavilier Biondi
his Eromena, being the first volume of his works, highly esteemed in Italy,
among the choicest pieces of that nature; as well for the good liking which
that Nation bears to that pleasing way of Helidorian Poesy (I mean an
historical way of Poetizing, or Poetical manner of historizing, or displaying
of the fained seeming unfeigned adventures and actions of persons real, masked
under the vizard of invented names:) As also for the Authors peculiar way of
imbellishing it more frequently with Ethicall solidity, than superficial
Rhetoric; which gained so much on the Italian humor, as it induced diverse of
that Nobility to procure him to second it (as sithence he has done) with
another Tome, called Donzella Desterrada, so adorned with elevated grave
conceits, and variety of strange (though aptly enterlaced) occurrences, that
their desire being thereby rather exceedingly augmented, than (in the least
measure) satisfied, incited them by (then more than ever) earnest solicitations
to re-importune him to close up what in these two remained unfinished, with a
third and final Volume; which the Author (loath to disoblige so many deserving
and noble personages) is now (some while sithence) in hand withal, having in
it is infancy named it, Il Coralbo, being (for the better suiting with his
years) the graver of the three; so as he intends not to show thee the way of
pulling by the Curtain from before the persons in his former pieces
represented, until he has withdrawn his now well-nigh wearied pensill from
his, as yet, little more than half pourtraied Coralbo.

Mean time, if thy liking sympathize any whit with that of the Italians, I may
then hope for thy gentle approvement of having employed some vacant hours in
translating this piece, which, indeed, might well have merited an abler Pen,
and in that kind of employment more versed than mine; though I would not
willingly (for all that) be taken (or rather mistaken) for a Dictionary-tutred
Linguist; but rather the meanest proficient among those, whose Genius (in their
less experienced years) never either rounded them in the ear with that
French Adage, La pierre sovent remuee n'amasse pas volontiers mousse; Moss
seldom does infold that stone that is often rolled. Or was ever so providently
cautelous, as to admonish them, that the securest survaying of Transmarine
territories was in a Map in ones Chamber; and the safest conversing with
Transalpinan Transalpeninan, or other remoter Nations, was by discoursing
privately in ones study with Rawleigh, Sands, Villamont, Maierne, etc.
Whereunto seems to allude that of Martial, Aethereas lascive cupis volitare
per auras?
I, fuge, sed poteras tutior esse domi.
Have thou a longing gadding vein
throughout the world to rome?
Go, post away; yet know, thou might
have lived more safe at home.


But suffered their greener youth to be swaied by an innate and unresistable
desire of going themselves (more superfluously curious, thou will say, than
judiciously considerate) to search after such outlandish flowers as best liked
their fancy, and having found to gather and crop them off their proper stems,
where they naturally grew (for doubt of receiving them at a second hand
withered, vertuelesse, or adulterate) though necessitated for arriving at them,
to force a passage through many a bushie brake, and thorny thicket, besides the
often hazarding the pricking of their fingers to the quick, in reaching at
them, so fenced and entertwined with sharp-pointed brambles, and smart-stinging
briers; Howbeit, thou may hereafter expect a participation of the gleaning of
some of them, not much perhaps declined from their native beauty, odor, and
virtue: For the sooner accomplishing whereof, it shall prove no slender
encouragement to have prevailed so far with thy courtesy, as that the
acknowledgement of my being sensible of my own incapability may be accepted in
excuse of my not voluntary undergoing (by the Authors assent and privity) the
burden of this Translation, more for the satisfaction of some noble Friends of
mine, (if the weakness of my deserts, supported only with a desire of
honoring merit in the proper sphere, where it both resides and moves, may
presume so to term them) than for any over-weaning confidence I ever durst
repose in my own far short sufficiency, or rather selfe-conscious
insufficiency of being able to accord the far discording strings of two so
different languages. Yet if this cannot satisfy thee whom I have styled, an
Understandingly judicious Reader (than whom, I know no other fit for either my
judge or censurer) do thou then but ease me of a labor (which I doubt will be
imposed on my unwillingnesse) in translating his Donzella desterrada; which
(perhaps) ere thou have brought to a final period, will give thee cause to
entertain a milder opinion of the no less well-meaning than unwilling
employment of my as yet bashful maiden Pen, in a task of this kind not the
easiest; on whose behalf I dare yet confidently (and that without presumption
too) aver the same to be, though (in respect of my not yet fully renewed
acquaintaince with my native tongue) not elegantly; yet (by the furtherance of
my twice two Summers assiduall conversing with that Nation at their native
home) faithfully (not paraphrased, but) translated. Seeing that I have (as often
as they would endure the being new cast in an English mould) used the Authors
own words, rarely ever (unconstrained) varied any phrase of his, and never I am
sure strayed beyond the limits of either his matter or meaning; wherein (upon
the importunity of some deserving spirits) I have been the more charily
observant, to the end, that such as desire to make that (no less pleasing than
stately) language their own, might, without any great difficulty to their (as I
presume thou will confess) no small furtherance in that study, master this
Original, for depth of language not inferior to the best I ever yet saw
published by any of that nation; For which, as I expect not the least stroaking
of applause (it being no other than a recreative employment, or rather but the
immature fruit of some spare hours, stolen from the Orchyard of recreation) so
fear I not the ghastliest frown of censure, knowing that the scope of these
mine (how slender soever) endeavors, aim no less at their profit than
delight, from which, lest I detain them too long, I bid thee and them, Farewell.

YEt e're thou pass, a word, and that is but this,
Think not all is mine that here thou find'st amiss.
The Plot and Authors way may chance come short
Of pleasing all; if so, then blame him for it;
Suffice it me to express him in our tongue,
And neither do his Muse nor meaning wrong;
Since to the Interpr^^^^ it is held a blemish,
To change or add, no less than to diminish.
If language thou expects, then pore not here,
But Sidney read, whose Pen never yet found peer.
Some faults here may prove mine, that I Will confess;
Yet load not me with th'errours of the Press.
Man's apt to err; and many a first edition,
For it is escapes pleads Custom and Tradition;
And so must this, since, What Is once done and ended,
Can never by after-view be well amended.
To quote all scapes might wrong thy patience; then
Correct but these more gross ones with thy Pen;
The sense will help thee give the rest their due
Meaning, and order both.
Once more, Adieu.
ERRATA.
IN pagina 2. lineaque 3. for became, read, and become. p. 5. l. 20. for
seems, read, seems unto you. p. 7. l. 4. for my, read if my. p. 25. l. 27.
for setting, read settling. p. 25. l. 46. for honor, read house. p. 34. l. 38.
for wayed, read weying. p. 45. l. 30. for commending, read commanding. p. 47.
l. 16. for houses, read household. p. 55. l. 32. for time, read tune. p. 55. l.
last, for disdain, read destiny. p. 61. l. 46. for chief, read choice. p. 62.
l. 40. for him, read them. p. 74. l. 3. for put in, read put in for. p. 83. l.
26. for at, read an. p. 84. l. 3. for curious, read courteous. p. 89 l. 20. for
leaving, read leavying. p. 94. l. 32. for (...) his. p. 96. l. 34. for
experienced, r. unexperienced. p. 98. l. 11. for force (...) forces. p. 104. l.
20. for turning, r. stirring. p. 107. l. 5. for digested, r. (...). p. 129. l.
21. for out of, r. out to. p. 131. l. last, for effects, r. affects. p. (...)
l. 1. for word, r. ward. p. 136. l. 15. for respects, r. effects. p. ^^4. l.
17. for their, r. third. p. 147. l. 17. for well, r. wall. p. 148. l. 3. for
in, r. on. p. 157. l. 8. for for, r. far. p. 158. l. 16. for mean, r. moan.
p. 177. l. 8. for excusive, r. exclusive. p. 192. l. 16. for his, r. her.

To the most Illustrious and right Excellent, my most honored Lord and Patron,
The Lord Duke of RICHMOND and LENOX, Earl of DARNLEY, etc.
Most Illustrious and right Excellent Lord,
I Have brought forth to breathe the common air this Eromena, at the
commandment of a Lady, who (pretending to have over me the soveraignety of an
absolute Commandresse) straightly requires at my hands, a devoutly-obedient,
strict, and sudden performance of her imperious and not to be questioned
commands. If she prove imperfect, she is the more excusable for being no
natural birth, but an abortive of a few months time, accidentally conceived
without any hope ever to have breathed. And now I am constrained to dedicate
her (thus unpolish't) unto your Excellency, before whom she ought (indeed) to
have appeared as richly endowed with ornaments, as you are with virtues.
Vouchsafe (I beseech you) to accept, in excuse of my boldness, the necessity
of my obedience, by receiving this Princess into your courteous protection,
that you may behold in her the conformity she has with your Excellency in
nobility and valor, but (above all) in an eternal constancy, whereby as she
grew to be peerlesse among all the Ladies of her time, so makes it also your
Excellency become singular among all the Cavaliers of this our age. The Lord
God grant your Excellency all increase of felicity, whilst I, with reverend
affection, humbly kiss your hand.

Your Excellencies most humble and most devoted Servant, Gio. Francesco Biondi.

To his worthy good Friend, Mr. JAMES HAYWARD, upon his Translation of EROMENA
out of the Italian.
THere is a sort of people use to be
Most captious, though of least capacity,
Who when, as almost still, they meet with Strains
Too high and lofty for their stupid brains,
They say, they see no wit in it; good cause why,
It Is too far distant from the purblinde eye
Of their dull knowledge; whence it comes they slight
All that they cannot understand aright.
I hate their humor; yet not so that I
Should only on mere contrariety
Praise all I apprehend not. Friend, your Book,
(Although I partly guess what pains you took
To gain the Language, how the Seas you crossed,
What time, what travel, and what coin it cost)
Yet dare I not ^^^mend, unless I were
A perfect Linguist, and a Traveller;
For to thy censure is required more art
Than conning or some Dictionary by heart,
Or an Italian Grammar: he must sweat,
And cool again, fare hard, endure the heat
Of foreign Climats; and, what is ten times worse,
Humor each people, keep an open purse,
And a close heart, pass through such misery,
You Would rather think his work well done, than try
How he came by his knowledge: 'twill suffice
The man that can consider, and is wise
Enough to know the motive to his pains
Was not vainglory, nor the hop'd-for gains
Of praise, or profit; nor to merit thanks
From some great Lord his Patron: Mountebanks
Of art there are, whose aims be these; but he
Disclaims such baseness, shames to Poesy.
His end is only that he may delight
His Reader, showing how the Italians write,
And what their fancies are: Nor does his wit
Seek out some Satyr to translate, lest it
Should nip our vices of the newest fashion,
So near, that some might think 'twere no translation:
Nor covets he that to the world be known,
He has a Muse or Genius of his own
Can teach his Pen a method: and for stuff,
His Travells might afford tales strange enough
To please the times with; but his wiser brain,
Gives to your censure first a Strangers vein;
So a Translatours name may faults excuse
Not of his own, but of another Muse,
If there be any: for, who knows the tongue,
May see he has not done his Author wrong;
But rather how the Italian he refines
In these his smoother and more polisht lines.
Yet in the Authors praise, whom I nor know,
Nor understand, thus far I Will dare to go,
Knowing our Translatours judgment to be such,
I dare presume he likewise merits much;
For had his work not been a piece well writ,
'Thad known no language but Italian yet.
THOMAS SALUSBURY.
Ex Templo interiori Ar.
To my worthily esteemed Friend, Mr. JAMES HAYVVARD, upon his Translation of
Eromena (...)
Fair Eromena in her Thoscan tire,
I viewed, and liked the fashion wondrous well;
But in this change of habit I admire,
That still in her the same perfections dwell:
So have I seen Transalpin grafts to grow,
And bear rare fruit, removed to Thames from Po.
A l'istesso.
FV l' Eromena parto felice
Del 'alto intendimento di Biondo,
Et girava part del mondo
Si tosto quasi che vidde luce.
In Inghilterra nacque, mandata
Dipoi a Venetia.
l' alma citta donzella
Picciolina nelle fascie, ella
Divento tutta Italianata.
Il virtuoso Hauardo la trouava,
Et l' ha fatto parlar buon Inglese,
Maternella lingua del paese,
Dove che prima l' aria spirava.
IA. HOVVELL, Arm.

To his much honored Friend, Mr. JAMES HAYVVARD, upon his Translation of
EROMENA.
SPare minutes thus spent (most accomplished Friend)
Much should I err should I not much commend;
For thy retired hours, (by proof) I know,
Thou in more serious studies do bestow,
As Engine, Stratagem, Fortification,
Means to extend the confines of a Nation;
In which as judgment does already crown thee,
Employment in the future may renown thee;
Since in the Mathematick Art (I mean
Those parts most useful, and whence we may gleane
An Enginiers perfection) I know none,
In Theorick and Practick has out-gone
Thee for thy time. On then in thy progress,
As for thine own thy Countries good no less;
Nor have thou of thy travells made that use
Which many do, to bring home the abuse
Of Foreign Climes, their complement, their fashion,
Not their known vice, t'infect thy home and nation;
Thy purpose and thy practice was not such;
For thy endeavors have not been so much
To see as know: for neither have thou pierced
France to attain her garb, but to be vers't
In her best Dialect; nor Almaigne known,
To make their healthing, not their tongue thine own:
Thee thine approved Temperance has taught
The Teutons lofty language, not deep draught;
And to thy mind gave a more pleasing gust
The Thoscans stately strain than loathsome lust.
Of these thy ways I cannot but approve,
Both 'cause I know them, and because I love
To see thee constant in them; do but then
Impart thy Talent to thy Countrymen,
By culling out the choicest Foreign flowers,
To plant in English soil and make them ours.
A l' istesso sopra l' istessa Translatione.
Dell' Eromena le vaghe bellezze
Mirai in Italia con occhio gradito;
Eveggolla adesso con l' istesse bellezze
In tutte le sue parti: solamente 'l vestito
Parmi cangiato; Benche per richezze
Non e manco al present ch'alhora compito.
Merce 'l Hauardo diligente and cortese
Che cosi garbata la vesti a l' Inglese.
I. G. Ar.

To his selected Friend, Mr. JAMES HAYWARD upon his Translation of EROMENA.
WHat? laid aside thy Compass? from whose use
No Art could wean thee or thy constant Muse?
Or with the Circle art thou fallen at Square?
Cause thy Direct and Perpendicular
Lines want their due employment, that I see
Thee practice language for Geometry;
No, they are thy Passatempos fruits, and they
Tasted by a judicious palate may
Have a good relish, and deserve (though so)
More praise than a more serious piece, and more
Than I Will confer upon thee; yet I owe
Something unto thy gratefulness, that thou,
Having by Eromena's proper file
Bin polisht to the choicest Thoscan style,
Have in the way of friendly commutation,
Taught her the language of our English nation.
All' istesso.
L'A^tiera Eromena d' addobbare
Con vestimenti a par lei pari
Non bastano gl'ingegni ordinari
Versati fuorch' in un' particolare,
Ma chi in fatti d'arme esquisito*
Destro nel cavalcar ^'l navigare,
Anco esperto nel' fortificare,
Ed in scienze altre e compito,
Alui di giure appartien l'honore
Armar Heroice spalle coll' arnese
Tutt' imbellito di lavor Inglese;
Donque ardisco dir al tuo favore,
Di guerriera degna tu guer riero
Degno sei degno esser sol' scudiero.
At yr unrhiw.
HAwdd darllhen dalen liw dydd, hawdd siarad
Hawdd siwrneio glenydd,
I byr iaith bod in ieithydd
Gorchwyl faith gorchest y sydd.
THO. REVELL, Ex hospitio Graii, Genesis

CAVALIER GIO: FRANCESCO BIONDI HIS EROMENA
The First Book.
CAttalampo King of Mauritania, had by his wife Algidosia (the Numidian Kings
daughter) a goodly, though too too numerous a progeny; Because the law of
birthright (in that kingdom inviolable) was not liberal to younger brothers,
of other patrimony, than sword and horse. The youngest among them, was a babe
of exquisite beauty, to whom together with perfections of body, nature was
bountiful of those virtues of the mind, which best beseemed a well-meriting
Prince. Polimero (for so was he called) in growth prevented his years, and in
knowledge and discretion the age of discretion; so as (though a child) he knew
already what it imported him to be last borne, and what it was to be a younger
Brother: Whereof although his natural generosity made him in some sort
careless, yet the same influence that gave him a great spirit, made him also
pensive in finding out the means, how he might with virtue ore-match destiny;
and by making himself the forget of his own fortunes, verify, that the Wise
man rules thestarres; his nature then being equaliz'd with an education
conformable, induced his Parents (allured with the splendour of so many graces)
to dote on him as a creature singular, in whom the heavens had (with
extraordinary partiality placed all these good gifts, which they ordinarily
used to share among many. Metaneone the eldest brother (observing this their
inclination, became jealous thereof) began so deeply to hate Polimero, that he
(borne to endure rather any misfortune, than domestike hatred) purposed (though
not as then arived to sixteen years of age) to leave the country; and the
effect had accompanied his deliberation, had not the reverence which he owed
his father, persuaded him to a discreet dissimulation thereof.

It happened that the Queen of Ireland, Catalampo's sister, (by relation
enamored of the toward linesse of her Nephew) sent him some precious gifts, and
among those two Irish Greyhounds, of the goodliest, and best, that were in her
kingdom: Polimero desirous to try them, commanded, that a Lion and Leopard
should be led out of the den of the Lions, into an enclosure, near the kings
Quiry, railed in with pales for such like baitings; which was no sooner
performed, but that the Prince came unexpectedly thither. Polimero (courteously
and affectionatly entertaining him, and leaning on the gallery with him,)
caused one of the Greyhounds to be led in, together with the Lion. The dog,
as soon as he saw the savage beast, slipped eagerly off, with a great leap.
The Lion (lashing himself with his tail) went on to encounter him; the other
(as if he had been accustomed, (all his life time) to wrestle with such like
beasts) seeing the fierce beast make stealing-wise toward him, flung himself
furiously on him, and with his fore feet keeping down his ^rm'd paws, pinched
him in the eye, with so terrible a shake, that the Lion (not able to recover
from under him, overcome with an extreme convuision) was constrained to forsake
himself. If the wonder of the Prince was great, greater yet was the content of
Polimero, who (having caused the railes to be removed away) willed that the
other Greyhound should be led in, with the Leopard. This dog (as if he
envied his fellow) to shun the disadvantagious dexterity of his enemy,
encountered so furiously in the air, that he shookt his back against the
ground, and ere he could get up again, (seazing on his shoulder) tore it
sheere off his body with such facility, that an hatchet could not have done it
more neately. The Prince (well pleased with the fierceness of the Greyhounds,
and desirous to have them) could not satisfy himself in commending them,
which Polimero observing, proffered them unto him, and praying him to accept of
them, the Prince said, Infant Polimero, I will not accept them as a gift, If I
have them at all, I will owe fortune for them: choose you out of my stable two
steeds, such as like you best; those I will play against your dogs at such a
game as we shall agree on. Polimero perceiving that his gifts (merely for ill
will's sake) were not accepted, and that (by law of inferiority) it behooved
him to accept the proposition, replied, My Lord, sithence that you will not
vouchsafe me this favor that the dogs be immediately yours, as I am, I cannot
but obey you; But two horses are too much for a couple of dogs, It shall
suffice me (so you be therewith contented) to choose out for my self only
Flammauro. (This was a horse kept in the stable as a thing excellent, whom
never any man till then was able thoroughly to tame; though he had already
dismounted and killed above twenty Knights: all which Polimero knew well, and
persuaded himself that (in winning this steed) he might content himself
without discontenting his brother; confident withal that himself alone was
able to tame him.)

The Prince therewith contented, the wager was agreed on, but not the game,
whereof many (that were disliked of) were proposed. Met aneone would have it be
three carrieres at the Ring; when Impatient to stay the sadling of the horses,
he saw (as he passed through Polimero's hall) some foiles and blunt swords to
fence withal; whereupon (his mind being altered) he said, Infant, Let him of
us twain lose his wager, that shall with these foyles receive the first foine
of the other. Be it as it please you (My LORD) answered Polimero; On this each
of them having taken one, the Prince advanced himself forwards, making with
his point toward the others face, and faining a passage (by stamping on the
ground with his right foot) stood still, expecting his advantage. Polimero
(who well knew what opinion the Prince had of himself) making a show of
fearing him, stood close in his guard, forbidding him entrance; The Prince
(thinking to dazzle him) and so put him from his ward) fained at him diverse
foynes, but with so little Judgment, that the Infant (seeing him lie open)
touched at two thrusts his (...) and hat: But the Prince loath to acknowledge
himself the looser (every one crying (...), that such thrusts could never have
drawn blood, because they had not made any sign or impression in the clothes)
and continuing in striking at Polimero, who warding his blows, and standing in
a steady guard, with his point received the Prince in the midst of his breast
(as he advanced forwards with a step:) who thereupon, all in a chafe threw
away the foil, and (confessing to have lost) bade lead forth the horse. The
Infant (seeing him in so fiery a mood) said unto him, My LORD; since that it
has pleased you, to let me win, that so you might bestow on me your steed, I
beseech you to favor me in accepting the Greyhounds: (which the Prince
refusing) they descended the stairs into the Court of the Quiry where they saw
come the horse with his spectacl^s and covering, (which taken from him) he
remained naked so well shapen and exquisitly proportioned, as that Apelles
(though he had borrowed the perfections of all the horses in the world) could
never have painted one more perfect Flammauro (seeing himself at liberty) made
no more esteem of his bridle, than if it had been a small thread, and giving
a busling shake (wherewith he threw to the gaound the two horsemen that held
him) after he had many times raised himself in the ^yre, took a full
carriere toward the Prince, so swift, as he gave him ^o time to save himself:
for rushing in among the throng of Cour^^rs, and (trampling down many of them,
shrewdly maimed) he then (wheeling about,) bore down the Prince himself, who
desirous to revenge his fall cried, Kill him, kill him. Every man with sword in
hand strove to obey him. But the fierce courser (like a skillful fencer) kept
them aloof off; until upon the appearing of some lances (as if he had known
that his hurt could not be redressed by defense) he then quietly (laying aside
all fierceness) drew near Polimero. Who (taking him gently by the reins, and
turning toward the Prince) said: I beseech your highness, seeing (through the
favor of the gods) you have received no hurt, to grant life to this fair
beast for my sake. I will not, (answered irefully the Prince) but will, that
he dye. Upon this every man strove who should be foremost to come to strike
him, which Polimero perceiving to be done in scorn of him, and not being able
to endure it, lightly vaulted on the courser, and gallopping a maine speed out
of the Quirie entered into the Kings stables, where (finding by chance the
chief rider) he delivered the horse into his charge, as a special steed of
the Kings; denouncing him his Majesty's indignation, if he permitted any one
(not excepting any man breathing) to lay hands on him. The rider) astonished to
see one of the Kings sons come riding on such a horse, imagining that the
exception comprehended no ordinary persons) answered, that he would obey him,
and besought him to send for those horsemen, that were accustomed to govern
him, whereto the Infant would not consent, but caused him to put the horse
(now grown to be gentle) into a good place of standing. The Prince (in the
mean time having understood whither the Infant was gone,) stood a good while
doubtful whether he should pursue him or no, but pride and disdain boiling
within him, he returned to the palace.

Some there were in that very instant, that acquainted the King of these
passages, who made as though he knew nothing thereof, expecting at the hour of
dinner the coming of his sons (according to the accustomed manner) but
observing Polimero's room void, and inquiring for him of one of his servants
(come thither expressly for that purpose) he was answered, that he was in his
withdrawing chamber, (come newly from abroad, somewhat hot and weary) but that
he was well, and desired (with his Majesty's good leave) to dine alone.

The King (attentively looking on the Prince) perceived his color altered. In
the mean time, Polimero returned from the Kings stables, and (reasoning with
himself upon the matter) was visited unawares by his governor the Count of
Bona, who told him how the Prince (as he returned toward the palace) had
rashly let slip that the death of some body should redeem the life of the
horse; and therefore besought him to be circumspect, and for a few days to
retire himself to (a country palace of the Queens called) Poggio; Because he
believed that these words aimed at no man but him.

The Infant (seeing the business fall out worse than he imagined, making
show of embracing his advice) resolved to depart for good and all, and (taking
leave of him) caused to be called unto him Carasio. (This Carasio was a squire
given him by his father, who (having served him from his cradle) besides that
he was by nature loyal, so dearly loved him, as he judged that he could not
trust any other more faithful and more loving.) Wherefore he said unto him.

Carasio, You see on what terms I stand with the Prince my brother. I am
resolved to give fortune place; Only two things grieve me, the one is that I
must part without the consent of my Sovereign the King, and my Mother; the
other, that I have not as yet received the order of Knighthood; But now
necessity must excuse me in the one, and assist me in the other; See that those
arms which we over-saw some days ago be put in a readiness, with that
little money that I have, and such jewels as you think may best stead, and
less comber me. Choose you out for your self one of my steeds, the best in
the stable; for me, I will have no other, than that fatal cause of my exile.
And as Carasio would have said something, Polimero (interrupting him) replied;
I know what you would say, It greeves you that I part, in respect of the
discontent my father will conceive therefrom. It seems that my resolution is
rash and overhasty not (having been advised thereon) proceeding (as you
believe from some childish disposition. But know: that if I part not, my stay
will occasion heavier discontents. I choose my departure as the lesser evil;
many months (...) have I thought thereon, my resolution is neither sudden
nor childish, (...) grounded on manifest tokens of the hate of my brother, who
will do me all the (...) he may, during my fathers life, and after his death
all the mischief he please; I therefore (being of age to discern and know my
own danger) were very simple if want of years should hinder me to eschew it.
My father I will satisfy, (not with my presence, because I may not) but by my
letters, and much more with my actions. Here is not any patrimony for me: we
are to many brothers, my self the youngest of all, and not like to enjoy oath
eportion than my brothers hatred; my fathers love should not make me hope for
any thing, who (being aged) must by course of nature dye shortly; and he once
gone, who will protect me against such an one, as is naturally inclined to
tyrannize over me: and believes, that the deceitful love of the vulgar should
edge me on to cause him lead a life full of misery and suspicion? Fortune (
Carasio) is a woman, and consequently a lover of youth, seeing therefore, I
cannot abide here, it behooves me (the younger the better) to se^ke her, find
her out and retain her.

To wait irresolutely for time, is but to lose time, and to bring ones-selfe
to such a pass as he can never amend the error of time. And though I were not
in such danger as I am, yet must I go get my self a patrimony elsewhere,
since that the spite of fortune made me be borne last, and the rigor of the
law makes me (for being borne such) poor and miserable. There Is none can deny,
but that I do well; as well, to avoid contentions with my brother (wherein I
cannot choose but loose) as also, to take away the occasion of many vexations
of the King my Father, whom I should not grieve.

I will hence to Ireland to my Aunt, and then I will think on my journey as
occasion shall require. See you dispatch all things this day in any wise, and
prepare this evening a ship, the first that sets out of the haven. For I am
most resolute that the Sun shall not eye me to morrow in Birsa.

Carasio (having heard his LORDS irrepliable reasons,) without any more ado
went to the haven, where (finding a ship of Sardegna with hoised up sails, and
understanding that there blew a fair gale, and that she would part about the
first watch) he having agreed with the mariners for their passage, acquainted
therewith Polimero, who (causing Flammauro to be led forth) mounted on him, and
(having awhile gently managed him without finding him any way disobedient to
the great amazement of all those that had formerly seen him very capritious)
fayning to go recreate himself to Poggio de gli Oliui, a palace of the Queen
his Mother, gave order publikly to Carasio to come thither to him with the
furniture of his chamber. Got out of the City, (and fetching a great compass)
he returned again at night, and (finding Carasio in the place appointed) went
aboard the ship, who having waied up her anchors, hoyst up her sails before
a pleasant and gentle gale of wind.

As soon as the King had dined, he sent secretly a Gentleman of his chamber to
spy for Polimer^, and (understanding what order he had given Carasio) was
thereof well pleased, imagining that by that means he might avoid occasion of
new broiles; And lest the Prince should resolve to pursue him (wroth perhaps
that his brother went away triumphant with the horse escaped from his anger) he
entertained him all that day in counsel. The day following came to court the
housekeeper of Poggio; who (seen of the King and questioned of the cause of
his coming to the City, whilst he ought to have been an assistant in the
service of the Infant Polimero) answered; He was come for some service of the
house: And that as touching the Infant Polimero, he understood not his
Majesty's meaning.

How, understandest thou me not? (replied the King) what I would tell thee is;
that, when any of my sons come to Poggio, thou depart not thence, but serve
them as cause shall require. Even so do I, my Liege, (answered the
housekeeper) and acknowledge my self blameworthy if I did otherwise: But, my
Lord, the Infant Polimero is not at Poggio. How? is he not there, (said the
King very angrily) and having espied the Gentleman that had told him he was
gone thither, he said; Did you not tell me that Polimero was gone to Poggio? I
did so, my Liege (answered the Gentleman) citing with that his authors, who
were some of the Infante's servants there present, who jointly protested that
they saw him mount on horseback, and that he would not suffer any man come with
him, but gave order to Carasio to bring (that night to Paggio) the furniture of
his chamber: The keeper (amazed at so many affirmations) turning toward the
King

My dread Sovereign (said he) my Lord the Infant Polimero parted yesterday in
the evening to go to Poggio, I know not where he may be; he came not the last
evening, nor this last night, much less this morning; for I dined there,
neither is it above an hour since I parted thence. The King (fixing his eyes
on the table) knew not what to imagine, he thought first he might be gone to
his uncle in Numidia, but that seemed impossible; considering the discommodity
of the journey because of the sands: it being not likely he would undergo that
journey secretly with so much danger, and besides he would have feared to be
pursued and overtane.

Afterward (reasoning on the old desires he had to travel) even in that also
appeared difficulty, being he could not do it, without a great provision of
moneys: But (the remembrance of his sister the Queen of Ireland come into his
fancy) he imagined that for certain, he was imbarqued to go to her, and
therefore commanded to see what manner of shipping had set out of the Port that
night, and whither they went; and from whence they were; but finding that there
parted no other than a ship of Sardegna, he remained more confused than before,
not judging it a thing likely that he was gone for Sardegna, but that the ship
had rather (...) course of the straight of (...) supposing that they could not
(...) land in Sardegna, because of the wars, (which he knew to be there very
hot) Inveloped with so many conjectures he went to the Queen, to whom he
related what till then no creature living durst have spoken of; whereat she
(overcome with an extreme hearts grief,) began the pitifullest complaint
that could be.

The King (not able to endure the sight of her in that plight) went out from
her, and having sent for the Count of B^na, charged him diligently to search
Palimero's lodgings, and study; and to bring him word of all whatsoever he
found there: The Count obeyed and (making a diligent search of all) made an
inventory thereof.

Being come to the study he caused it to be opened, wherein the first thing he
discovered, was a letter sealed and placed on the midst of the table with
inscription, To the King my (...): which the Count took, and brought unto the
King, offering him also the inventory, which he refused: But opening the
letter, he found it said,

Sir; Among all the misfortunes, which I have hitherto in these my few years
partaked of, the greatest is that I part without your Majesty's royal license,
which if I had done in way of disobedience, or other such like thing, my life
would be loathsome unto me, neither could that joy be found that might any way
case me. But (Royal Sir,) I hitherto ever have and henceforth ever will study
to obey you: whereof although the obligation takes away the merit, yet bereaves
it not me of that comfort which a noble mind receives in doing his duty: I am
gone away, not for any curiosities sake to see my self free; nor for any
desire I had to exercise my self in the profession of arms; Since that in the
one I aspire to no greater liberty than to serve your Majesty, neither had
your clemency denied me (in its time fit) in the other such reasonable
satisfaction, and in such an equipage, as had been answerable to the honor I
have in being your son. The sole cause of my going away is, Because the small
fortune I have in the favor of my LORD the Prince, has thereto advised me; Had
I thought I could be able to have bettered the respect I owe him, and so become
more gracious in his favor, heavens be my witness, I had never entertained
such a resolution, knowing that next your Majesty he is that only one whom I
ought to serve and honor. But seeing my conscience does not accuse me of
misdoing, I must needs confess, my behavior to be such as cannot please him:
And if my duty be to please him, but cannot, then am I obliged to what I can,
which is, to absent far from him my presence, which so much dislikes him.
Touching the last occasion of my departure I am not willing to say any thing,
not meaning to excuse my self, by pretending, that I could not find any reason
in my LORD the Prince, who indeed cannot do amiss in any thing he does
against me; But rather I humbly beseech your Majesty to hold me for faulty,
condemning (...) for my absence (though neither voluntary nor malicious) for
which (I hope by the intercession of your gracious benignity) to obtain your
royal pardon. I write not to the Queen my Lady and Mother, lest I thereby
grieve her the more. Assuring nevertheless the one and the other, that I part
hence with an Indeliblememory of being, of both your Majesty's a most humble,
and most obedient Son, and servant. Polimero.

The King strangely moved at this letter (having called for the Prince) with
an Irefull countenance thus spoke unto him. Metaneone, I intended (many days
ago) to make known unto you your ill carriage toward your brother the
Infant Polimero: but misfortune has so prevailed, that I have differed it so
long as it is now past remedy you are the cause that I have lost him, in which
loss I yet enjoy this comfort, that you also have lost him, and that besides
it is you that shall repent it; you are first borne, it is true; but by mere
fortune; And he is last borne; by the same reason: But for his virtues worthy
to be the first; And thou for thy vices worthy to be, not the last, but none at
all; so much exceeds he thee in worth, that thou (because thou could not
match him in equality of deserts) did (of mere malice) endeavor to reduce
him to those terms of desperation; Neither had thy fault been so
insupportable, if what induced thee thereto had not been unworthy of a Prince;
(who is obliged to love virtue, and not to abhor it:) yet if thou would
needs offend in such a case, then should thy fault have been a generous envy
to emulate virtue, where it was; now with what face can thou show thy self
to the world? with what reasons can thou excuse thy self? with thy hopes
(perhaps) and interesses to the crown? Interesses of a Tyrant and no Prince.
Think thou thy self surer of succession if thou wer'st alone? peradventure
thou do imagine the being of many brothers to be prejudicial unto thee, and
among them especially him, that is most worthy: know thou not that the
multitude of Princely issue in a royal^ house, is that which assures the
successor in his government; And though this multiplicity were prejudicial to
a wicked Prince (as thou art) yet availes it to the public good, saving them a
labor of seeking a master elsewhere, which cannot be done without endangering
a state? Neither art thou deprived of the means of avoiding this hazard by
out-going the rest in goodness, being a matter that lies in thy own power;
and although it were granted that all thy suppositions were indeed as thou
would have them, yet should not all things be equally considered in persons
unequal. Polimero's qualities are not such as might give thee cause to doubt
him, although (after my days) even the kingdoms crown were offered unto him:
Seeing then thou have had^ oreason to disaffect him, and yet have hated him,
thou have made thy self unworthy to be such an one as nature has made thee to
be. And let thus much suffice, for what concerns thee.

Now touching what concerns me, I thee tell that in this case I am doubly
interessed, both as a father and as a Judge; as a father, I accuse thee that
thou have robbed me of my son, that thou have made him a fugitive, and that
thou (...) lost him me; as a Judge, I condemn thee to restore him me again:
And that (whilst I live) thou be not seen in this kingdom without him.

Metaneone (hearing these cruel words of the King) was even half dead for
grief, because the ingenuity of his blood working in him, ^irred up from the
more internal parts of the heart the seeds of virtue, sowed there by
education, and till then dead and buried; but in an instant in their sprowting,
quickened by the heat of blood, and revived by reproach; wherefore (kneeling on
the ground) he thus answered, My LORD, I confess that never father with more
reason bemoaned the loss of a Son; nor Judge more justly condemned a guilty
malefactor, than does your Majesty: Only this one thing is wanting, that your
Majesty (possessing the place both of father and Judge) have, as being a
father, too too much moderated your affections (deserving all immoderation for
so wor^hy a son) and have obtained of so just a Judge so unjust a sentence,
as not to exercise the rigor worthy for so great a fault, against the wicked
person of that caytive wretch that has so maliciously committed it: I beseech
you (My LORD) that (stripped naked of all pity) you cloth your self with the
robes of justice, and that you severely punish me that have so highly offended
you, I having not deserved to have any place (much less the first) in the book
of your generation: I know not (My LORD) how it is possible that I (your son,
and nursed with the crumbs of your royal virtues) have suffered my self to
precipitate into so base a fault, borne to be a slave to my own sensuality
(without having participated of any of your perfections) but dazzled with the
lightsome splendour of those of my noble brother. My Liege, had not your
Majesty condemned me to seek him out, I had besought you to favor we with
that employment, not as a punishment or penance (for such to me could it not
have been) but as a supreme favor, being assured that if I find him not, and
though I find him, if I obtain not his gracious pardon (which I cannot
pretend of other than a Polimero) I shall lead but an ever-dying life: And if
my ill behavior have offended you (my Liege) lost you a son and therewithal
scandalized the world. I will endeavor with my future actions to deserve your
Majesty's pardon: And that both my love and respect toward my brother may
yield a manifest testimony of my repentance; and also that my future course of
life (contrary to that I formerly affected) may give the world a good example.
And although I be not worthy to be called your son, yet (seeing it lies not
in the power of my fault to cancel that character of nature) I beseech your
Majesty to favor me with some sign or assurance of my future reintegration
into your royal favor, to the end that my conscience (stung with the
foulness of it is fault) be not so wounded with the imagination of your
Majesty's hatred, as overcome with its infirmity, procure me that have lost
you a worthy son by malice, to lose you also an unworthy one by repentance;
which said, embracing the knees of his father (which stood as a Rock
immovable) he humbly kissed them, weeping so pitifully that the King (not able
longer to contain himself) raised him up from the ground, and (having first
turned aside to dry the tears of his eyes;) Metaneone (said he) I am not a
father so inexorable, but that I (seeing thy unfeigned repentance) can pardon
thee.

And though the departure of Polimero be grievous unto me, yet nevertheless so
much prize l thy repentance, that thy becoming a new man does temperate the
grief I conceive of his loss: Howsoever I will in any case have him again,
for my comfort, and thy service. I cannot yet imagine where he may be gone.
Neither can I (by this letter found in his study) gather any thing of his
journey: Read it, and to morrow we will resolve of what shall be done.

The Prince (having read the letter) was well pleased with his brothers
modesty, and thought the time long of imbarking himself to go find him out,
and bring him home again. But the Queen (being informed by the King of the
conference had with his son, of the humble speeches he used, and of the
unfeigned tears which he saw spring from his heart) prayed the King not to
suffer him to go: whereto he had willingly condescended, if the doubt of
showing himself too credulous (lest this repentance were counterfeited) had
not confirmed him in his former deliberation: But the Queen (urging earnestly
the business) with many reasons drew him at last to be of her opinion, they
agreeing to send in his stead the Count of Bona, who in a well armed galley
should suddenly depart. The Prince (as soon as he understood that the King
was gone from his mother) went thither: And in the same manner as he had done
with his father, (accusing himself of his ill carriage toward his brother)
besought her pardon: But (perceiving that she consented not to what was
proposed, touching his going to seek his brother) prostrating himself before
her, he besought her with reasons so lively, and tears so effectual, that she
(mollified in affection to see her sons reconciled) was content to let him
go.

The Prince forthwith caused to be rig'd and trimmed up the Royal, which was a
bastard Galley of three and thirty banks with six men to an oar, he armed her
with twice as many crossebow-men as soldiers, and furnished the remnant with
knights, and adorning her with double harness, tackling and furniture, he
chose to take along with him for counselor the same Count of Bona. By whom
though he were advised that the Galley would only serve in the Mediterranean
sea, as far as the straights, but that (being to pass thence to Ireland in
respect of incommodity and peril of the long vessels in those seas,) it would
be good to take a-long with them a spare ship for that purpose; yet resolved
he to bring with him no other but the Galley, because she (being well rig'd
and manned) might overtake Polimero's ship ere she could reach to the
straights (being that she parted but a day and two nights before them; in which
time she had no good wind, but only one night and some few hours the day
following, the rest of the time being calm as it continued to that very
instant:) And if he should need to pass any further, he might then either
leave the Galley in the straights, or send her back again, and there hire or
buy a round vessel.

The Prince having kissed the King and Queens hands ascended into the Galley,
and (causing the ghing to ply the sea with their oars) vanished in an instant
out of the channel of Birsa, and leaving on one hand Porto-Farina, Biserta,
and Capo di ferro, and on the other the Island of Sardegna, steered a course
right on toward the straights, the Galley slaves being eased by a little gale
that blew from the shoreward.

Polimero in the mean season sailed very pensive (his vessel running the
course of Sardegna,) he could find in himself no comfort because of the
discurtesies of his brother, nor quietness for having in such a fashion
forsaken his parents: The noble Pilot (who delighted much in his generous
presence) knew well who he was, and (seeing him so heavy) imagined that there
was some thing occasioned it (his age and constitution not being such as might
argue melancholy.) Whereupon (desirous to make him merry) he said, Sir, If you
were constrained to make this voyage of necessity, which (I believe) you do
only of your own free will, I would imagine you could not be exempt from
fear, being you go to a place where the landing is somewhat dangerous: If
such be the cause of your heaviness (which I believe not) I beseech you be of
good courage: Because (God willing) I hope (if you vouchsafe to mark what I
shall tell you) to direct you in such a manner, as you may enjoy the sight of
the wars without participating the perils thereof.

Polimero (that purposed to go for Ireland, and had put himself in that
ship only to get out the speedier from Birsa; and that till then understood
nothing of that war) desired to hear: the relation thereof. The Pilot most
willing to obey him, and assuring him that he should understand a memorable
(though a pitiful) history, thus began.

Arato King of Sardegna (whither we are going) had two children, the one a male
named Perosphilo, and the other a female called Eromena: both so beautiful, as
that the world never produced a goodlier couple; But that which chiefly adorned
their fading and corruptible beauties were the everlasting perfections of their
immort all souls, whereby the one has already, and the other does at this
present show her self admirable to such as know her.

The prince Perosphilo was grown up to about your years (being as I conceive
not above sixteen) when after he was dubbed an armed Knight, he so manifested
the dexterity or his body, as (leaving his home, and spending sower years time
abroad in most noble achievements) he made himself thereby (though unknown)
famous and known over all the world. But (recalled by often messages from his
father) he returned home with such rich tropheyes, store of good manners and
languages, that (displaying them opportunely without ostentation) he both
amazed and delighted such as were so fortunate as to enjoy the happiness
either of his conversation or service: whilst he thus traveled abroad to pass
the time without losing it; Eromena at home made such a benefit and use of
hers, as every man thought he could not make a richer gain of his time than to
spend it in admiring her; whose employments were a noble and solid curiosity of
knowing things in their beginnings; a strict vigilance to accuse and correct
her self, if her perfections could have been capable of the least error; To
speculate the means of negotiating with diversity of persons, and to put the
same in practice with the measure of more and less, according to the
difference and merits of each one: and to yield every one satisfaction, so as
not any (how highly soever favored) could presume to judge himself worthy
thereof, so well known was her Incomparable courtesy that she participated
it to all with a proportion so regular, that neither she in doing it (although
a Princess,) nor others in receiving it (how mean conditioned soever) came
thereby to lose or gain in the imagination of others.

This court then (by means of these two princes) so flourished, as that the
kingdom of Sardegna (though neither ample in territories nor opulent in
riches) surpassed nevertheless in many things sundry of the greatest and most
famous, for these Princes being young (studying only to delight and be
delighted) by their affability and graceful behavior, allured and wan the
hearts of all that knew them. In so much as naught else was there to be seen,
but Iousts and tourneyes, entertainements of arms and love: so as such as came
thither from other countries preferred Calary (which is the city where the
King did and does yet reside) before all others the most renowned cities of
Europe.

Among the principal dames of Sardegna, among the fairest and best esteemed of
the Princess, was Talasia, Lady Marquess of Sassari, a young Lady of
nineteen years of age, brought up with the Princess Eromena. Who though
married, had yet no occasion to leave the court, because her husband (a harsh
fellow, but of a great spirit) served the King as Admiral of his fleet.

Perosphilo at his return home was two and twenty year old, during all which
time Love could never get any victory over him, being ever till then daunted
with the Majesty of his virtues, employed in so many heroike actions: But
(espying him now idle) thought it the fittest time to bring him under his
obeisance, and (because he had been his wilful enemy) with a miserable and
tragical success.

The Lady Admiral kept continually the Princess her company, neither came the
Prince ever to the lodging of his sister, but that he there found her; And
finding in her at first sight regard-worthy objects, he thought well of her,
ere the destinies compled him to love her, neither imagined she ever that the
favors of the Prince were other than mere terms of gentility; wherewith she
being caught, began to love him, ere she thought her self beloved of him; yet
as the native virtue of the one, served as a remedy to quell down the growing
fire; so the seemly modesty of the other (fearing to presume too high made her
conceal that flame, which in the end reduced to ashes both her life and honor.

The Prince (in his long travels) lighted on a thousand occasions of love,
which he eschewed, to shun any thing that might disturb the honorable course
of his worthy enterprises; and now, freed from this care (as though other
occasions deserved not such or greater obstacles) he suffered himself to be
bound, and being but a Novist in that practice, thought at first, there was no
such matter to be doubted of, but deceiving himself (and believing that fair
parts in a beloved object, were only fair for being virtuous) he perceived
not how the more he esteemed it, the more it pleased him, and the more it
pleased him, the more it inflamed him.

After that virtue (a greenefu^ll for such a fire) was somewhat dried up, and
that it is smoke (which were good inspirations) evaporated away through the
chimni^s of youth, the flame of the one began so lively to communicate it self
with the flame of the other, that joined both in one they became to be (by
little and little) an infernal Mongibello. The Prince meditating with himself
considered (as a presager of what was to ensue) all the mischief that
afterward befell him. There lay represented before him his Illustrious deeds,
his renown acquired, with those his royal virtues that purchased him the good
opinion of the world, then the quality of the woman (not for being his
inferior, but for being married) and because her husband was a noble and
valiant knight, the King his fathers servant, and a well deserver of the crown.

But that which more than all the rest tormented him was his conscience,
gnawing him so shrewdly, and stinging him so deeply, that the very Imagination
of the sin was to him both penance and torment.

This conflict between him and reason, lasted well-nigh two years, during
which time he did as much as a well governed understanding could do, and
thought to ease his heart of this conceit by listening to the marriage which his
father treated for him with the Princess of Maiorica.

But the subtle Lady Admiral (who was long before aware of the Prince's love
to her-ward; and did often hope that the heat of youth, and delight of enjoying
would in time vanquish all the Philosophy of virtue and reason) when she
understood that he had condescended to the conclusion of the marriage (so long
for her sake suspended) was ready to grow frantic with the very thought
thereof: But honesty so tempered her affctions, that concealing inwardly her
grief she seemed in outward show to be more joyful than ever before: Mean
time the disease creeping inwardly, brought her to her bed for not bringing her
to her Beer, which had been better for her. The Physicians knew not what to
do, her impairing was manifest, her disease unknown and strange, yea mere
conjectures were deficient because the means (whereby to conjecture) were
wanting; they applied unto her foments, but not such as she required, they gave
her cordialls, but not proportionable to her melancholy: so as (cestaine of the
evil and despairing of the cure) they left her in the hands of fortune; The
Princess (that truly loved her) conceived thereof an extreme grief, not
omitting to visit her daily, having caused her to be brought to the Palace in
a covered chair, and couched her in a withdrawing chamber near her own.

The Prince (for all his resolution made never more to think of her) could
take no rest, neither thought he that he could possibly live if she died, he
asked for her often of Eromena, and was somewhat solaced in hearing the sweet
harmony of her name. But finding one day his sister with bitter sobs bemoaning
her as dead, he comforted her, intermingling among the offices of consoling,
an expression of a certain pious desire he had to see her: whereupon his sister
said, Alas, my LORD and brother, and well are you thereto obliged, for you own
not that subject that is more observant of you than Talasia: with much a-doe
could the Prince refrain from tears, when (concealing his grief) he said,
Let us go ( Madam) to do this charitable office, which I had done long ere
this, had not the due respects of her sex withheld me.

The Princess would first know what she did, and would go give her notice how
that the Prince would come visit her. The languishing Talasia, that stood on
the point of death, and who (having abandoned all earthly things) retaind only
the love of her Perosphilo; understanding that she should see him before her
death, was the best contented woman in the world; and not wanting her gentile
spirits (although deprived of all the rest;) sent him word, that she having
never merited much, and now (being a carcass) nothing at all should
exceedingly joy to carry with her to her grave the honor of being so highly
and graciously favored of her LORD and Prince.

The chamber-windowes were all shut, so that whosoever came therein, saw
nothing, but only heard a pitiful murmr of the standers by, and sometimes
the languishing sighs of the sick Lady. Perosphilo was conducted unto her bed
whilst the Princess would needs go know of the women what she said or did
since she had left her.

The grieved Prince knew not how to frame his speech, yet (with a pitiful
accent) enquired of her disease; She (with an amorous hearts grief able to
become visible in darkness it self, thanking him for having so much abased
himself as to come visit her his most humble handmaid) answered him; that
she knew it not otherwise, but that she must needs die. The Prince (in a
manner illuminated by this answer, but much more by her manner of expressing
it) suspected what the matter was indeed; but (desirous to be better cleared of
his doub:) having besought her to comfort and cheer up her self, he prayed
her to len^ him her pulse, and there withal lest she night take cold by
putting forth her arm;) he reached in his hand gently to it

But she (feeling her self touched with that hand which she so much desired)
not able longer to refrain, took it between her two hands, and (sweetly
kissing it and bathing it with her tears) said unto him; Behold LORD, how that
I, a dead woman have now more courage, than I had when I was lively: I beseech
your Highness to pardon me, I presume too much, I know it I offend against
mine own honesty, but much more against your resolution (which is by not loving
me to compel me to die) yet this does me good, that you (being the cause of my
death) do now know it; you need feel no other pulse than my heart, which
(being in you) you may keep (as you please) dead or alive, and by it give me
either life or death.

The Prince (overcome with supreme tenderness of affection) answered, ( Madam)
I have, and do love you, and if I resolved to strive to conceal my affection,
yet did I it not with an intent to withdraw it from you, I beseech you,
recover, and be well, otherwise my life shall end with your death. Scarce had
he finished the last accent of his speech, when the Princess came unto them:
Who, having asked her how she felt her self, said unto her, Talasia, I pray
you torment me not by depriving me of you. All the world will have your
sickness to be nothing else but a mere melancholy, and therefore the remedy
lies in your own power; what want you woman will you be your own murtheresse?
If you will not recover for any others sake, yet do it for mine. See (my LORD
and brother) the Prince is come to visit you, and I am sure that you cannot
please him better than in recovering. The Lady Admiral (who had already chased
away all melancholy, and who full of content thought the time long that she
left not her bed) answered; The favors ( Madam) you do me are such, as it is
impossible for me to die, though I would; I am not so foolish but that I know,
that it is better for me to stay here, and serve you, than to lie in the grave
with my ancestors: I will endeavor to obey you; and do already perceive my
self to have that ability which before I had not, I am toomuch obliged to my
LORD the Prince, by whose gracious visit I acknowledge my self revived, for at
his comm^ng in, I felt my self so amend, as I now hold my self fully
recovered.

The Princess very gladsome (embracing her about the neck) kissed her, and
(having together with the Prince accompained her a good while) left her, being
well pleased to see manifest signs of her amendment, neither deceived she her
self therein; for in eight days space she returned in her former plight both
of health and beauty.

Perosphilo, having thus (under the pretext of pity) given reins to sense,
thought the time tedious till he should enjoy her; and meeting her at his
sisters, agreed to speak with her that night, being to enter into her house
through a secret door, (standing toward an alley frequented of few;) her
husband was then executing his charge in the fleet on suspicion of the King of
Corsica, who gave no obscure signs of enmity: Because he requiring for wife
Eromena the Princess, Arato denied her him (seeing his daughter not thereto
inclined) this King (who is called Epicamedo) being of a crabbed nature,
pimple-faced and a creple: Whereupon pretending old titles to the Island of
Asinara, a natural member of Sardegna (it seemed) he would by this pretext
molest that kingdom.

Now the Lady Admiral had in her house many maids and women, to whom she would
not trust her self, believing she might better commit her life and honor both
into the hands of Prodotima her slave (with many courtesies obliged unto her;)
who withal was already (some time past) a servant in the Admirals house; and
she (seeing her self become her mistres treasurer of a secret of such
importance) was infinitely glad thereof, hoping to reap therefrom no ordinary
profit; she was borne in Orcano and taken on those shores, when she (running
away with her lover) endeavored to save her self from the fury of her parents,
that came pursuing her, not because they cared either for her or for the honor
of their blood (she being but basely borne) but because at her parting away she
had broken up the chest in the warehouse (where her father was factor) and
stolen there-out the money.

And (because matters ill begun end worse) her fortune was to escape her
parents, and perish among strangers, for the galleys of Sardegna being (by a
great tempest) wether-beaten and driven to that shore, the two Fugitives (spied
by the Galley-slaves) were by them first taken and stripped, and then presented
to the Admiral.

Andropodo (which was the secret lecher) was put to serve in the stable, and
she (being an artificial dissembler) knew so well how to work for her self,
that she was withdrawn from base slavery to services more civil, about the
person of her Mistress. And now (perceiving her self employed in affairs of
so great consequence) she (with well composed words) promised her utmost help,
and being rich in invention, discoursed upon the manner and means of the
coming of the Prince with such circumspection, as the poor Talasia thought it
impossible to perceive it her self, much less her husband; and gave her
forthwith (in earnest of her liberality) two hundred crowns of gold. At the
appointed hour came Perosfilo (armed with a sword, a little buckler, and a
half coat of maile) so secretly, as that not any of his servants were any way
privy to his going, because some days before he had begun to lock himself
in his chamber, with a devise that lying a bed, he could with a little cord,
open and pull toward him the door; so now also he caused himself to be set
a bed, but as soon as the Gentlemen that waited on him were gone, he put on
his clothes himself, and getting out by a secret ladder went on to the
Admirals house, where he needed not to touch the door, so vigilant was the
villainous Prodotima, who (expecting him, with the door under-shut) suddenly
lead him the way in. It Is needless to tell you of the joy and pleasure of the
two Lovers, because the imagination unable to conceive it, deprives the tongue
of the ability of expressing it: let it suffice, that they did their best to
recompense the two years time, lost to their loves, with the peril of death
incurred by her in her last sickness; and well might they do it, there
concurring in them both, love, beauty, and youth, to make them humanely happy.

This practice continued happily, until such time as Prodotima (rewarded by
her Mistress, and enriched by the Prince) began to desire to enjoy in
liberty the selfsame pleasures with her Andropodo But knew not what course to
take, because to run away was a difficult matter, and to delay time grieved
her; not so much, because it is a thing ordinary to expect with impatience, the
fruition of dishonest desires, as because she (hoording up every day more gifts
and coin) doubted lest the abundance thereof should redound more to her
peril, than profit; just as it chanced her, when she was taken with the
Galleyes. At length after she had a long time conceited diverse projects, she
ran her head into the most detestable mischief that ever was heard of in the
world; and there, (without passing any further) she staid: this alone seeming
unto her to be the way to re-have their liberty, regaine her sweetheart, and
to enjoy happily her ill-gotten riches. Wherefore having caused Andropodo to
come unto her, (before she came to the purpose, she lessoned him what he should
say, if by chance any body had observed them talk together,) and then
afterward she thus began.

Andropodo, I will not make thee any long stories of my love, nor of the losses
and sufferings I have endured for thy loves sake, as well because thou already
know them, as also because I have no spare time at this present to lose in
matters so superfluous, it shall suffice me only to remember thee, how that I
have been robbed, and that I am now a slave, for nothing else but for loving
and following thee; not making any reckoning of the rest, as the loss of
honor, country and friends, because I ever have, and yet do prize all as
nothing in comparison of thy dear self alone.

What I have to tell thee is, that I, desirous we might recover again our
liberty, (among many ways by me thought of) have found out only one easy,
and (as I believe) without any danger. But that which should cause us to desire
it the more (although it be of it self desirable) is, because we now are in
case and ability of enjoying it sweetly, without being beholding to any, my
self being worth between Jewels and money near about six thousand crowns, by
what means I came by them, thou shall understand with the rest: But first,
thou should not marvel, why I have till now concealed this from thee,
because it was a matter of exceeding great importance, and though I well know
that I may assuredly trust thee in any thing, yet know I also, that if I had
made thee privy thereto, I could not have refrained from being good unto thee,
and thou by spending, had given occasion to others of being inquisitive, how
thou could come by those moneys, and so our affairs might have been
peradventure endangered.

Then discovered she unto him the love between the Prince and her mistress,
showing him all the presents bestowed on her by them, and (taking out of her
chest a purse) she said unto him, What I have thought of to be done, is this;
that thou go to our Master, and tell him that upon condition that he grant us
our liberty, thou will disclose unto him a matter of great importance, nearly
concerning the principal of his interesses; thou must speak of me, not as if
I knew the secret, but as thy fellow-slave and taken in thy company; assuring
him that to know it he would not stand on granting liberty, not only to two
but even to two hundred slaves; which if he promise (and that thou guess it
be made in such sort as if he meant really to perform it,) then tell him,
that I, (not able to endure to see him so highly injuried) have sent thee unto
him, wherein if he doubt of being deceived, beseech him to come secretly, and
his own eyes shall see the manifestation thereof. But if he chance to deny
thee, and will needs by all means know the matter, then set not thy self
about this enterprise, if thou have not the courage to resolve to die in
torments, rather than to confess it.

The hazard I confess is great, but well recompensed with thy liberty, my
person, and those riches thou here see, wherewithal we will live all our
lives time most happily. Here take these hundred crowns, if thou will go, let
them serve thee in thy journey; But if thou can not find in thy heart to
go, then enjoy them, (but with such sobriety, as the air perceive thee not to
have them) until fortune offer us some other occasion.

The slave as rash as malicious (having suddenly made a brief discourse with
himself, and balanced the danger with the benefit,) resolved to go, assuring
her that no torment in the world, should force one word out of his mouth: only
it seemed unto him a matter worthy of consideration, whether they might trust
to the performance of their masters promise, seeing it lay not in their power
to force him thereto. And Prodotima judging the consideration to be of moment,
(after she had awhile stood somewhat doubtful) said unto him: We (my
Andropodo) can never aspire to our liberty, but by some strange and unexpected
accident, which the gods alone know, when any such may happen; as for me I can
well stay for it, for though I be a slave by name, yet am I in effect a free
woman: my mistress being my slave upon the matter, neither can she deal
otherwise than well with me, who have in my hands both her heart and life: but
thou, that leadest a painful life, can no long time prolong it, without
danger of thy health, yea, and of thy life it self; wherefore believe me, that
what I do, that do I not for my own sake (because I can never have a happier
nor better fortune than I already enjoy) but it is for thy sake I do it,
without whom I can take no joy, neither in fortune, nor in any goods
whatsoever; and albeit in an estate so highly raised, we ought to govern our
selves with all prudencie, yet, if thou think that it lies in our power to
prevent all dangers, thou art deceived, for fortune will have a share in our
actions, and for the most part we should refer our selves to her. On these
speeches Andropodo resolved to go.

The fleet rode then hard by Isoletta Asinara (to which the King of Corsica
pretended title) in the port of Torre, distant from Calari a hundred and
sixteen miles: and the way to go thither, passed through Sassari (a place of
the Admirals) where he then resided for its commodiousnesse, who being there in
his own house, was not above eight mile distant from the fleet.

There accompanied him in that instant a high spirited young gentleman (his
own cozen) the Count of Montevero, and with him the Baron of Frisano (his
kinsman, brought thither by him to see the Admiral.)

The slave noting his master all alone, presented himself before him, and
said; My Lord, you wonder to see me here unsent for, but the occasion that drew
me hither is of such importance, and concerns you so nearly, that I resolved
by all means to come hither; being well assured that when you shall know it,
you will not only take it in good part, but will also courteously grant me
what I shall demand of you.

The Admiral, who (seeing him come unawares) had eyed him with a dogged look,
suspecting that he meant to fly into Corsica, but that being discovered, he
resolved to come to Sassari; or else that somebody had enticed him to run
away (which might be the better done under color and pretext of being his
slave) yet hearing these words, permitted him to speak all that he would. The
slave (observing the coming of others into the room,) with a submissive voice
besought him to make a show of bidding him do something, till such time as the
company were gone away. The Admiral seeing him so circumspect, thought his
suspicion might be vain, and (his heart telling him that something was amiss)
he bade him do some services about the chamber, to set him aworke till he were
rid of those that were there; then (having made him follow him alone into the
garden) he commanded him to tell him the occasion of his coming. Whereat he
kneeling down, thus said unto him;

My Lord, the thing I have to tell you is of such importance, as, if it should
be known, there is no man living could save my life: although then I (as your
slave, and as a slave well used) am in all things obliged unto you, without
having any reason of pretending any reward from you; nevertheless, I beseech
you to be pleased, that (before I tell it you) I beg the liberties of my
self and Prodotima, who (to tell you the truth) is my wife; and though
liberty be the only thing that ought to be most desired of every one in the
world, yet would I not in this case desire it, were I not of necessity (for
the saving of my own life) constrained so to do.

The Admiral (having heard these well compact reasons) absolutely promised him
all that he requested; in case, the matter were such as he made it to be.
Whereupon the slave kissing his feet, said unto him; My Lord, Prodotima sent
me unto you, and (out of the obligation she owes you) lets you know, that your
bed is violated by the Prince, which (if you believe not) she offers to let you
see.

The Admiral (who expected no such news) was ready to fall dead for grief
thereof; but striving to encourage himself the best he could, he demanded of
him many things touching that purpose: but the other (fearing to fail) said,
he knew no more thereof, but that Prodotima could fully satisfy him of all.
The Admiral (concealing what he felt in himself) sent him to the stables,
bidding him say, that he himself had sent for him thither. Afterward (settling
himself to ruminate, or rather to rave on the case of the business) he could
not imagine that the slave came to tell him a lie: neither held he him to be so
simple, as not to know his own danger.

Whilst he thus stood, there came to him unlookt for, the Coant of Montevero;
who (seeing him changed as if he had been sick a whole months time) asked
him, if he felt not himself well? And being answered with, no; The Count said,
that it might be, that he was not sick, but that it could not otherwise be,
but that some great ill had befallen him. The Admiral (suffering at these
words a deeper impression of grief) burst out like a child into an extremity
of weeping: whereupon the Count (taking him by the hand) led him to the end of
the walk, and having first seated themselves in the thicket of a grove,
besought him to tell him the occasion of his grief, to the end that he might
either comfort, counsel, or assist him. The Admiral blushing for shame of
being found in such a plight, (after he had dried his eyes) related unto him
all that the slave had told him: whereupon the Count (after a short pawse) said
unto him, Cozen, the occasion of your grief is great, not in respect of what
is already happened you, (you being not the first that had a dishonest wife)
but in regard of what may befall you, if you think to repair your honor;
whereof (because of its difficulty) you cannot easily resolve: suspend (I pray
you) your sorrow, lest by bewraying it, you mar all your business. Only this
much I Will tell you, that though in revenging your wrong I were sure to lose my
life and goods, yet would I most willingly forgo them, and think them well
spent for your honors sake. The Admiral (framing the best countenance he
could) departed thence, to which place both of them returned again after
supper, under pretense that the Baron was disposed to recreate himself: where
after much consultation, they resolved that the Admiral should go disguised
to Caleri, to assure himself of the act, before they would think of the rest,
and to the end that this his journey might not be any way suspected; they took
on them to go thence alone to Montelione, without any attendance, that those
of the household might think they made this journey for some amorous pleasure.
The slave sent they two days before with a spare Barbar horse, which the
Admiral was to ride on; lead by him a mai^e pace as far as Montecouo being
forty miles, where he left him, having found another that there expected him,
being sent there by the Count; which he led as far as Genevi, being forty
miles more, w^ere after he had delivered him with the counter-signe agreed
(...) a place without the Castle, he went thence a foot to Caleri. (...)
Admiral, after he had continued at Sassarie, till such time (...) imagined
that the horses sent before were somewhat reposed, (...) on horseback, very
early, accompanied with the Count, (...)ping together as far as Montelione,
where leaving him at a (...) Inn; he mounted first on the one fresh horse, and
after^^rds upon the other, posting on with such diligence that by dark ^^gh^
he reached to Caleri, where expected by the slave, that through the stables
conducted him to the house (to the lodgings reserved for strangers,) Prodotima
came to find him out.

The words were few, because they were to go thence to watch the coming of
the Prince: she led him into the fore-chamber of her mistress (who was already
laid in bed) and there hid him in the study, where-hence he might first see the
Prince, as he passed by, and then through the door (which was to stand open)
hear and see all the speeches and actions of his wife. He was well armed,
because he came of purpose about a business of such importance, and wanting
neither valor nor courage, had soon resolved with himself to kill them both;
if his Cozen (foreseeing the danger) had not made him promise to do nothing
else but assure himself of the fact.

In less than a quarter of an hour came the Prince, and passed through the
fore-chamber with a light that Prodotima bore before him. The Admiral saw him,
and knew him he heard their amorous complements, their reciprocal affections,
the smacking of their kisses, his putting off his clothes, and going to bed. I
wonder that madness, jealousy, and fury, made him not forget his promise.

Prodotima gone out, he would not stay to hear any more (not willing to trust
too much to his own patience.) Of her would he needs know in many particulars,
and (amongst other things) the time and continuance of this practice. She,
concealing such things as might condemn her self for a mediatrix, told him,
that it had not lasted many days, and that she (for her part) had absolutely
denied her assistance, when she was thereto requested by her mistress, who
therefore (mistrusting her) had caused the Prince to threaten her, the self
same evening, when her mistress went her self in person to open him the door
(as she believed she had done ofttimes before her being made privy thereto) so
that she for fear of her life could not choose but obey her.

The Admiral, after he had seen and heard too much, went his way, charging
her to serve them with a good countenance, until such time as he gave her
further order; promising her, that (over and besides her liberty) he would
therefore well reward her.

The slave having put the horse to stand in a stable without the house, found
him (when he went to saddle him) so tired and weary, as he could not possibly
cause him to get up on his feet, so as the Admiral knew not what to do, and
(not able to endure any longer the sight of his house, or of Calari, no nor of
the sky that covered them) went out of the city on foot; giving the slave
money to hire another horse, as far as Geneui, whitherward he was to come
after him and overtake him by the way.

The subtle hangman (well knowing where to find choice of horses,) chose out
an excellent good one, paying well for him, and leaving the other in pawn
thereof, received of his master when he overtooke him, the counter-token for
getting again the horse at Geneui; whither he walked at his leisure. But the
Admiral carried by Furies road those five and thirty miles in two hours, and
with the other two horses came to Montecouo ere the Count was stirring out of
his bed; where (almost dead with weariness, hunger, and grief) he told him of
all that had happened him.

The Count (although astonished to hear him) answered nothing else, but that
he had well done to hold his hands, praying him to repose himself a little, as
he had need for not having slept a wink the two former nights, and that
afterward they would discourse of the business with more convenience and
leisure.

The Admiral (although he had more desire to die than to live, yet overcome by
necessity having refreshed himself with a little meat,) without stripping
himself of his clothes, lay him down to sleep a nap on the beds side. And
afterward awaking with a a shivering fear, caused by his imagination and
passion, he found the Count awake, who spoke thus unto him:

Cozen, I have thought on your case, wherein I find you may proceed two
manner of ways, the one profitable, but contrary to the common opinion of our
country; the other (by the same opinion) honorable, but ruinous: in the first,
is laid before you; how that he who offends you is your Prince, and such a
Prince, as (this fault excepted) might be entitled the worthiest that the world
enjoyes.

Add hereunto his discretion in doing what he does, in a manner so secret,
that no living creature can come to know it, and what you esteem an offense is
rather an amorous trespass, than an injury. Moreover if we ought to ground our
resolutions on the common opinion, we shall find that a Prince takes not away
the honor of his subject in enjoying his wife; which if it be allowed, though
all the world know it, why will not you allow it now that no body knows it?
Infinite truly are the number of such, as will laugh at you in their sleeves,
if you but do otherwise; because honor is indeed in the end nothing else, but
a mecre opinion, and many nations mock and leere at us, who with so great and
so many dangers endeavor to protect the chastity of our wives, persuaded in our
selves that their dishonesty spots us with infamy.

Therefore, if you will follow this course, you shall (besides the saving of
your honor) reap thereby many commodities, you shall find your self freed of
a grief that so much troubles you; and consequently, letting all things pass,
you need not think of any thing else, than of your course of life.

And may withal (if jealousy should yet torment you) in some seemly fashion
th wart those loves by causing your wife to come to Sassari; you shall save
your own patrimony, and the estates of diverse others; and besides free from
danger your own life with those of your friends and kindred.

The other way of proceeding is, for such as believe, that this case marches
in the very front of the first files of honor, which if you will follow, you will
uncloath your own shame, and thereby procure your self many losses and
disgraces, as to be branded with the infamous name of a Traitor, and utterly
lose your goods, country, honor, dignities and friends. The choice therefore
lies in your own hand, and on you alone depends the election thereof.

This said, he pawz'd awhile, till (seeing the Marquess stand silent, without
making any answer) he thus proceeded: I believe, that these reasons shall not
(peradventure) obtain of you that credit, as I wish they could; in that you
may persuade your self that I propose them, only to free my self from the
community of your perils; but (to clear you of that doubt) I hear seriously
protest unto you, that I am most willing to incur with you any danger
whatsoever.

The Admiral (looking somewhat more cheerful) answered, (Cozen) I have not
so little judgment, but that I know you; though your reasons indeed are more
profitable than honorable, my business caries with it no other balance than
that of honor, which if in this case it cannot be taken from me by the Prince,
because he is a Prince; no more can he deprive me thereof in another case, for
being such a person: and Princes by this reason should be less powerful than
private men, for such (for being private men,) might and are able to do
injuries, if they would, whereas Princes cannot so do (for being Princes.) But
this (cozen) is a false reason, found out and invented either by the Princes
themselves, or by the women, who (being dishonest) would thereby defend their
honesty; or by their husbands, who feign would under that veil hide their
own disgraces. As concerning virtue, I confess the Prince has heretofore
participated of some part thereof, whereof he is at this present deprived,
because true virtues are perpetual, neither are they ever found unaccompanied
with others like themselves, so that when one of them is corrupted, all the
residue are thereby blemished. Touching honor, I allow what you say thereof:
but the selfsame argument of yours is sufficient to give you satisfaction;
True honor (as you term or limit it) is that, which is found common in every
one, as the law of nature is common to every man; observing this rule, I should
have but small reason to find my self aggrieved. But there are certain
particular laws, which although they be not observed elsewhere, than in places
where they are established, yet can it not be denied, but that they are laws;
and ought to be known and observed of every one for such. When custom has
brought a thing to become, (or be esteemed) a branch of honor, whosoever is
not observant and obedient thereto, is dishonored, not because it ought to be
so in effect, but because we have consented that it should be so. I confess
that to watch over women's honesty, with so great curiosity, is a custom
altogether prejudicial: but we being thereto subject, must needs endure it;
and so much the rather, by how much we are the more conspicuous and eminent in
our callings. And if I would free my self from the bonds thereof, then would
it not be said that I did it, because the Philosophy of honor taught me to
despise this fantastical opinion; but rather for that avarice and ambition had
induced me to become patient: so as I shall not only make my self subject to
the sottish talk of the vulgar, but shall also be accounted of my Peers
scorne-worthy, and infamous. As for my life and goods, the selfsame custom
will answer for me; which custom will, that I prefer my self, and my own
honor before all things: and that with losing all, I declare my self a rebel
to Nature, which commands us to look to our own profit, and to conserve what
we enjoy of hers. Touching my friends, I know not what to answer you, saving
only, that the disgrace I suffer does also reflect on them; what is my case to
day, may be theirs to morrow. It rests that I tell you, that the Prince might
have allowed himself pleasures without offending any man, as wise Princes do,
who jest not, but where such jests are received for favors. The sum of all
is, that I am resolved, that the lives of both the Prince and my wife shall
satisfy the vengeance of my wronged honor.

Seeing that such is your resolution (replied the Count) mine also shall be
conformable to yours. And after they had proposed diverse means for effecting
it, at length they concluded on these; that the Admiral should sell a good
part of his goods, who to give a color to the sale thereof, was to lose
publicly at play with the Count, sixty thousand crowns. That he should
practice a plot with the King of Corsica, by the mediation of Mortiro (one of
the Ambassadors that came to demand the Princess) a friend to them both, whom
they were to procure to come disguised, and give them the meeting. That the
assistance of that King should be sued for, with proffering him in recompense,
the Kingdom of Sardegna. That they should in the mean time insinuate into the
love of the Captains, Soldiers, and Mariners; but so discreetly, as their
unaccustomed liberality might not cause them to be suspected. All which
accomplished, the last thing should be the death of the Prince.

The Admiral, after this agreement, seemed to be of better comfort, and
considering how it would be well done to prepare thereto their friends; and
particularly the Baron of Frisano, the Count thereto agreed not; but said that
the foundations being once well grounded (which were the moneys and the
backing of the King of Corsica) their friends would be thereunto afterward
more easily persuaded.

The day following they returned to Sassari, where taking on them to be merry,
and setting themselves to gaming; the Admiral lost some moneys, which he took
out of his pocket, and then playing on ticket, lost twenty thousand crowns:
under which pretext he had leisure to give himself over to his melancholy, and
holding on his game (although the Baron with many Captains would have set
themselves in between them, and the Count himself made as though he played
unwillingly) in a few days, the Admiral resolutely lost threescore thousand
crowns.

The news of these losses were suddenly rumored about the Court, and came to
the ears of the Admirals wife, who grieved extremely thereat; and not long
after received from her husband a letter, with order, to find out such as
would buy so much of his goods, as might make up the sum of sixty thousand
crowns. Now the Prince being that night come unto her, she with be-teared
eyes, showed him the letter: and he (glad of having occasion to gratify in any
thing his Talasia) wished her not to trouble her mind therewith. Having
therefore sent for the Admiral to Calari, (who came thither very unwillingly)
he bespake him in this wise: I understand that your Steward has offered to
sale your goods, which have for these many years belonged unto your honor,
for which I am indeed sorry, more for the occasion, that for the thing it
self; the King (my father) will not that you (being the second Baron of
Sardegna) should (by being ruinated) become unable to serve him: repair
therefore unto the Treasurer general, who has order to deliver you sixty
thousand crowns; make use thereof, and restore it again, by little and
little, without discommodating your estate. The Admiral (who well knew the
cause of this liberality) dissembling, kneeled down before him, and with most
humble speeches, thanked him, doing the selfsame to the King; who advised him
not to suffer himself by play, to be any more reduced to such necessity.

The Admiral continued at home but a very small time, where it behooved him to
make much of his wife, with no less art, than disgust. Returned back to
Sassari, he wrote to his Cozen, to whom (as soon as he was come) he publicly
disbursed sixty thousand crowns, acquiring thereby the praise and reputation
of a loyal and gene^ous spirit.

Afterward retired aside, the Count showed him the answer of Mutriro, the
contents whereof was, that he would go to Assinara, in the habit of a
Fisherman, where they were to expect him; they therefore retired to the fleet,
and (taking on them to go a fishing) went so farreonwards till they came to
Assinara, where the counterfeit shepherd expected them, and landing a bowshot
distant from him, (leaving their Squires busied in making dinner ready) they
walked along the strond, till they came to his Bark; where (dissembling the
matter before his servants, there present, and asking him what he was? and what
he there did?) they singled him from them; and he (with a seeming humility)
followed them, till such time as the Admiral perceiving himself out of sight,
told him; that the occasion wherefore he had prayed him to come thither was,
for that he (resolved to avenge his wronged honor) was desirous to participate
it to King Epicamedo, who by that occasion, might not only be revenged for the
refusal of the Princess Eromena, but also impatronize himself of that
kingdom, which they offered him, telling him, that they demanded no moneys;
howbeit he might do well to employ such as he should have given them, in
reinforcing of the fleet with more men and munition to pass over into
Sardegna, when he should be thereof advertized. That the Admiral would stir
up to rebellion the fleet under his command (having already purchased the love
and affection of the Captains and Soldiers thereof) which he could the easier
accomplish, because his was no rebellion, but a just revenge. That as soon as
he received an answer, he would communicate the business to all his friends,
whereof some of them had their lands and castles lying in the Province of
Lougodori, over against Corsica, so as at their landing in the Island, they
should find no resistance. That in these consisted all the strength of the
kingdom; in that (the Prince being once dead) there would remain to King
Arato, but very few soldiers, without either General or Captains.

Glad was Mortiro of so goodly an employment, whereof when when they had
sufficiently discoursed, every one returned to his own bark, agreeing within
six days to meet again in the same place, where being accordingly returned,
Murtriro presented the Admiral with a letter from King Epicamedo, whereby he
accepted of their offer, promising all whatsoever they had required of him,
specifying withal, how that he would send into the Island, twenty thousand
soldiers, and increase the fleet to the number of five and twenty Galleyes,
together with this message sent he him for a present, a rich sword with the
hilts, inlaied with many diamonds, and unto the Count a rich Jewel to wear in
his hat.

Afterward, having more particularly ordered a settled course for what was to
be effected; the Admiral together with the Count, returned to the Fleet, and
thence went away as if it had been to recreate themselves, together with the
Baron of Frisano: to whom when they had communicated the business, he remained
so troubled in mind to here of such an unexpected act done by the Prince, that
loving both the Admiral and his Cozen (as it were) with an equal affection,
he easily consented to make one in this conspiracy.

Thence compassing about Capo Luogodori, they infected all those tributaries
thereabout, whereof the principallest were, the Earls of Reparata, of
Pussinera, and of Castle Rabone, with the Barons of Ianque, of Lilaraba, of
Lagosardo, and of Villapeires. All these were present at the death of the
Prince, except the Count of Montevero, who (with the occasion of apparent
receipt of sixty thousand crowns, having (by the Admirals appointment,)
liberally given as largess of his winnings in the army, more than six thousand
of them) had so obliged the Captains, and all the rest, that it was thought
fit to leave him in the custody and government thereof.

The Admiral in the mean time, sent the King and Prince often intelligence of
the great preparations of the King of Corsica, desiring to be authorized with
greater power, to the end he might give order in the country of Luogodori, for
the defense of that Cape (dangerous in time of invasion) as the nearest unto
the enemy. Whereupon he received greater authority than he desired, and began
first to fortify his own holds (namely) Sassari and Porta Torre. Thence (with
title of Commissary General) he visited the Conspirers, and caused their
towns to be fortified, their battalions armed, and many companies of soldiers
to be levied all at the charge of the Kings Exchequer, without a penny of
expense, of either his, or his accomplices. All which accomplished (and nothing
but the execution lest uneffected) he sent for the slave (under pretense of
having the horse which he governed) who come, and instructed of what he had to
do, returned to expect him at Caleri. Where the Admiral with the conspirers,
came by night at the hour appointed, and were hidden by Prodotima, (after
Talasia was a bed) in the study of the fore-chamber. After that the Prince had
received intelligence from the Admiral of the King of Corsica's being up in
arms, he felt in his heart (although he was the most valourous Knight in the
world) a new effect of melancholy, withisome conceit or feeling of fear,
whereat he was astonished: It seemed to him unlikely that Epicamedo (alone
without foreign aid) durst move war against Sardegna (a kingdom well-neere
thrice greater than his, and withal abounding with warrelike subjects.) And
(being desirous to proceed on sure ground) he had sent many spies into
Corsica, who conformably advertized him of the great preparations there, and
how that all the troops marched toward Basilica, over against Sardegna;
whereupon he often solicited the Marquess, by sundry poasts, to assure that
Country of Luogoderi, till such time as he (having mustered up the horse, and
armed men) came thither in person.

All that morning, which preceded his death, spent he with the King and Queen
(who grieved to see him so changed) and he angry at himself, strove to force
himself to be merry; but his joys vanished in an instant.

In the evening he determined to go sport himself with his Talasia; Prodotima
led him to the chamber as she was accustomed, all trembling (as knowing what
was to befall him,) and passed before the Conspirers. The Prince disarmed and
unclothed himself: but the Admiral (not able to hold any longer) rush't into
the chamber, just as the Prince thought to lay himself down, and (without
speaking a word) thrust at him a full stocada, which although it pierced him
quite through the other side, yet was it not mortal: The Prince (seazing
suddenly on his sword that lay by him) stroke at the Admirals head with so
maine a force, that he (warding with his buckler) was not able to bear off the
blow, but yielding thereto, the sword came to charge him so furiously on the
head, that cutting through the Helmet, it somewhat wounded him. But the Prince
seeing so many about him, and among those, the Earls of Reparata and Castle
Robone, (both his special Favorites) detesting, and wroth to see so great
ingratitude, he said unto them; And to you Traitors, what have I done that you
thus murder me? Thou have done too much in maculating our blood, (answered
Reparata;) now these were all of them of kin, either to the Lady, or to the
Admiral; and the Count of Reparata was her own Cozen-germaine, who thought
this fatal shame concerned him nearest, in that she had neither father nor
brother living. The Admiral (who had forethought of the manner of conducting
this enterprise) had beforehand furnished his companions with Iavelings,
because, having considered the valor of the Prince, he judged it folly to
regard the fair terms of Knighthood, much rather, in that he doubted lest the
noise and bustling of their blows might endanger them; so as the poor Prince
pierced at once with six darts, was not any more able, either to strike or
speak. The Baron of Iangue, and the Count of Pussinera, were (from the
beginning) run to the bed, who (lest the Lady Admiral should cry out) held
close her mouth stopped up with the sheets: her husband, (having made her rise
up, and put on a chamber-weede) intending (because he disdained to kill her
himself) to cause her to be strangled by the slave, seeing the Prince not yet
quite dead, grew desirous (for his greater anguish) that she should give him
his last wound, and having therefore made her take a Poyniard in hand, he told
her, his will was, that to revenge the death he had given her honor, she
should resolve to kill him with her own hands; she (seeing him wallowing in a
lake of blood, and how he though gasping for life, yet beheld her) laying aside
all fear, stabbed her husband with the Poyniard in the face, thinking to strike
him in the throat-pipes (for well deemed she him armed every where else) and
had therewithal sped him, had he not fallen flat on the ground; then turning
toward the next unto her, which was the Baron of Vellapetres, she ran him in
the flank, and killed him. The Admiral (in the mean while gotten up) gave her
a thrust in the side, which pushed her upon the Baron of Lybaraba; in whose
belly, she without loss of time, buried the Poyniard up to the hilts, (aiming
her thrust low, for doubt of sticking it in his coat of maile) and therewith
sped him; but then, she beaten down with diverse blows (and struggling to set
her self forwards again to kill her husband) came to fall upon the Prince,
where faintly kissing him, she breathed out her life with him; in that very
instant, as he breathed out his last gasp.

The Admiral seeing his plot brought to pass, at so dear a rate, as to have
two of his companions slain, and himself wounded; knew not what course to
take with their bodies, and yet needs must he have resolved to get him thence:
when every one advising him not to lose any time about two inutile carcasses,
he thought his best and safest course was to be ruled by them. Having therefore
bound up his wounds, he wished them all to go out into the Hall, to the end
that those of the house (wakened with their bustling) seeing them jest (beating
one the other with pillowes) might believe that thence began the first noise:
The beds being made ready they called for dice, commanding the servants to go
sleep, under color of having no man to over-looke their game; and because
many of them (considering how unfit it was to leave Lords of such a rank, not
attended with as much as one servant) would have waited out of the Hall; they
constrained them to get them thence, and by locking the doors after them, had
thereby conveniencie a little after to shift themselves away thence, without
being observed of any. The Admiral had forethought of all things (except the
two slaves,) whom then also he had not remembered, had they not presented
themselves before him, so as they must have taken them up behind them on their
horse-croppers, had not the death of the two Barons remedied that
inconvenience. And because Caleri for the suspicion it had of Corsica, stood
then guarded with some watch; it behooved the Admiral to make himself known
unto the Porter of the City. They rode all night, having twice changed horse,
and taking the way of Montevero, arrived there the day following. There were
they enforced to leave behind them Prodotima (accompanied with the slave) all
galled and bruised with riding; to embarke themselves suddenly at the mouth of
the river Thirsis, distant but eight miles from Montevero, and thence to get
them to Porto Torre, themselves without one minutes stay, (holding on their
journey with incredible diligence) arrived the night following at Sassari.

As the Pilate held on his discourse, there appeared in sight a small Bark,
sailing here and there without any order or direct course, which being showed
them by Polimero, they judged it to be some one, that had been robbed by
Pirates, and left as a play-game to the winds; (desirous to know the truth)
they bore up to her. But because she was yet afar off, the Pilate (requested
to continue his History) thus proceeded.

It grew to be far days, and Talasia's Gentlewomen expected that Prodotima
should come to call them up, as she was wont to do: but dinnertime being come,
and no Prodotima as yet appearing, and the Serving-men on the other side
(marvelling they saw not in the strangers lodgings, the Knights come thither
with their Master the night before) went on toward the fore-chamber, where
Prodotima lay, where knocking many times, and hearing no body stir within,
they began to doubt, of I know not what. Whereupon, bouncing again many times
and often, they resolved without any respect, to throw down the door, which
when they had done, and found not their Prodotima, onwards they went into the
chamber, and there they saw the pitiful spectacle of four bodies lying
weltred in blood; whereof (to their great horror) they knew at the first sight
their Mistress and the Prince. My tongue cannot express the effects of grief
and amazement, that seized on these poor people, neither believe I, that they
can be imagined, unless the imagination had experimented a like disaster: they
could not as much as guess how the matter stood, because they never were any
way privy to the Prince his love: but seeing him now in such a plight, and
knowing that their Master came to the house that night, and thence shifted
himself away privily, they began to doubt of what was so indeed.

The Steward (having caused the gate to be shut, with charge not to open it to
any man) went to the Kings Council, to whom he related the fact, conformable
to his conjectures.

The Council (not knowing by what means they might therewith acquaint the
King,) were advised by the Marquess of Bossa, Lord high Chamberlain, not to
inform the King of any thing, ere they had seen themselves the body of the
Prince, and with more certainetie informed themselves of the case, wishing
therefore, all, or some of them, to go to the Admirals house, whilst he rooke
care that no man came near the King. His Council was embraced; The Marquess
retiring to the Kings chamber, and the others, (as soon as their coaches came)
hurrying to the Admirals house, where causing it to be close shut up, and the
chamber opened, they saw the relation prove but too too true; there being not
any of them present, who by the place, persons and qualities of the dead,
comprehend not the case.

Having afterward examined the household, they understood of the Admirals
being there that night, accompanied with Reparata, and the rest, and how that
the slaves were not sithence seen, by whom they believed the Prince to be
betrayed, and so by the help of the rest murdered, by the Admiral. They sent
suddenly to the gates, where they understood that the Admiral, with eight
Companons all well horsed, went out at the gate of Castlemuni. They resolved to
send after him, and having to that end sent for the Count of Montereale,
General of the horse, and showed him the body of the Prince, they committed to
his charge what he was to do. The Count (who adored him living, and now being
dead, could not satisfy himself in bemoaning him) considering that the
present state of the business required somewhat else than tears, went on his
way most resolute to use all possible diligence to revenge his death. The Lords
of the Council in the mean time, (after they had taken such order, as was
requisite, touching the bodies of the Prince, and of the guilty Traitors)
returned to the Palace. But the Citizens having (I know not how) understood of
the accident, and telling it one unto another, were seen to shut up all their
shops in an instant, with lamentations so manifest, that the King perceiving
it, asked the Marquess, what was the matter, who answered him that he knew
not: but the King (seeing it more and more increase) bade him go call the
Prince, and learn what the matter was. Wherein, whilst the Marquess took on
him to obey him, there appeared in his presence the Privy Counselors, who
when the King saw come thronging so many together, he imagined that some great
disaster had happened; for all of them pitifully lamented, insomuch as the
President (who was to be the Speaker) could not utter a word; whereat the King
impatient, turning toward the Marquess, and seeing him make greater moan
than any of the rest; asked him angerly, if the King of Corsica were in Caleri,
or if the Kingdom were lost. My Sovereign Liege, (answered then the
President) would to God, I could bring you that news in exchange of this
other, a thousand times more woeful; for there might be hope to recover again
the Realm, whereas the loss that both you and the Kingdom have now
sustained, is irrecoverable. What can it then be? (replied the King) Is
Perosfilo dead? At which demand all of them kneeling down, and pitifully
lamenting him with grievous sobs, and mornefull cries, answered that he was.

The King hereat astonished, would have run toward the Lodgings of the
Prince, thinking to see him there: Whene the Queen (coming out thence,
accompanied with Eromena, with their heir hanging disorderly about their
ears, more like Bacchanals, or mad women than themselves) met him at a door,
full-but. The Queen strangely gazing on the standers by, with reiterated
words, cried out, Perosfilo? Where is he? where is my Son? Come, give him
me: withhold him not rom me, for I will have him.

This encounter was to the King, even as a fire which come near a dry tow-like
matter, fuming, and half consumed, puffs it up in a flame in an instant, for
seeing his wife and daughter in so strange a fashion, his spirits and courage
so failed him, as he sunk down to the ground. But the Queen without taking
any notice of him, (running about, while here, while there) continued in
calling out for her Son, till become all hoarse with crying, she held her
eyes, immoveably fixed where once she let fall her sight, without shedding a
tear.

Eromena (the mirror of beauty and Prudence) stood in that instant (with her
fair eyes concentrated) pale, and wan. She wept not, and yet she wept, for her
weeping were exclamations and sighs, she called on the beloved name of her
brother, she sought for him all over his Lodgings, and hehind the Tapistrie, as
if she had hoped to have found him there hidden.

The King was raised up from the ground, and laid in his bed, so would the
Ladies have likewise disposed of the Queen; but she (become frantike) ran up
and down the Palace, and round about the Lodgings, complaining of the heavens,
and cursing men; till she brought her self to that pass as she was not able
any more either to move or cry. The numerous company of Ladies, that
pitifully wept about her, had not been able to re-conduct her to her
Lodgings, if Eromena (fearing with her brother to lose also her mother) had not
with her presence and tears, importuned and persuaded her to retire her self.

It boots me not to tell you of the revolt of the City, when the corpse of the
Prince, were (about midnight) brought to the Palace.

The doleful Eromena, (considering how her father was, by reason of his great
grief fallen sick of a Fever, and her mother grown distracted of her
senses) was not therefore willing to let them know any thing, but went her
self with a few others, to veiw the body; but then, although all her vital
powers ran unto her heart; although all her force and virtues (whereof the
heavens were unto her so graciously liberal) united themselves together to
fortify her courage, yet could not all this save or sustain her spirits, and
almost her life from failing her at that instant: she grew pale, she swounded,
she fell dead, at least in all likelihood, and died she had indeed, if a spirit
more feeble had given shape and being to a less generous heart: In the end
(come to her self, and sitting by the corpse as she watered his breath-losse
face, with a fountain of her tears) she said:

Are these then the joys (Brother) which we expected of thee? Are these the
hopes that the world had of thee, and which with all reason is expected of thy
valor? Is this the flourishing age, by so short a space of life, so cruelly
cut off, to bring therewithal to an end with no less cruelty the lives of
those that brought thee into the world? why did not thy resplendent virtues
dazzle the eyes of him that slew thee, maugre the spectacles of envy? O cruel
stars! To what end served such and so great influences of beauty and
exquisite feature in a body peerlesse for prowess, and adorned with so divine
a soul, seeing a little blemish, an error (in youth so tender) so excusable
has caused and pro^ured the corruption and ruin of all those excellent
perfections, to give the whole world cause to lament the loss of them: yet are
they not lost, for what ascends from above must return to whence it came, so
as we have no cause to grieve for thy generous soul, but yet can we not choose
(as we are mortal) but lament the dissolution of the perfectest composure that
ever nature put together: neither can we without death choose but bewail thy
death, depriving us of the life, which from thy sweet life we received; for in
thee were indivisible all those graces, which the Graces participate not to
others, but in such measure as is requisite for the delight of humane kind. We
cannot choose but mourn, seeing our selves threatened at home and abroad, being
(since we are deprived of thee) without force and vigor: neither can we choose
but lament, when we behold the state of our drooping kingdom, which by thee
alone become once renowned and famous, returns (now that it is deprived of
thee, it is light and life) to it is former cloudinesse, and dim obscurity.
But if every one has cause to lament, why should I not then bewail thee with
an eternal lamentation; seeing I participate of all the general causes, and
have withal peculiar to my self alone, a particular cause, as being left, the
only Sister, of an only brother, taken from me suddenly unawares, and without
all reason? Here (overcome with extremity of grief, and being not able to
forbear) she flung her self upon him, whence as her Ladies endeavored to raise
her, she (turning toward them with a fierce and severe look) said unto them;
How unseasonable, unjust, and pitiless, is this pity of yours, that would
defraud so worthy a Prince of these funeral rites I owe him: Which if I
believed that I could better solemnize with my death, I would willingly do it?
Then (taking off the sword from the corpse side, and lifting up her eyes to
heaven) she proceeded. But I assure my self (my noble Brother) that I am not
the sacrifice which thou requirest: Wherefore if so be that thy divine ghost
does as yet wander or hover hereabout thy fair body, and that thou see our
grief, comfort us then, (we beseech thee) whilst I also comfort thee, and
assure thee that I will never rest, till I have executed just vengeance on him
that unjustly slew thee. Which said (girding her self with the sword) she
dried away her tears, and seeing there was no action to be hoped for of the
King her father, she caused the Council to come together, and (after a brief
consultation) commanded the soldiery to be mustred, resolving (at the return
of the Count of Montereale) to march in her own person to Sassari: most
assured that the kingdom would be on that part assaulted by King Epicamedo,
without whose privitie, the Admiral would never have undertaken to murder the
Prince her Brother.

The very same night she privately caused the corpse to be interred, reserving
the solemnizing of the funeral rites till her return, enjoying in so great
heaviness, one sole comfort, which was to see the unfeigned tears of the
people.

The Count of Montereale used all possible means to ore-take the Conspirators.
Albeit he perceived that he labored in vain, the pursued having gotten the
start of him both in time and riding: which he could not recover without
change of horses: and had therefore returned back, but that he hoped to block
them up, either in Sassari or Port Torre, or at least to chase them out of the
kingdom.

The day following he came to Montevero, where when the doleful news were
spread abroad, the lamentation was such, as you would have judged it to be an
effect of one only heart and spirit.

Now whilst the Count could imagine no possible means to overtake the Admiral
(who by that time might have reached to Sassari) he was informed how that there
was left behind him in that village, a slave of his together with a woman-slave
bruised and galled by riding, who (because she could not go by any other
means) had caused her self to be carried in a chair to the sea coast, to
take shipping, and that (if it pleased him to send after them) they might be
both overtaken by the way.

The Count, although he were weary, and his horses tired (having procured a
Guide) would needs personally pursue them. Neither rode he five miles, when as
he (ascending a hillocke) descried the she-slave in a chair, who (seeing the
horsemen) grew pale, and over-tane by the Count (who well knew her in the
Admirals house) she besought him to kill her. But he (thereby better assured
that she was the authresse of all the mischief) answered her; No, mischievous
and accursed Traitresse, thou shall not enjoy the happiness of dying by my
hand, it grieves me that there is no kind of death so cruel, as can equalize
thy base offense. And inquiring afterward for the slave, he understood by the
porters, that he was gone before to hire a bark; The Count therefore (leaving
the woman in safe hold) spurred amain to the sea-ward: but the slave (espying
him descending a little mountain) having already bespoken a Bark, imagined
that those horses came for him; wherefore although all alone without any
Mariners, who were gone to Bossa for provision, having got himself aboard the
Bark, he waied anchor, spread sails before the wind; whom, though most
ignorant of that profession, fear made so cunning, as he was gotten more than
two miles into the maine, ere the Count could gain the sea shore; and (which
was worse) there was not so much as one Bark with sails to be found at the
mouth of the river Thirsis, but only small fishing boats unfurnisht of all
things necessary: Whereat this Count was ready to eat his fingers. But whilst
he sent for a Bark to Pisanco, that of the slaves was in a short time borne
away with the wind, so as although they had made after her, yet the night would
have taken her out of the sight of such as pursued her.

The woman slave was sent back again to Caleri: and onwards went the Count to
Sassari, when finding it shut, and calling to the Centrees, he was answered
with a shower of arrows; wherewith were killed eight of his horses, and many
more hurt and wounded: Whereupon, perceiving the mischief to be greater that
he took it for (in that the subjects maintained with open Rebellion, the
wicked actions of their Lord) he retired himself with all the speed he could;
and having sent Scours to scour the field, he received intelligence that the
King of Corsica in person, was passing over into the Island, with a great army:
considering therefore that his stay there could be but disadvantagious (his
horses being already all spoild) he determined to advertize thereof the King,
and to retire himself to the first secure place.

In the mean time, the Princess, who only sat alone at the Helm of this
weather-beaten ship, (having left part of the Lords of the Council at Caleri,
having given order for the marching onwards of the foot Companies) followed
them with two thousand horse, her self being armed at all pieces, and mounted
on a great Courser, having first commanded the she-slave to be sarely locked up
in the bottom of a Tower; by means of whose confession came to be known all
that I have told you: and because we shall come shortly to Sardegna, you shall
there understand the sequel hereof, and (shall perhaps) see with your own
eyes, the generous actions of the fairest and stoutest Princess the world
enjoyes.

Polimero, (who with twice so much sweetness had drank of Eromena's
perfections, by how much compassion he had listened to the Tragic story of so
worthy a Prince) thinking himself not as yet fully satisfied in mind, desired
to know how the Princess came to have the courage to practice, and use the
handling of arms, an exercise not ordinary to her sex, and though she had
naturally such a spirit and will, yet how came she to acquire an apt gesture
and dexterity ot supply the weakness of her sex, when occasion required?
Whereto the Pilot smiling, answered; Think not (Sir) that the resolution of
our Princess is void of reason, or insufficient to accomplish whatsoever she
takes in hand; I confess it is a thing extraordinary to her sex, but not to
her: for know, that whilst she was yet a girl, and had no other brother, than
the unfortunate Prince, she even then, loved him, and he her so heartily
dearly, as their fraternity became converted to a friendly society, most part
of their time spent they together, neither had the one any conversation in his
exercise more dear than his Sisters, nor the other any company more
conformable to her inclination than her Brothers: whose childish games and
delights, being (such as those of all Princes should be) representations of
battles of arms and horses, she came (by the shadow) to such knowledge of the
things real, and substantial, that there is not a Knight can, either in
managing a courser, observe better his times and motions, or break a Lance
with a seemelier grace, or bandish a Sword with greater cunning or dexterity,
than this our Princess.

Continued had they on this discourse (so much was Polimero therewith
delighted) had it not been broken off by the drawing near of the Bark, by
them a little before descried; whereunto seeing no body therein, they drew
near, and one of the Mariners boording her, found therein a man stretched all
along (by the pumpe) covered with many clothes, and gasping for life; they
(pitying to see him in such a plight, and curious to know the occasion
thereof) began to question him, but he opening his eyes a little, and then
closing them again, made them no answer; they hereupon (seeing him not any way
wounded) thought that perhaps he wanted sustenance, so much the rather, when
having searched the Bark, they found there, neither meat, nor drink;
therefore gave they him a little wine, and a while after a little more, till
they saw him begin to recollect his spirits, and recover some vigor; and
withal (unclosing his eyes) mutter out some faint words, so as having made him
a soppe (with the pith of bread sokened in Spanish wine) he willingly are it,
whereby he recovered such force, as turning up his face, he discovered himself
to be the Admirals slave, of the Pilot very well known; who was therefore the
gladdest man in the world: yet without making any show thereof, he commanded
them to use all attendant diligence to restore him to himself, which they so
performed, as in a short time he began to speak. The Pilot, seeing him
restored to his disposition, caused him to be transported over into his ship,
and the Bark to be towed, then after he had given him leave a good while to
repose himself, he inquired of him, what he was? and by what accident he came
to be so left alone? He (with his eyes inclined downwards) began to tell them
a tale, without either beginning or end, and so by studying for matter, the
more disclosed himself to be what he was, neither had they gotten ought else
out of him, had not the Pilot (all disguise laid aside) said unto him, Art thou
Andropodo, and know not him, prostrating himself, kneeled down before him,
saying, Pardon me (my Lord) for truly I knew you not in that habit you now
wear; and sithence I am fallen into your hands, I beseech you rather to kill
me, than bring me back to Sardegna; For albeit I am no ways guilty of the
Prince his death, nevertheless, I assure my self that because I am the
Admirals slave, my innocence cannot save me: No more of this (answered the
counterfeit Pilot) but tell us how comes it, that thou have continued so long
at sea? have thou landed any where? Whereunto Andropodo (all quaking) made
answer, that about some forty days, sithence he embarked himself, during
which time he had suffered all the miseries to a body humane insufferable, that
the wind ever kept him (for the most part) in the maine sea, that sometimes he
saw land, and had a good wind to come almost a shore, but that it changed in a
moment, and that he (not having any experience in governing the sails, and
withal being all alone) had escaped in many tempests the danger of drowning a
thousand times; but that his ill fortune had saved him, to make him die a death
more miserable; that when he came aboard, he found in the Bark a little bread,
which lasted him not two days. That on the Sardegnan coast, he met with some
Fishermen, and (a little farther that way) a ship of Greece, that furnished
him with bisquet and a barrel of water, which he had wanted three days
before. That the principal cause of his roving up and down the sea, was
sleep, because the Bark abandoned of her Rother, ran whither the wind
carried her, so losing (whilst he slept) the way he had gained waking; and
beside, being in the midst of the sea, and not knowing on which part the land
lay, he believed, that he ran always in a round, going perhaps nothing at
all, or very little wide from the same place. And finally, that his spirit
failing him, he was stretched along, expecting death, in manner as they found
him. And being asked why he embarked not himself in the ship that sold him the
victuals, he answered, that they would not take him aboard, for fear of the
plague, whereof those of the East were very scrupulous, it being not lawful
for them, to commerce or traffic without their patent of health, from the
place whence they parted, with the precise number of the persons a-boord them.

So be it a-Gods name (answered the Pilot) they have well done in not taking
thee with them, to leave thee to me, who will bring thee where thou shall
receive the reward thy treasons merit. Which said, he caused him to be bound,
and set fast in the lowest part of the ship, to deprive him thereby of the
means of doing himself any harm.

Polimero then (turning toward the Pilot, and smiling) said; Sir, you have
hitherto represented the personage of one, whom you are not: I pray you
vouchsafe to favor me so much as fully to unmaske your self; seeing this
Villain has almost wholly discovered you.

The Knight (who till then had caused himself to be called Pilot) answered, I
will obey you Sir, knowing you for such as may command me; for be pleased I
pray you to know, that if you believe your self masked as well as I, you
entertain then an opinion that deceives you, you having not so soon set your
foot a shipboord, but that I knew you for what you are.

My name is Eterossilo, and am Marquess of Chia, a place on the sea coast on
this part of Sardegna, bordering toward Afsrique: I was the Prince his
servant, to whose memory I am so much indebted, as that I shall never more
content my self in that I can no longer serve him. And as soon as (by the
means of the conductors back of the she-slave) the flight of this Villain
was known; I resolved to go to sea, (my heart telling me that I should find
him out) having very well known him in the house of the Admiral, his master.
I romed of purpose up and down this sea, almost a month, without being any
thing the nearer of finding what I sought for, until (assailed by a great
tempest) I was constrained to save my self in the haven of Birsa Where to
avoid the being questioned of the affairs of Sardegna (whereof I was
doubtful, whether I might without danger relate any thing in neighboring
countries) I charged every one to call me by the counterfeite name of Pilot.
And when I saw your servant enquiring out for passage in some ship, for two
persons, and two horses; I know not what spirit prompt me (knowing him to be
your servant) that he sought them for you, (putting then his hat off in
reverent manner, he proceeded) which are the Infant Polimero, worthy son of
the puissant King of Mauritania; wherein I thought my self exceeding
fortunate, judging that in our tribulations, the gods had touched the heart of
a youthful Prince, (so like both in the virtues of the mind, and beautiful
proportions of body to our deceased Prince) to come to the defense of Sardegna;
so as it was no difficult matter for us to accord for the passage. And now (my
Lord) behold us both unmasked. Here, as he would have kneeled down before
Polimero, he taking him by the hand, besought him not to discover him; telling
him how he would (as unknown) make one in those wars; moved so to do, for
the interest common to all Princes against Traitors, for the revenge due to the
virtues of Prince Perossilo, and for the valor sake of a Princess so
renowned, as Eromena. And this was indeed the occasion of breaking off his
intended voyage into Ireland.

Within two days then after, they landed safely in Chia, to the great pleasure
and content of both parties.

The end of the First Book of BIONDI'S EROMENA.
CAVALIER GIO: FRANCESCO BIONDI HIS EROMENA
The Second Book.
PRINCE Metaneone furrowed the surging waves, variously affected with cont^nt
and grief; both tormented with the remembrance of his offense, and comforted
with the hope of finding out his Brother, to amend and recompense past defects,
with contrary effects. The Count of Bona, exceeding consolated in seeing him so
altered, and indeed partially obliged to rejoice at the love of the Brothers,
(as one who next the King his Father, claimed greatest interest in Polimero,
for having bred him up from his infancy) confirmed him in his good intentions,
being (as he already assured himself) not counterfeit, in that he made choice
of him for a companion in his voyage, to be a testimony of his actions.

The weather was clear, whereat all the world seemed to joy, except the
Galley-slaves, who, for being becalmed, were forced to ply their oars.

The Galley scowred away amain course, seeming for her riches and curiosity
of workmanship, to be some rare enchanted piece of excellency. She had her
poope curiously carved with diverse Histories of finest graven work, gilt all
over with gold; her pavement of Jewels, and richest mother of pearl; her hulke
painted over with sparkling vermilion; her oars of the same, but done
pompously from the midst downwards with golden flames; her beak, railes, and
window-linternes proportioned to the devise of her poop; her mast and
loope-holes gracefully adorned with banners, and flags of cloth of gold: on her
foresaile flag-staffe hung of the same stuff a goodly streamer, of such
length, as it reached down to touch the very waves; her three lanthornes of
mavelous invention, glittering with gold, afforded the greater luster,
because of the crystal, cut diamondwise; and artificially in-laid in their
footstals, cubes and columns: so as she seemed to such, as saw her a far
off, (both in shape and colors,) a fiery Dragon with scales and wings of gold.

Two days sailed the Prince, without seeing any kind of vessel sail before
him, on the third he descried a galley, which espying that of the Prince,
strove to gain the shore. But doubting to be overtaken, she made off toward
the West, thinking to escape by the benefit of the night: The Prince taking her
for some Pirates ship (as she was indeed) commanded the Galley-slaves of his
Royal, to row amain, and they (encouraged with hope of booty) made her
scour little less than her full length between one stroke and the other.

Twenty miles off, were the Pirates descried by the little top-saile of their
top-gallant; and the Prince making forward with extraordinary swiftness,
(maugre all her force of oars) over-tooke her; whose Commanders seeing no
means to escape, resolved to defend themselves, fearing to lose the great
riches they had stolen before, and purposing to make head by tacking about,
they could not do it so soon, but that the Prince his Galley, running her
full course, bore upon theirs at her poope; whence passing over her prow, she
plunged her up to the mast in the sea; but the vessel being good, got up a
floate again, receiving thereby no other harm, than the spoiling of some
battlements, with the death and bruising of such as were so unfortunate, as to
be on that side of her: In the same encounter, were many of the Prince his
oars broken, a loss not recompensed with the gain of the Galley, which with
no great pains, and less bloodshed, fell into his hands. Then would he know
what they were, and whence they came, whereto one of them answering for all,
said, That they were of Callo of Mauritania, and that going with a Galley of
theirs, to get some booty, toward the coast of Catalogna, they were by an
East wind driven to land on the strand of Dragonera, a little Island of
Maiorica; where having understood how that from Porto Colombo to the West part
of the Island, was to set out a Galley, sent from the King to his daughter; they
made the best speed they could to rigge and dress up theirs, which with
beating on the shore was almost all over cracked, and bruised: and that, having
set themselves in ambush behind the cliffe of Cabrera, they had assailed her
unawares, and (not far off the haven) taken her, with the death of many, for
that being constrained to leave behind them their own Galley (which was unfit
for any service) they had no room on this other alone to set aboard both all
their company and the slaves too; And that yet for all they had killed none, but
the more unserviceable, sparing the Knights, Ladies, family and servants of the
Princess; with an intention to go thence to the rock, where she was her
self (to them very well known,) and thence to take her prisoner, whom they
meant not to set free ere they had received for her an exceeding great ransom.

Feign would the Prince see those prizes, and passing over therefore into their
Galley, he found there certain women, and among those the Countess of
Palomero, (the Princess her Governesse) with four Ladies of honor, and among
the men six Knights.

The women rather dead than alive, as soon as they saw the Prince, kneeled
down before him, who courteously entertaining them, accompanied them in
grieving for their misfortunes, yet joying in that he was the means of their
deliverance, he prayed them to acquaint him with their voyage, and the occasion
thereof

The Countess (somewhat comforting her self, and assured by the Royal
presence of the Prince, whom by many circumstances she thus judged to be such)
said, My Lord, we, and those Knights are all Vassals and servants of the King
of Maiorica, who having but one only daughter (which is one of the fairest of
the world) and she retired into Asrique; sent us thither with all provision
necessary to sojourne with her in that Country; but scarce had we issued out
of the Port, when we were taken by these Pirates. The Prince (causing her
(though unwilling) to fit her down with all the other Ladies) curious to
understand the manner of the case, besought her to relate it him minutely and
particularly, saying, that (being now freed) it would serve them to shorten and
drive away the time. At which word they would all of them have kissed his
hands, which he not permitting, but profering them all further courtesies
possible, the Countess (respectively thanking him with the terms of Noble
gratitude) thus began.

Two years are now expired, sithence the King of Sardegna, treated of a
Marriage between the Prince his Son, and the Princess Eromilia our
Mistress; which was concluded on, to the great content of both parties, for
the commodities of commerce, and neighborhood, but much more for the rare
qualities of the bridecouple, being such, as (I believe) whosoever had searched
over all the world, could not have found out such another pair; for Perosfilo
Prince of Sardegna (besides the valor of his person) was by nature endowed
with parts so excellent for beauty, feature, comeliness and grace, as hardly
meet all in one man alone. And for Eromilia our Princess, I Will not only say
that who so has seen her, believes her to be for beauty matchless; but I
will also, without error, affirm her to be such, as needs not (in that
regard) the favorable judgment of any.

The marriage then concluded, with hope of a speedy performance, she was by
her hopeful Bridegroom visited by letters and presents, whereunto she
reciprocally corresponded, building a most ardent affection on the presumption
of being his wife, and upon two of his pictures, the one limmed and painted,
the other made of stuck, (this later, fully and proportionably representing his
natural lineaments:) It fell out afterward, whilst the marriage for more
than two years was (upon some unknown occasion) deferred, that the
unfortunate Prince was by the Marquess of Sassari (Admiral of Serdegna) in
the night time found a bed with his wife, and by him therefore slain, which
news spread abroad in Maiorica, manifested the cause of so long putting off
the marriage; which nevertheless was not sufficient to take away from our
Princess all occasion of grief, as it had done to any other: whereas she no
sooner heard it, than she sunk down to the ground senselesle, and
breathless, so as there was much ado to restore her to her spirits, that had
suddenly forsaken her. Impossible it is to express the extremity of her
lamentation, suffice it, that two days after she went her ways, whither no
body knew, except one very aged and trusty Priest of hers, who also (until he
was a good way of the Island) never knew any thing of her resolution, (which
was) to retire her self from the world, and never more to think of father and
mother, realm, subjects, or ought else save only on her dead husband, whom
because she could not own living, she resolved to enjoy now dead and gone,
spending a coin quite contrary to his, both in stamp and metal: for whereas
he had obscured the purity of his customs, by falsifying his faith (for love
of another woman) before he had married her; she on the contrary, (though now a
freewoman, and he dead and buried) would reserve her self constantly his
spouse, resolved never to change her resolution for any man's sake in the world.

The good old man could not with any arguments persuade her to return; he
showed how she (abiding in Maiorica) might accomplish her intention, telling
her how that to go wander about to seek places of abode in strange countries,
was neither commendable nor secure for a woman of ordinary condition, much
less for a Princess, ordained, both by birth and desert, to a royal
dignity; moreover that in so doing she could not please the gods; to whom she
pretended to devote her self, within the limitation of whose service were not
comprehended the disobedience and cruelty to parents-ward, who, without doubt,
would for this occasion die with grief; that her reason of neglecting her
parents for divine love, was not in this case approueable, but that she should
and ought to understand it rightly, in a wholesome construction, which was not
to neglect their service for any affect of blood, which ought not to be held in
equal esteem with them, who admit of no comparatives, much less of
superlatives in their love; and that under such a pretense to abandon our
parents, (especially grown aged, desolate, and charged with a family) was
rather to displease, than to serve the gods, who by the law they gave us by
nature, require at our hands, reverence and obedience toward our parents,
being strong, and vigorous, and pity, comfort and sustenance, being become
weak and impotent; and that then the eldest child ought, together with the
family, sustain and undergo the charge and burden of parents; and if this
were the true meaning and manner of discharging on's duty, even in private
families, how much rather should it be observed in hers, that was Royal,
wherein she being an only child, had forsaken her parents (grown now aged)
and with them also the whole kingdom being her family, which being by her
means made an Orphan, lay subject to the tyranny of whosoever would oppress
it? Besides, that this resolution of hers sprang not from any true affection
she had of serving the gods, but from a despair and discontent, for seeing her
self deprived of such a husband, whose company she hoped would have endowed
her with a blessed life; which effect she despairing to find in any other, had
suffered her self to be beguiled by her evil Genius, who persuaded her under
the color of pity, to become cruel against father, subjects, and her own
self.

But to all these arguments, the good old man found her ears deaf: for she
accompanied with one only Damsel, and two of her ancient servants (by whose
means she had found out that vessel, and put therein many things of her
dearly esteemed, but espepecially the statue of the deceased Prince) passed
over into Affrique; where landing at Velez, she bought of the Lord of that
place, a Rock, which she then caused to be named Pegno della morte (or the
pledge of death:) whereupon she caused immediately a Chapel to be built, with
an intention to erect afterward a Temple, by this time begun, where she
intended to finish her days. By the Priests persuasion, she wrote to the King
her father, to rid him from the anxietie and vexation of mind; wherewith he
was troubled because of her departure.

Her father (somewhat consolated in seeing the evil was not so great as he
believed it to be, and hoping that time would alter her mind*) being informed
of the situation of the place, and of the neighboring inhabitants, would needs
send her (although he knew it to be against her will) all her household, to the
end he might therewith also furnish her with company sufficient to defend her,
from such as might go about to take her into their power; and with these sent
he also some Masons, who under pretext of building the Temple, might fortify
and assure the place with strong wall-workes, which reared up on the accessible
parts of the rock, might be defended of a few persons: Howbeit before he sent
us, he would know of every one of us, whether we were willing to go or no; but
there was not any one who was not willing to dwell in the fire, much less on a
rock, in the service of so gracious and amiable a Mistress. Whereupon, the
King having caused this galley to be rig'd up, and put in a readiness, and set
aboard therein all kind of household-stuffe hangings, and furnitures necessary
for a new house, besides a good sum of money; we departed, when on a sudden
(ere we could put our selves in defense) we were taken by these Pirates.

The Prince (astonished at a resolution so strange in such a Princess, and
enamoured of her extolled beauty, whereof he had also formerly heard talk of)
bethought himself that he might conveniently now go see her, the way to go
where she was abiding, being the selfsame course he was to hold. Wherefore
(after he had thanked the Countess for the relation she imparted him) he told
them all that (so it were not discommodious unto them,) they might without any
fear abide still in that Galley, because of the great number of men aboard
his, and wished them to see they had again all their things (as well those of
every particular person, as also those of their Princess) restored them,
whereof whatsoever was wanting, he would see by all means found out; promising
them further, that their way being the same with his, he would not leave them,
until he had landed them safely in the place where resided the Princess,
whose hands he (conformable to the duty of a knight) was desirous to kiss,
whereat they all kneeled before him on the ground, and to the Prince raising
them up, the Countess, after she had rendered him convenient thanks, thus spoke
on.

My Lord, in telling you the History of my Mistress, I forgot one essential
point thereof, which is, that after her resolution of going her ways, and
leading that kind of life she now lives, she made a third resolution, more
strange than all the rest, which was, To remain a whole year unseene of any
mankind in the world, except such as were admitted to serve her: so that the
King himself (her father) (desirous to come in person to bring her back
again) chused rather (as the lesser evil) not to come, condemning that small
time to the grief of his daughter, who having experimented the bitterness
thereof, and vented the extremity of her heaviness, would (as he hoped)
become more supple and pliant to wholesome persuasions. And of this (My Lord) I
thought good to inform you, to the end that to you being so courteous, it
might not seem a discourtesie meant toward you, when you encounter an effect
contrary to your desert. The Prince somewhat amazed hereat, courteously took
his leave of them, sending the Pirates, being his subjects to the Countess, to
be by her chastised, as she thought good, who being importuned and pressed to
accept them, and foreseeing the use and employment her Princess might have of
slaves, caused them to be put to the chains, abhorring to chastise them with
any other punishment, though they well deserved it.

In the three days following, the Prince encountered with many vessels, of whom
he could hear no news of her he sought after. But now drawing near to the
Pegno della morte (which after a long progress of time, I know not if by
corruption of language or otherwise, it came to be called the Pagnone) he
overtooke a ship of Sardegna, which in that she came not from Birsa made him
somewhat pensive: whereupon the master of the ship said, (My Lord) if you
desire to hear any news of the Sardegnan ship, that came from Birsa, I have
here one can satisfy you, for I met her in her return, and she belonged to
the Marquess of Chia, of whom I obtained the favor of getting this young man
(my brother) from aboard her; who will relate unto you, what he knows, to
satisfy you in what you shall please to require of him. The Prince and Count
both (having questioned him particularly touching the passengers aboard that
ship) comprehended by the qualities of the horse, and of the squire; but more
probably by the features of the youth and respect borne him by the Marquess,
that without doubt, that same was Polimero, whereof they causing him to relate
the same again, were yet more than fully assured that it could be no other
than he. Metaneone therefore the gladdest man now that ever he was all his life
time, resolved (as soon as he had accompanied those people to their journies
end, and seen the Princess) to steer thence to Sardegna.

Arrived at the Pegno, he would not come a shore for fear of displeasing the
Princess; but calling one of her Knights, whom in that small time his good
liking reputed confident, he said unto him;

My Lord Perseno, one thing that I desire most in this world, is to serve your
Lady the Princess, it grieves me that I may not be permitted personally to
offer her my service to such an honest and houourable end, as befits a Knight
of my quality; seeing that her vow forbids me it: It would grieve me extremely
to part without seeing her, I Will therefore entreat you to further me to the
accomplishment of my desire. And seeing she is resolved to see no man, I will
not bind you to an impossibility, but only to bring me to see her without
letting her know it; wherein I promise you not to stray from your directions.

Perseno (that held himself obliged to the Prince, and well conceived the
honesty of his intentions,) made him this answer.

My Lord, so much I hold my self obliged unto you, for the favor you show me
in commending me, that if I owed you not that great obligation, (as do all the
rest in general, and withal the Princess her self, my Mistress) yet were
this a sufficient tie to oblige me eternally; howbeit, I beseech you, give me
leave to tell you, that I cannot as yet absolutely promise you any thing in
this purpose, having not as yet seen the Princess, nor knowing how she lives,
neither am I acquainted with the place whereby I might make use of such
occasions as would be requisite in such a business: but if you please to give
me time to see her, and to discover and observe her manner of life, I promise
you then, that I will endeavor to obey you, to the utmost of my power,
assuring my self, that you will not command me any thing wherein I may not
serve you without blemishing my honor.

The Prince well satisfied with the reasons of Perseno, told him that he would
willingly attend, and withal would not stray from his directions. Afterward,
having sent for the Countess, he told her he was glad that she was safely
arrived to her Lady and Princess, to whom though he could not be permitted to
come to kiss her hands (as his duty bound him) he hoped nevertheless to be
favored with some command of hers, ere his departure, which would be about
three days thence, during which time he had need to repose his Galley-slaves,
that he might then after hold on a straight course to Sardegna, where he hoped
to find out his Brother.

The Lady (who was of right noble behavior) answered him; that she found her
self confused in the confused being and state of her Mistress, for that she
well knew, that to suffer him to depart thence, without being for his noble
favors, courteously thanked by her herself, was no otherwise than to satisfy
a great obligation with the coin of a greater ingratitude, and therefore
besought him to be pleased to excuse with the perfection of his courtesy, the
imperfection of the times, and to assure himself that she (for her part) would
not fail to manifest to the Princess, to the King her father, and to all the
world, how deeply, and for how great a good turn she remained engaged to his
Highness. Whereunto the Prince replied, that he deemed himself most happy, in
being so fortunate, as to happen to do so slender a service for so worthy a
Princess, for which he pretended no other guerdon, than the favor of her
commands, that he might more effectually serve her, and so took his leave,
abiding below without offering either to go up himself, or permit any other
to ascend the Rock.

The Princess (in the mean time) according to the custom of melancholy
folks (who either stand stone-still, or else are never quiet nor content with
any place) roaming up and down, (now here, now there) about the upper part of
the rock, vouchsafed not once to move herself at the news, which was brought
her of the splendour descried afar off, although it made toward, and drew
near that place; till seeing the Galley appear from under the cliffe, and
marvelling at a piece so rich and gallant, she could not choose (for all her
grief) but behold it, yet fretting with her self for giving her senses way,
to taste of the least content, (contrary to her resolution made, of never
taking delight in any thing) she returned to her lodgings, become (in respect
of its garnishment, situation, and solitariness) ghastly and hideous to behold;
she could not believe that they were company sent her from her father, for well
knew she that his Arcenall affoorded no such Galleyes. And whilst she, curious
to know whose it was, was angry with her self for being curious; desirous to
rest naked of any other affect, than of grief alone, Gierofando the Priest
came unto her, with news, that the Countess of Palomera was at the foot of
the rock (with all those of her household, sent her from her father)
accompanied with a great Prince.

Eromilia (doubtful in her mind, what she should do, and wrought on by the
tenderness of her affections, being not altogether indulgent, nor yet
altogether repugnant to her natural inclinations) knew not whether she should
rather joy for the coming of the Countess, (her Governesse) or fret her
self, that any Prince would (contrary to her deliberation) proffer to come to
that place. Nevertheless, the stock of her natural prudence remaining yet
livily, after being awhlle amazed to see her household come unsent for,
imagining the cause thereof, which displeased her not, in that she began
already to conceive the danger she incurred in, by living so alone, she made no
other answer, than that the Countess was welcome, and that she only should
be admitted to come to her. But that for strangers, he well knew himself, that
she could not be seen of her own father, and therefore referred to him the
satisfying of that Prince in that behalf.

Whilst then with crooked and tortuous interrogations Gierofando endeavored to
tell her what she required not; thither came the Countess, whom the Priest
went to meet, conducting her in, all-alone. The tears (here shed) were in such
abundance, as there was not for a good while any room left for speech: but as
soon as any was, the witty Lady (knowing that the time served but to things
general) presented her with the letters of the King and Queen, giving her
withal succinct news of the houses, of such things as were sent her by her
father, and of the love of the family. The Princess (mollified in affection)
would needs see them all, who came one by one to kiss her hands, waxen so
moist with the tears of every one of them, as she could not restrain hers.

The Countess then afterward related unto her, how they had been taken by
Pirates, and freed by the Prince of Mauritania, extolling the humanity of his
behavior, his Royal manners, and the features of his person; acquainting her
further of the desire he had to kiss her hand, or at least, to receive from
her some command, ere his departure thence.

The Princess answered, she was sorry she could nor might not see him, to
acknowledge the obligation she owed him. But hoped, that (he being a courteous
Knight) would accept of her excuses, in stead of more essential reasons. With
which embassage, to satisfy him in that behalf; she willed there should be
sent him some Knight (in her name) such as should to the Countess seem
fittest.

The Countess having observed in their voyage, the affectionate inclination
the Prince had showed toward Perseno, caused him to be called in, to whom the
Princess said.

Perseno, the Countess has told me what great favor, both I and all you have
received at the hands of the Prince of Mauritania, and how by his means have
been saved, both your lives and liberties. If I were now, as heretofore I have
been, I would endeavor with my own mouth to assure him, how highly I esteem
his favors; but I being now no more my self, am (among other defects)
disinabled herein (which at this present inwardly grieves me) my present estate
being more capable of receiving, than in doing courtesies; and seeing (because
of my vow) I may not see any man, I cannot therefore content my self, in
partly satisfying so great a service.

Then (wiping off her tears which the imagination of her melancholy made her
power out in abundance) she further said.

I can tell you no more, you know my mind, and therewithal the condition of
my hard fortune, you shall therefore with your speech, supply the defect of
mine. And because the place is not furnished with any thing worth the
presenting him, nor my self stored with any thing to honor him withal, you
shall endeavor to assure him of the grief I conceive thereof Afterward, when
she had opened her fathers letter, she found it thus said.

Only and beloved daughter, by your absence have I obscurely ghessed, and by
your letters clearly understood of the strange resolution by you undertaken,
so that if I knew you not well, or believed not that I knew you more than
passing well, I know not what I could think of you; for first, for the loss
of one thing in hazard or uncertain, and which might well not be (that is,
your husband) you have despised many things certain, and which could not choose
but be; and such am I, your mother, our subjects and kingdom. And albeit the
gods have endued you with a spirit transcending the ordinary, nevertheless I
believe for a certain, that if a man would at this present demand your reason,
why you have so done, you would answer him with I cannot tell, and therefore
the first essence that was in you is necessarily corrupted, seeing the actions
thereon depending are corrupted: for although it were granted, that the Prince
of Sardegna had been already your husband, and that the possession of his
person had redoubled your love, yet what reason should move you to grieve for
him in such a fashion, as that because you cannot enjoy him, you will not enjoy
the world? Nay, though even this were also granted you, yet who will grant you,
that you may live, and not live to the world? If then you ought to make use of
the world, then ought you doubtless to exchange a Cliffe for the Island
Baleari, which ought to be so much the worthier of your ashes, by how much the
nearer they are to the tombs of those you love so well: And though your
judgment were so unequal, as to judge, that you ought for the place where you
are, leave the place where you should be, and that you may live, and yet not
live to the world: yet tell me (I pray you) what reason, what law, or what god
have ever heard grant or allow such injustice, offense, or cruelty, as you, an
only daughter, use toward me your father, that never gave you any occasion
therefore? Which if you had no reason to have done, although I had used you
ill, what cause or color have you then for it, knowing that I esteemed you not
only as a daughter, but as mine own heart, you being withal even in my
life's time (excepting the title) Sovereign Queen of my people? In that you
loved him, that was to be your husband, it is a sign of a good and laudable
nature, I blame you not therefore; but to have so loved him, as because you
cannot love him any longer, you will not love either me, or any other, you
shall find this to be an obstinate contradiction of nature: You say, you are
retired, because you would not be interrupted in your grief; Truly if nature
were as constant as she is variable in our affections, then had you wisely
deliberated, and I would have therefore commended you; for if a man could
shun all griefs for the price of one grief alone, though the same were most
violent, doubtless he ought to purchase it at any rate, because it is
impossible that it can of its nature last long: and passions pass away even as
pleasures do, though not so soon, which though they did not, yet pains,
abstractions, and businesses, but (above all things) time (extenuating it by
little and little) would at length reduce it to nothing. Whence it proceeds,
that who so believes to prefix and give him^selfe a law for his life, founded
upon a running grief, imagining it to be everlasting (as you have done) such
an one does not only deceive himself; but also (as soon as his understanding
is cleared from the cloud of passion) he first repents himself thereof, and
then looks in the face of his own ignorance, which instructs him how humane
nature is changeable in all things, and yet rather in love, than in hatred. But
let us suppose it be not so, and let us grant, that you may be in time
possessed, if not of a greater grief, at least of a more worthy resolution,
occasioned by some danger of your honor, of my death, of the loss of your
subjects, and of many other accidents which cannot be imagined: Tell me, which
of them would you judge more worthy the entertaining, the first, or the last?
That which touches you very near, or that which nothing at all concerns you?
That, whereto you (applying the remedy) may bring to nothing, or that, which
(being irremediable) can receive no other being than that of your imagination?
But yet, this is not all, it is a thing ordinary for one evil to produce many
others. Your unreasonable grief may beget desperation, and desperation the
loathing of all things; hence sprung your disobedience, your stealing away,
your new course of life, and finally your vow of depriving your self of your
self, and of seeing you, every man (my self not excepted.) If this be the
ladder to climb up to heaven, and the way to please the gods, as you pretend,
then would I think that humane actions were to them indifferent, and that
their favor might be acquaired as well by working iniquity, as by doing good
and virtuous deeds. Perceive you not, alas, what opinions your actions manifest
you to hold; (which is) to form by degrees this monstrous, horrid and
blasphemous consequence? If you had a desire to serve the gods, how then to
marry? Or will you, that I bear something with your love (truly lawful, and
in its limits virtuous?) well, I am so content; but what hinders you to serve
the gods, abiding at home in your own house? Are Maiorica and Minorica not to
your liking, for being more spacious and fairer than your Pegno della morte?
And why so I pray you? Have the gods (perhaps) such eyes as we? Or respect they
more the outward appearance than the inward realitie? Think you that they
esteem more an erected Temple, than a contrire heart? No surely, we may as
well serve the gods in our delicious and sumptuous palaces, as offend them in
Caves and De^^rts: yet can you not say that you want such, because you have the
Cabrera and Dragonera, whither you might have retired your self with greater
reason; with greater (I say) in that where you now are, you are deprived of all
safety: possessing in your person and quality, and carrying with you so many
silent invitations, as might tempt all such to endeavor to have you in their
power, as shall come to know, how that you being beautiful, a Princess, and
heiresse to the Crown, are retired alone without any guard, to a Rock not
defended otherwise than by winds, the Sunbeames, and the injury of the
weather: yet your misfortune would be far less (though nevertheless
exceeding great) if you happened to fall into the hands of a Prince; but if
fortune should make you a prey of thieves and Pirates, What would then become
of you? For such would sell you and make you of a free woman a slave, and of a
Mistress a servant; all which is (you will say) nothing to a mind resolutely
indifferent. But can you find in your heart to rank among those indifferent
things your honor and virginity? Consider how you are environed with most
potent Kings, if any one of them had a desire to take you away, I see not how
you could defend your self from them; which if they enterprized only to
deprive you of your widdowhood, it would p^ove (...) great ill hap: But how are
you assured that they will not ^ake you first away, and then (under the
pretense of having you) impudently deprive me both of Realm and life? There
are now wars in Sardegna, which by all reason expects aid from us: If
Ep^camedo King of Corsica become Lord thereof, (as I doubt he will, he (being a
lover of beauty) has courage enough to claim interest in yours, seeing he is
already wroth at the Princess Eromena, and is a man like enough to aspire
(with the i^corporation of Sardegna) to the dominion of all the other Islands,
and of ours also together with your person. And if you be not here, what
resolution can I make; fearing always, that I shall need reserve for your
rescue such soldiers as I should send to succor Sardegna? No other persuasions
(daughter) will I use toward you: only I pray you so to strippe your self of
your passion, as being freed therefrom, you may partly judge of things as other
times you have done. I will not thereto compel you (although I might;) but
will in some things dispense with your grief, which I pray you endeavor the
best you can to shorten. In the mean time (for the shunning of the imminent
dangers of your person) I herewithall send you men, and money, to the end that
you might, to save your self from death, block your self up in your Pledge
of death. I send you all your household, because all of them would needs come
serve you, notwithstanding all recompense that I (without service) offered to
each of them in particular. But above all (I pray you) honor the Countess of
Palomera, and esteem her as a mother.

Much was the Princess astonished at the reasons of this letter, especially
when she more lively considered the danger, wherein she stood, wherefore she
resolved, as soon as her husbands funeral rites were solemnized, to wall
about the rock on the parts of its ascent, being every where else so fortified
by nature, as it needed not to be doubted of. Perseno in the interim joyful
for the commandment he had received, went to present the Prince with his
embassage, who (after corresponding of affectionate discourses) thus said unto
him. And must I then (my kind friend) depart hence without seeing your Lady
the Princess? I much doubt it (answered Perseno) unless you would vouchsafe
to abase your self to do one thing I have thought of; without the which it is
impossible that any man in the world come to the sight of her: And (being
demanded what that was) he proceeded, saying,

Two things my Mistress intends to do; the one is the Dedication of her
Chapel, for the celebrating of sacrifice; the other, the solemnization of
Prince Pirosfilo's funeral, when (among other ceremonies) she will, that all,
as well her Knights as Squires, be clothed (conformable to the custom of our
Country in the like occasions) in a mourning garment with a Cappuccio or hood
which covers the face, saving the eyes; for whose use there is an opening in
that part reserved. What I have thought of, is, to give you mine, and to take
for my self one of one of my servants; If this device please you, the matter
is then accomplished, for to conduct you in, is a thing I can easily perform.

The Prince (embracing him) with great joy told him, that he could not have
thought on a better means, desiring to have it by all means effected. The
order they therefore took was, that the Prince should launch out thence, to
some place not far off, and that within six days then after (which was the
term prefixed) leaving his Galley behind him, he should come in a Frigate about
midnight, there (showing him the place with his finger) where he with a little
Bark would be ready to receive him. Which concluded on, Perseno returning to
the Princess, reported unto her such speeches, which even of blind folks
could not be taken for other than conceits of courtesy, and by a good eye might
easily be discerned to implie conceits of love, neither displeased they her;
for that truly gentle hearts are ever ambitious of other men's good opinions.
But the Countess pleased they exceedingly, who earnestly desired that some new
affection of some effectual love in her Lady and Princess, might rid the old
of it is desperate humor: for the better grounding whereof she neglected not the
opportunity of extolling the Prince, with such commendations, as had been
sufficient to have enamoured any heart not obstinately resolved not to love at
all.

Now the time for reposing the Galley-slaves being expired, the Prince caused
the March or Levata to be sounded, continued with the consort of all his
trumpets, with such exquisite melody, that the hollow concavitie of the rock
thereat resounding, the echoes were heard make answer from every part thereof.
Whereupon every one ran out to see the Galley, except the Princess, who was
jealous lest her grief should grow to be displeased with her, for adventuring
her self to the gust of a curious sight; yet would she have the Countess go
thither with the rest, to whom (refusing to go, and leave her all alone) she
said,

Mother, the time that was is now no more, solitariness is now my pastime: And
albeit you are (as you know your self to be) right dear unto me;
nevertheless seeing I hate my own company, the being deprived of another
cannot grieve me: Recreate your self then, and take no care of me, and so
shall you best please me, for in doing otherwise you will displease me. Whereat
the Countess exceedingly sorry, without any more words went out.

Then stood the Galley beaten upon by the beams of the Sun in her glittering
parts, so as she seemed with her splendors to war against Phoebus, and to
dart to him-wards, as many radiant glimps, as she received of him. Being
afterward disanchored, whilst the ghinge stood ready with oars in hand at
the whistle of the Boatswaine, she saluted (according to the custom) the place
thrice with cries and trumpets; the windows above them appeared full of Ladies
and Knights, that standing bare saluted the Prince, who requiting them with the
like, and causing the ghing plie the water with their oars in ten strokes
vanished out of the Port: whence passing the Promontory toward the East,
landing at Budema twenty miles off, he smiling said to the Count, What think
you? Have we not made a long days journey? And upon this acquainting him of
what he meant to do, he there entertained himself until the day appointed,
which seemed to him a tedious years time* but then having armed and manned a
Frigate with men and oars, he went aboard her, taking a special care when he
came near the rock, to glide on so silently that the noise of rowing might
not discover him: arrived to the place appointed, he had no cause to attend,
for there found he the diligent Perseno with a little Whirry, wherein both of
them passed over to the Rock, having first taken order, that the Frigate should
return the night following to the selfsame place to fetch him back again.
Thence gotten up on high with no small pains to the Prince, being unacquainted
with that steepie ascent, the night being also dark and not otherwise
illuminated than by starlight; he slept that night with Perseno, because he
could not be better accommodated, yet was so merry in that he hoped to obtain
his desire, that he never thought of any toil or discommoditie.

The day come, the Princess, who slept little or nothing, rose up early in the
morning, and after the Chapel was dedicated (which was without any ceremony,
and where the Prince could not be admitted to come) every oneretired himself
to his own lodgings, till such time as the funeral Beer was put in order.

Then appeared the Princess in the Hall, where the ceremony was to begin, clad
in a black gown straight wasted with large sleeves, and so long, as they
reached down to the ground, it was lined quite through with whitesilke cipres,
pleated and crisped about the neck, with a deep fringe round about it: the
body of her garment, and the sleeves of her wascot, were cut from the highest
to the lowest part thereof, and rejoind with small black loope-lace, between
which cuts the same cipres came puckering out in equal small pleats;
attracting the eyes of the beholders with the comelines of her person, the
strangeness of the habit, and the proportion of contrary colors; her head,
neck, and breast were covered with a kind of robe of exceeding fine linen,
foulded in waves, which reached no further down than the knee: her sweet face
restrained in its own confines, had allowed it for observers and keepers (as
it was not fit it should be left all alone) some few of her fair hair, which
the more they were confused in the Chaos of so comely a melancholy, the more
orderly were they disposed to proportionate the fairest of all other beauties:
yet were they no golden hairs, because nature foreseeing or peradventure
emulating those accidental colors of her habit; and being desirous to sure
naturally the same devise, had framed her countenance as white as the driven
snow, and her hair like the glittering brown of finest silk; this robe of
hers, together with her face were covered all over with a transparent veil;
which although it was black, yet did it not moderate, but rather augment those
singular beauties: that being neither altogether apparent, nor yet altogether
hidden, could not either be concealed in their being shadowed, or conceived in
their full perfections; for their rays, penetrating through the pores of the
heart, made themselves known, and yet dazzling the eyes of the capacity
deprived it of the means of well-knowing and fully discerning them. This her
habit was embellished with the pearls that dropped in chains from her
crystal eyes, which (united together in a milke-white piece of fine linen
under the black veil) were motives sufficient to change even mirth and
laughter it self into plaint and grief.

The family came to the Hall a little before, to wait on their Mistress, and
among them Metaneone and Perseno in the very instant of her coming forth of
her chamber (as private as they could to shun the occasion of discourse with
any one.) The Prince seeing appear such a tree clothed with a shadow,
purpurized under the obscurity of veiles, between two contrary colors (no
otherwise than Aurora when she begins (at the approach of the Sunbeams) to
show forth her ornamentall graces, having besprinkled the eyes attracted with
unknowen violence, in stead of dew with a treasure of tears, signs (not
obscure, of an amorous heart) became thereat so astonished, as that if he had
been so forgetful of the quality of the place, as he was of his own
condition, he had no doubt in that place quite forgotten himself. But Perseno
(that with a vigilant eye beheld him) seeing him begin to stagger, set him
right again by bringing him to himself with a beck; Just as a generous
Courser (forgetting his exercise) is suddenly brought in again by the voice
and hand.

In the midst of the Hall stood a Beer, representing the body of the dead
Prince raised up from the ground, with a large Beere-covering of black velvet,
fringed round about with diverse Tropheies of arms and instruments of war,
with the Escocheons of Sardegna and Maiorica quartered, and richly embrodered
with gold at each of it is four corners. The superficies of the Beere-cloath
was sprinkled all over with drops of blood, represented to the life by a
curious hollow-stich of vermilion silk. The Hall hanged all over with black
Arras, not only the walls, but also the seeling and pavement thereof. So as
amongst all these obscure colors, there was not any white discernable, but
only that which (shaming all blacks) was not only transparent, but
resplendent from under the veiles of the Princess.

At one end of this Hall right over against the Beer stood placed a Canopy of
State, with a little bench, and two great cushions, all covered over with
black velvet: here stood still the Princess, and kneeled down; where after
she had a while fixed her waterie eyes to heaven-wards, then (as if she hated
the light) bent them downwards to celebrate the funeral, weeping out amain
such music, as with i'ts mournful and compassionate tone, drew humid
lamentations from the driest eyes.

Metaneone uncertain with himself, whether he was in a dream, or awake, nere
took his eyes off the Princess, and (forming in his mind a rapsody of the
things he saw) was not aware that he saw them, so great was the confusion he
tossed too and fro, in his mind.

The music ended, there were distributed torches, which (though of pure white
wax) were yet all artificially made obscurely brown. Then the Priest, having
first invocated the God of gods with the attributes of only incomprehensible,
and eternal, thus prayed:

Receive (O Lord) our prayers, and accept our tears, which because they are
not worthy of thy sight, vouchsafe to make them worthy, for thy mercies sake;
seeing we, because of our corruption, cannot make them worthy, but acknowledge
thee to be both the work, and the workman, the beginning and end of all
things, and that in thee is perfect happiness, which we hope to enjoy in thee,
by thee, and with thee, for ever and ever.

Which said, taking out of a golden Chalice, a spoonefull of most precious
sweet incense, he powered it on the kindled embers, that stood by him in a
great vessel of silver, and then made a sign to them all to stand up, and go
forward with their tapers lighted; those of meaner quality going first in
rank, were followed by such as carried the Beer; next after which followed
the Princess herself with her Ladies.

The little Chapel was all over illuminated with no other light than wax
candles, having its windows shut up with cloth curtains, to make the
ceremonies seem more lugubrous, and the office more devout: In the end thereof
stood a great Altar, hung round about with black velvet, whereon in stead of
fringe, were richly embrodered diverse tropheies of death. On this Altar was not
any god, only there stood fastened in the wall a large Tablet of delicate
picture-worke, whereon with astronomicall proportions was represented the
Universe: in whose poles stood two hands full of light, that gave it motion,
made in such a fashion as they seemed to be of a greater body than the world.
And this body became invisible by being hidden by the interposition of the
machine of the universe, but much more by its own splendent rays; the
distance between these rays were filled up with good Angels, having sundry
colored wings, and about it might be read, And in perpetual working I

As soon as they came hither, they laid down the Beer upon a rais'd-worke
mourning Coverlet, adorned with many pieces of arms. The Priest having in his
hand a silver vessel (that hung at small chains of the same, wherein was
finest incense on fired coals) went thrice about the Beer, invocating the
greatest Jove. Whereto being answered by the Quire of music, he made a stand
before the Altar, where (after a long silence) lifting up his eyes toward
heaven, he said:

O Lord, that art the true love wherewith thou joinest together in an invisible
society, the things become incorruptible and immortal, we pray thee so to
strengthen us as that we being divided from our corruptible and mortal parts,
may comfort our selves in thee, which art our only life and comfort: ( and then
pu^ting more incense on the fire of the Altar, he spoke on.) Kindle (O Lord)
our souls with thy ardent fire, that we being ride of the desire of
terrestrial things, may withdraw our selves from them, and trust only in
thee; Let our prayers (for thy goodness sake) ascend up to thy sight, even as
this incense by its nature mounts upwards; and as its odor is pleasing unto
us, so let our prayers be acceptable unto thee. Let all the dead live in thee,
together with him for wh^m we now pray, that though they be severed from us at
this present in the diversity of their essence; yet that when we become
conformable to them in essence eternal, we may join with them to praise thee
world without end. To this the music (answering, So be it o God we beseech
thee) sung an interchangeable quire consort, in a time so doleful as might
move to plaint and heaviness the merriest disposition.

In the mean time got up the Princess, and Metaneone (before advertized by
Perseno to whom that duty belonged) was ready to help to raise her; supporting
her to his so great content, as he might well in disparity (or in a contrary
kind) contend to parallel her discontent.

Come to the Altar, she taking in her fair hands the Incense, and laying it on
the fire, returned, all the rest imitating her in doing the same; which
finished she rose up again, and causing the statue of Perosfilo to be carried
onwards with great solemnity, she causing it to be laid in a Press, made for
that purpose, thus said,

Behold (My Lord) the last duties of your Spouse, it pleases the heavens that
it so be, and therefore must needs please me. I once hoped to serve you in
another manner, and to place you elsewhere in an other-ghesse shape. But
sithence it so pleases my cruel disdain, that in stead of your noble person,
I may enjoy but your shadow and picture; behold me most ready and willing so to
live all my life's time. The Bride-chamber (My Lord) is denied you, but not the
Elysian Fields. And I taking thence example, knew not where to place your Image
in a fitter place than this, which being dedicated unto the eternal, it is fit
your Image should have another like here on earth. Which said, she with many
tears, retired to her lodgings, wherehence all the rest retired to theirs.

The Prince of Mauritania having laid aside his roabe, and caused Perseno
(whether he would or no) to sit down by him, thus bespake him; I have received
from you (My Lord) so notable a peec^ of service, as I will never forget it
whilst I breathe; I pray you continue your good inclination to me-wards,
whereby (I assure you) you shall reap naught else but honor; I part hence so
enchained to the beauties and noble behavior of your Mistress the Princess,
as I doubt to die thereof; though I am more afraid that the selfsame will
betide her, if she obstinately persevere in such an unreasonable and desperate
way of Melancholy. My intent is to demand her of the King her father; but I
doubt it will prove but lost labor, unless she alter her opinion: I am not of
my self a man to resolve of any thing, without your advise, as well for my
engagement to your Highness, as also because I find my self an insufficient
Counselor in this business, being only capable to receive it from you.

Perseno (desirous to stand up, but retained by the Prince in his seat) made
answer; (My Lord) you have no cause to think your self obliged to me,
sithence you well know, that I by your means enjoy both liberty, and life
(...) self: which though it were not so, yet would I nevertheless beseech you
to command me, because in so doing, you much oblige me. Besides you may well
judge, that the little service I did you, tended indeed to the service of my
Mistress; and therefore the foundations of what you think your self obliged
for to me-wards, is quite demolished. For I forethought (most excellent
prince) that you becoming enamored of her (as I was sure you would be,
considering her perfections) might prove a mean to divert her from her so
strange a course of life. Because her being sought for, by so great and worthy
Prince, as your Highness is, might open away to the business of freeing her
hence. Of your resolution of demanding her of the King her father I approve
right well, which the sooner it be done, would be the better; albeit I could
wish it were carried in such a fashion, as the demand might not occasion any
delay, (that is) that she were demanded by the gracious mediation of the King
your father, and that with his own privity: because since such must be the
issue of it, it is as good it be done first as last; as well to eschew loss of
time, as also because the business may go forwards under the shadow,
protection and dignity of both parties. Neither should her present humor give
you any cause of disincouragement, because (hap the worst that hap may) we
cannot be in worse plight than we are.

And assure your self that when you have gotten the goodwills of both kings
(your father and hers) you will soon obtain her consent or no man breathing
can ever gain it. Nay, we may well hope that when she understands her self to
be sued for by you, to who^ she is so much obliged, she may be more easily bent
to a contrary resolution, rather for yours than for any other man's sake.
Neither is this the sol^ reason that moves me thereto, for know (most excellent
Prince) that my mistress lives herein exceeding great danger; the fame of her
beauty is spread far and near, many Kings have sued to have her, so that some
one of them requiring her of her father may deprive you of her; or some other
(considering her resolution) may resolve to take her hence by force; whereas if
you demand her in time, you may then prevent the one, and the other hazard an
inconvenience: for the King her father will not deny her you; especially when
the Countess and I have written unto him in such a manner, as we shall make
him not only desirous, but also know himself obliged to grant her you: and as
for others, when they come to know her to be yours, they will alter their
intention of molesting her. Now for the Princess, I reply, that her resolution
should neither hinder nor discourage you, because she is ( in fine) a woman,
and therefore subject to change, even as we are also. Neither can such a change
be upbraided her, it being from worse to better, besides her being subject to
her father, and obliged to the subjects as Heiresse. And for what lies in my
power, I (...) not tell you any more, but that you see already that I am so far
from pretending to oblige your Highness, as I remain therefore exceedingly
obliged unto you for this, above all other engagements, whereby I am already
tied unto you. And if you yet (like a noble Prince) will needs for all this
hold your self my debtor, yet shall it be satisfied by your following my
counsel, and hastening with all possible speed the execution thereof.

The Prince embracing him about the neck, expresses his thankfulness with the
most affectionate terms that could be, and (pursuing their discourse) asked
him, what new and strange manner of service was that which the Princess used
in worshipping the gods? Whereto Perseno answered, my Mistres, as in material
things she has not any one thing ordinary or common unto others: so also in
the vivacity of spirit there is none can paragonize or equal her; for she,
(not contenting herself with the common opinion) examines the causes of things
with such an elevated judgment, as there is not a Philosopher that can
parallel her in the speculation of them. And that which above all other things
makes her curious, is not only the variety, but rather the contrariety of
opinions, almost in all ages, and those stiffely maintained by all such as were
by the world esteemed for the wisest men, so as it might (not without good
reason) be concluded, That humane wisdom is mere folly and has no certain
foundation. And if any man were more prized than the rest, it was not because
he had reason to procure him better estimation; but because nature made him
more acute than others in Philosophizing, and in the art of speaking more
dialecticall in persuading. I will give you a touch of my Mistress her opinion
in the generality of things, to the end you may imagine that the particulars
degenerate not a whit therefrom. To this her sound judgment thee has
conjoined a Prince-worthy erudition; because she hating superficial and
seeming disciplines, which puffes up the understanding, embraces the solid,
wherein consists real and true knowledge; And albeit Philozophizing on the
gods be somewhat dangerous, being it is dangerous to pronounce the truth, in
that we cannot set it forth but according to our capacity, whence proceeded
(not without some ground) that saying, that the truth thereof is best known by
being not known: yet is it nevertheless lawful for us to know so much
thereof, as Piety and Religion permits us; for if we were thereof altogether
ignorant, then would there not be among us either devotion or Religion.

About some two years sithence came from Lucania (I know not by what accident)
that Priest you saw in the Temple, who being (besides his knowledge and
learning) a man of an upright mind, and exemplary life, was bestowed on her by
the King, to the end that by his conference she might be assisted and furthered
in her studies, wherein they are come to such a pitch, as they have concluded,
that the opinion of many gods is false, and that there is no more but one, and
him such a one, as no understanding can conceive in that he transcends the
limits and reach of our intellects. And that is the reason you saw no Image in
the Temple. The picture (that is there) represents the whole world; and the two
hands the providence of God, of God himself: forasmuch as he is the motor and
original cause of all causes. The blood sacrifices are abominable in Gods
sight, neither ought he be otherwise worshipped, than with odoriferous and
sweet smelling offerings.

The Prince (marveiling not a little hereat) with a smiling cheer, said; Your
Lady (the Princess) being far from superstition and vanity, and doubting
lest she her self should for her divine qualities be reputed a goddess will
have but one God invisible, and incorporeall; but this belief shall not enter
so far in me, but that I will adore her. Whereupon enterchanging together
pleasant discourses, they resolved on a means to receive intelligence each
from other And in the evening Metaneone (being upon departure) would have
presented Perseno with an exceeding rich diamond, which he could never (either
by forced courtesy or courteous force) work him to accept: whereby (being no
less satisfied with the nobleness of his mind, than with his other gentle
qualities) taking (in affectionate manner) his leave of him, he transported
himself to his Frigate that rode waiting for him, and departed.

Perseno, now a glad man, that the business had so succeeded according as he
desired it should, went, and acquainted therewith with the Countess, who
astonished at the boldness of his resolution, could not choose but commend it,
seeing it had so well succeeded. And being to render the King an account of
their voyage and arrival, they wrote so well in commendation of the Prince,
touching the purpose of his freeing and accompanying them, that more could not
be said thereof, giving him withal an inkling of having discovered in him, a
more than ordinary inclination to the fame and renownc of the Princess.
Afterward Perseno taking counsel touching the fortifying of that place, and
having noted how Eromilia lived not without fear, deferring the building of
the House and Temple, settled himself to wall it round; and beginning at the
foot of the rock, fortified the parts adjoining to the ascent, with small
pains and less charge, the rock it self supplying him with stone and lime.

A little before the peering out of the Sun, came Metaneone to his Galley,
where the Count with much joy received him: to whom he related all that befell
him, extolling Eromilia her singularities with such superlatives, as the Count
could not choose but tell him, smiling; Sobriety (My Lord) with these your
commendations, no more I beseech you. Two things I want for becoming enamored,
and those are, the being young, and therewithal a Prince. If your Highness
publish her to such as want neither of these, in such fashion as you do to me,
(no doubt) you will have rivals enough.

The Prince joying at the Counts words, could not satisfy himself in talking
of her, resolving in any case to demand her. Neither could the Count therefore
blame him, having been long before informed (by less assionate witnesses) of
the merits of that Princess, advising him to go on in that match, not so much
for the satisfaction of the Prince, as for the interesses of the kingdom of
Mauritania. Considering then how they had in their voyage too much digressed,
he (as soon as the Prince went to sleep) caused to wigh up anchor and steer
on a straight course for Sardegna.

There blew from shore-ward a sweet gale of wind, and the Vessel scoured away
amain, on each side courted with wanton Dolphins: when after having two days
sailed with most prosperous weather, they were assailed by a tempest, so
terrible, as the Masters-mate (with all his counsel) could not resolve of any
course that could avail them, observing the winds so outragiously unstable, as
when by the help of any one gale, they ran a course toward any part, they
were suddenly rebutted and driven back by another: so as, not being able to
obey any one particular, but forced to yield to the violence of all
indifferently, they were constrained to rome up and down, with an order so
disorderly, that dejected and suppressed both in courage and force, they had
given themselves over for lost, had not the goodness of the Vessel and ghing
somewhat consolated them.

The Prince no whit dismayed, in that he was assured of the soundness of his
Galley, commanded to give her sea-roome enough, but seeing no means of
disobeying the winds, they gave their violence way, according to their
alterations: so as, although they had desired to come ashore, yet was there
not any means to do it, because the progress of ten miles was seconded
with a greater regresse. By means whereof, not knowing where they were, they
danced at the sound of the rustling waves, more than eight days in the Center
of the sea, with the loss of many of their oars, shivered by the repercussion
of the surging billows. On the ninth day the tempest being somewhat appeased,
they descried above them the Island of Maiorica, and a Galley that set forth
from Cabrera. Whereupon desirous to know whence they were, imagining her to be
sent from the King of Maiorica to his daughter (by whose means he might write
something to Perseno) he commanded to make toward her; but for all they could
do, it was impossible to overtake her, for she so posted with the help of
both oars and sails, that in the beginning of the night, she got quite out of
their sight.

The Prince (suspecting in his heart I know not what) seeing that though the
tempest was calmed, yet the wind was against him, turning toward the Count,
said unto him, I cannot imagine why this Galley should shun me; I have a great
desire to follow her, because I cannot possibly steer onwards any further in
my intended course, which I shall neglect but for this only night, during
which time also, the Galley-slaves may repose themselves; seeing he wind will
drive us whither I would go. The Earl, seeing him so desirous, would not
contradict him.

The saild all night with their prore toward Lebecchio (being the way they saw
the Galley hold) when at the break of day the Centree on the maine top-saile,
told them he descried the Galley not above five miles off. The Prince, who lay
on a quilt with his clothes on, and his arms hard by him, presently rose up;
and causing the Galley-slaves to be meated, and the Knights armed, he pursued
her with sails and oars: yet she (being one of the swiftest Galleyes of all
that sea) had not been so easily overtaken, if she had listed to fly away;
but seeing her self traced after, she holding on her course as the wind
carried her away, without putting hand to oar, seemed to stay and expect to be
boorded. By this time they drew so near her, that the Sun (by then risen)
discovered her fully; so that the Prince saw her with her rich lanthornes, in
bigness little less than his; well manned with soldiers, and numerous for
galley-slaves; imagining therefore that she was no Pirat (as he had believed)
he bade the oars forbear, and (with the advice of the Count) commanded
Tolmido Captain of his men, to take a Frigate, and go see what she was; he
(performing the command) quickly overtooke her, as she sailed gently, without
making any haste. And demanding what she was? he was asked again, who they
were that would so feign know? Whereto Tolmido answering that they were of
Mauritania; (just at that word) appeared a Knight of a low stature, and iron
hue, at whose coming all the rest reverently retired themselves; whilst he
fixing his eyes on Tolmido, said,

Sir Knight, I know not what you are, neither am I curious to know it; me
thinks you should be as little inquisitive of me. I can not imagine wherefore
you have ever sithence yesterday so dogged me to no purpose. I will not tell you
what I am, though I be such, as can tell how to chastise your indiscretion, if
you keep not on your way. Tolmido (although by his garb and appearance, he
ghessed him to be no ordinary person, yet seeing him so stout) made answer.

Let it not displease you (Sir Knight) that I ask what you are, in that you
might be such, that he, who sent me to you, might perhaps honor you, if you
were thereof capable, or did deserve it. It is the ordinary fashion of such as
go by sea, to hail one another, and therefore you had no need to be
therewith offended: but sithence that you are so disdainefull and proud, as to
dare (not knowing the terms of civilitie) thus boldly to threaten us, I am
content to return with this your answer, and do believe that you will be
feign to show, whether you can prove your self to be so brave and valiant in
deeds, as you are rash and arrogant in words.

The Knight (not accustomed to such answers) taking a bow in hand, aimed at him
an arrow, which if it had hit, where he levelled, dispatched had been the life
of Tolmido; but fortune so favored him, as it slipping by him, razing only
his skin, and doing him no other harm, pierced into the water. Whereupon, he
retiring himself with his company (though shot at by the Galley) returned
safely to the Prince: who (seeing what violence was offered) advanced forwards,
causing to be hung out the standard of war, understanding afterward by
Tolmido what terms were used, he could not imagine who that Knight might be,
till at length he began to suspect it might be some Prince that went about to
steal away Eromina, neither was he indeed therein any whit mistaken. This
suspicion made him become more fierce and eager, so as having got the lee of
her, he began to salute her with such a shower of arrows, as obscured even the
midday Sun: Yet found he not her asleep, nor her men with their hands tied at
their girdle, for as soon as Tolmido was gone, she turned back, and (mainely
rowing) came on, to charge the Prince.

The battle of Archers lasted not long, because Metaneone (not waying a rush
the fury of the shot-men) hastened to grapple with the Galley; and (having
under him the best Vessel in the world, and the wind a-poope) encountered her
with such a thump, as tearing off her snout, tottered and bruised her all-over:
then armed with a halfe-pike (being backed by his Archers and seconded by his
Knights; himself in person the first among the foremost gotten up on her prore)
made such a massacre of all such as opposed him, that in spite of them he
boorded her, where followed by his own men, he justling and laying about him
with sword in hand, won her to her mast, where encountered with a Squadron of
chief Knights, he was forced to retire himself some steps backewards. But
resolved either to prevail or die, he Tiger-like flung himself on the little
Knight, who was Lord of the rest, and getting within his pikes point cut it off
close at his hand, charging him withal with such and so many blows as
constrained him to fall down at his feet on the hatches; whence Tolmido
taking him by the heels dragged him between two bancks, intending (if he had
had time) to cast him over board. Whilst the Prince obstinately pursuing the
assault, got again as far forwards as the maine Mast, and thence further,
but with such difficulty, as he was feign to win the Galley by inches: for
besides the good ghing, there were aboard her between Knights and soldiers,
about two hundred, who behaved themselves very valiantly: of all which
nevertheless there remained but sixty alive, and those for the most part
wounded. The Prince lost some twenty of his, beside some of the ghing that
were hurt with the arrows, and more had been killed and wounded, but that the
battlements defended them. Then would the Prince forthwith know of the
prisoners, what they were? and who was their Lord? Whereto they made answer,
that they were Catalans, and that the Knight by him hurt, and perhaps slain,
was Don Peplasos Prince of Catalogna, who (enamoured of the Princess of
Maiorica, and understanding that by her good will she would not consent to any
marriage at all,) went to Afrique to steal her away, which he resolved to
effect; without his own fathers consent, and therefore unknown to him, set
forth privily from Barcellona.

Metaneone (rejoicing for so good an encounter, and that fortune, by such
unthought of means had so favored his desires) blessed the tempest that drove
him thither, joying in himself, that it was his good fortune (by the
instigation of an unknown desire to cut off and frustrate the designs of the
Prince, which had they been effected, had made him the unhappiest man in the
world.

In the mean time lay Peplasos more than half dead between two of the
ghing-bancks, when Metaneone (causing him to be taken up, and his wounds
searched and dressed) sent the Count to visit him, and to tell him that he was
sorry for his hurt, but much more, because he himself was the occasioner
thereof; for had they but known one another, then that inconvenience had not
happened: whereas his concealing of himself might have occasioned a greater
disaster. But he, (more vexed at heart for the frustrating his designs than
for his wounds) having understood who his enemy was, dissembling his anger,
answered, That he was not agrieved at his hurts got by the hands of so valorous
a Prince, but rather thought him well employed, in that they gave him occasion
of being acquainted with him: in respect therefore that there was not between
them any cause of enmity, he desired to be permitted to hold on his way, seeing
that if the inconvenience was occasioned by his ignorance, he well felt the
smart thereof.

The Count having related this suit unto the Prince (who then was upon going
himself to visit him) gave him thereby cause to alter his mind, so as he
went not, but sent again the Count, with order to tell him; That he was sorry
he could not serve him in that particular; understanding how he was bound for
Afrique to steal away the Princess of Maiorica, an offense that extended it
self to the King of Catalogna his father, the King of Maiorica, and to all
other Princes; but more particularly to all Knights, expressly obliged to defend
that sex. And that therefore he might do well to see carefully to the cure of
his wounds, assuring himself he should not be detained prisoner, being there
was a good and reciprocal amity bewixt both their fathers: but that the
reason why he could not let him part suddenly was, because he could not be
accessory to his offense, which otherwise he must needs have been, if knowing
his intention, and being able to prevent it, he did it not: Nay, that he
further knew himself tied as he was a Prince to remedy it, and as he was a
Knight to chastise him, if he offered to put his plot in execution; but that he
hoped that the qualities of his birth and dignity, (with the obligations
accompanying them) had already therefrom sufficiently dissuaded him.

Don Peplasos stood a good while after he had heard this embassage, without
speaking any thing, till at length he burst forth into such speeches; The
Prince of Mauritania favors me exceedingly in redoubling the pains of a
person of your merit, thereby re-obliging me with the favor of his visits: But
as concerning my voyage, which (as you tell me from him) was to steal away the
Princess of Maiorica, I pray you assure him that whosoever told him so, lied
most falsely, in that he informed him of an untruth in a matter so far from my
thoughts, as that Princess (whom I never yet saw) is from my knowledge and
acquaintance. And if my voyage has given occasion to any ill-minded fellows
to think so of me, yet cannot any such conjecture accuse me, neither am I such
as ought to yield any man an account where, or which way I go, there being in
those parts whither I am bound for, so many countries and such diversity of
occasions wherein a Knight may honorably employ himself: As I hold my self
greatly injured of such as judge of me rather the worst than the best; for the
rest, I know the Prince for a valiant Knight, and have tried him, but yet arms
(as well as other things) have their both fortunate and fatal days, so as if
I should happen to affront him; this my present misfortune should no whit
disencourage me; Albeit for the occasion he pretends, there shall neither be
cause for him to chastise me (as he says,) nor for me to defend my self, as I
would do for any one, that would offer to injure me. If he please to leave me
to my liberty, there being not between us any cause of hostility, he will then
perform what he owes to the amity of our parents. If otherwise, and that he
will rather credit the malignant conjectures of some villain, than the royal
words of a Prince, I shall then have just cause to think my self hardly used
by him.

The Count could do no less than report all these speeches punctually to the
Prince, who (not as much as moved thereat) sent for the Catalans, of whom he
would know again, whither Don Peplasos intended to go; those that had already
unadvisedly spoken the truth, could not revoke what they had said; the rest
(who were so fortunate as not to be examined) said, they knew not their Lords
intrinsecall intentions. Howbeit the rumor thereof was so published, as the
more cautelous sort, knew better how to conceal, than deny it. Whereupon
Metaneone (unwilling by contestation to multiply the ruin of these men)
resolved (with the advice of the Count) not to set him at liberty, until such
time as Eromilia were thereof advised, and had taken a course for the securing
of her person. But having discoursed of the manner of effecting it, they
(considering of their being but sixty miles wide from Maiorica) concluded to
pass that way, and thereof to advertize the King her father, and so with the
merit of two so great services to give him then an inckling of the desire he
had to be his Son in-law; not that he then meant to treat of the marriage,
but only to prevent the suit of all such others, as might come thither to
demand her.

The Prince (glad of this counsel) fell off with a contrary wind to
Fermentera, where he found a Frigate, that there rode sequestered by the winds;
The Knight that came in her, presently knowing the Galley Royal, ran with much
joy to kiss the Prince his hands, who suddenly knew him for one of Eromilia's
Knights; of whom when he understood of his being sent from her, with letters to
the King her father, he told him what had happened between him and the Prince of
Catalogna, and how that he continued not in his voyage, because it was
necessary for him to go to Maiorica there to leave him in the Kings custody,
till such time as the Princess had made sufficient provision for the security
of her person.

Fidele (for such was this Knights name) was much astonished at this news, and
besought the Prince to grant him some odds of time, to get him gone before him,
as soon as the wind should turn to be a little calmer, that the King by
reading the letters of the Princess, might come to know the other obligation
he owed him. To which request the Prince was at first loath to consent,
supposing it was but to give the King of Maiorica time to receive him with
greater pomp and honor; till afterward considering the advantage he might
come to receive by means of the letters of Perseno, and the Countess
Palomera, he was contented to favor his request: and such was the luck that
the wind in that instant (as it were) quite assuaged occasioned a great calm.
Whereof Fidele regardlesse (having a good Frigate well provided of oars, and
pressing forwards amain speed) arrived at Maiorica a day sooner than the
Prince.

The King (who was even dead of longing to hear news from his daughter)
seeing this Knight present himself before him, was exceeding glad thereof, and
understanding what had happened them in their journey as they went, and unto the
Prince of Mauritania as he came) remained thereat strangely amazed, afterward
opening his daughters letter, he found it thus said,

My Lord, if I had been capable of content, I might say I had received it from
your Majesty's letters, delivered me by the Countess of Palomero, being the
greatest joy that an obliged and obedient daughter might possibly receive; yet
does not this incapacitie deprive me of that comfort, which nature in all
children, and your particular love toward me might suggest or put me in mind
of: Insomuch therefore as you strive to surpass all fathers in loving your
daughter, most ungrateful were I, if I endeavored not to exceed all other
daughters, in loving so worthy and deserving a father. But now me thinks I
hear you say, that the last effects manifested the contrary: yet (My Lord) I
beseech you (in this subject) to give credit even to the incredible, for my
affection, which was the source of paradoxes, was so repugnant to all humane
dispositions, as it is no wonder, if with it subsist contrarieties. Behold
then, how I pretend not to excuse my fault, but do beseech you to impute it to
passion: by whose means (like a raving sick woman come to the worst point) I
wanted force to exercise those faculties which the wise make use of; so as my
offense deserves rather compassion than reproof, in that it brings with it its
own punishment. And now that I have acknowledged my duty toward you, together
with the fault of my absence; give me leave (I pray you) to defend my self
with the worthy occasion of my errors. Represent, Oh represent before you (My
Lord) a Perosfilo, a Prince of such exceeding rare qualities, to whom was
dedicated by you, my person, and by me, my soul; and then represent him before
you dead. Alas, how could I possibly in so great disorder, observe any order?
I, that more than any other loved him, whom all loved, (and which is more) with
a true and legitimate love: If then he were assigned me by you, to be the
companion of my life, why will you not permit me to be the companion of his
death? And where shall I ever find out his like? Indeed had I aimed at no
other end than solitariness, I could have retired my self into solitary
places, there at home: But what kind of a solitary life had that been, where
every one would have baited and opposed me? Besides, how had I been able to
resist authority? but much more your sweet persuasions wherewith you are able
to divert the most constant resolutions? Now whereas you afterward accuse me
of small love; certainly (My Lord) if you think you have occasion to say so,
I hope you have no reasion to believe so; for it is right all one, as if you
accused me for a dead woman, and respectlesse of your grief, and of my mothers
love, together with the debt I owe your subjects, and do you believe that it
would grieve me less to abandon these respects, than it would do to lose my
life? No surely, but the violence and wrong done me by such a conjecture, is at
least as great (if not greater) than death it self; seeing it is true that
love and death are both of equal power.

I answer not to all the residue of your grave and prudent reasons, which
although they convict me not, because they are grounded upon common
suppositions, which in my case (void of all rule) give no rule at all;
nevertheless the reverence I owe you obliges me to receive them, as if they
had already convinced me. My loving family I will love, and among them the
Countess above all: little thought they once to see me in the estate of a
Mistress, but of a slave for company with them. It pleased God that the
Prince of Mauritania freed, and conducted them here in safety, as shall be
told you more at large by Fidele, the bearer hereof, whereto I refer my
self; beseeching you that (in respect I could not thank that Prince by word
of mouth) you would be pleased to supply my defect, by sending to the King of
Mauritania his father, and to him such personages, as are capable of executing
such an embassage. Touching the particular of my person, I know the danger
wherein I am, and will fortify my self in such a manner, as I may be able
(the place being strong of its own situation) only with my own family to
defend my self, and live secure from all the world, so I be but furnished
with victuals. And in the mean time God will provide for all, whom I pray to
grant your Majesty the height of felicity, and to me that comfort, which being
absent from your Majesty I cannot receive. Eromilia.

With this letter the King became somewhat consolated, in that he thought he
had wrought something on his daughters melancholy: Albeit she therein made no
mention of returning homewards; nevertheless he could not choose but be well
satisfied with the accidents that had happened, hoping they would prove a means
to induce her to alter her intention. But when afterward he had seen the
letters of the Countess, and Perseno: he thought than that the Gods had sent
them that Prince to free them from affliction. Therefore (having given order to
receive him with all honor, and that notice should be given him, when he were
descried in the sight of the Island) he went the day following himself in
person to meet him on the seacoast. The honors wherewith be entertained him
were such, as might be expected, from an inferior, and the love such, as could
be hoped for from a loving father. The Queen (who both by the relation of
Fidele, and also by her own letters comprehended the Prince his merits)
received him with such tenderness of affection, as a mother is wont to welcome
her endeared Son.

After reciprocal complements, the Prince retiring himself aside with the
King, told him, that the cause of his coming thither was an accident, that
chanced him with the Prince of Catalogna, whose servants had plainly confessed
that they went with an intent to steal away the Princess Eromilia, because
their Prince had no hope of obtaining her by any other means. That it seemed
not good unto him to take him along with him, lest he might think himself
detained prisoner; much-lesse would he by any means set him at liberty, lest
he should then effect his design: And that being now wounded, his Majesty
(under the color of hospitality) might detain him, and in the mean time
advertize thereof the King of Catalogna his father, and send the Princess
provision to assure her from such like dangers.

The King not knowing how to find out words correspondent to the quality of
his beholdingness, omitted no means of letting him see, how dearly he
esteemed such notable and so worthy services.

And concerning Don Peplasos, told him, that a better course could not be
thought of, whom he would detain, and have a provident eye to the curing of,
his wounds, till such time as he had effected all that the Prince had
counseled him. And so passing from business to complements, and from
complements again to affectionate passions; the Prince, who according to the
custom of lovers, had not all this while the boldness to open his mouth in
his own desire, (whereat the King marvelled, believing that the Countess and
Perseno, who had thereof written unto him so confidently, were altogether
deceived) yet now (having lighted on so fit an opportunity) said unto him,

Your Majesty is together with the title and dignity of a King, endowed by the
heavens with inclinations so Royal as they embolden me to supplicate your
Majesty for one favor, since that you have been so courteously pleased, as
to command me to ask you any thing. The King all joyful (taking him by the
hand) made answer, that he could not do him a greater favor, than to demand
whatsoever he desired, assuring him he would not deny him any thing
comprehended within the limits of his power. The Prince then kneeling on one
knee, (whence he would not be raised up, do what the King could, until he
had first expressed his desire) said unto him; The boon I then beg of your
Majesty is, that your Majesty would vouchsafe to be pleased to accept me for
a son, by giving me (for wise) my Lady the Princess Eromilia. Whereunto the
King raising him on his feet answered,

Worthy Prince, your Highness obliges me more in disobliging me, than I can
ever deserve, much less requite. My daughter cannot be bestowed on either a
greater or worthier Prince than your self; and the demanding her, as a boon,
in so gentle a manner as you have done, had been a sufficient motive to have
induced me to give her you, if nothing else had tied me thereto. Therefore I
tell you, that without asking either counsel or advice of any one, (be it the
Queen or Council) as is usually done between Princes of our condition; I
will, that she be yours for as much as concerns me. Whereat the Prince would
have kneeled down again to kiss his hands, but the King (staying him up)
spoke on, I told you, for as much as lies in my power, because for what is in
the power of others, I must request two things of you, the one is, that there
may be obtained thereto the consent of the King your father; and the other is,
that therewithal be procured the good will of my daughter, for well you know
in what kind of resolution she lives in, as yet; howbeit I trust (God willing)
by the means of your merits (seeing the authority of a father could not
hitherto prevail any thing with her, which I have not as yet made use of, but
have reserved it for a fitter season) we shall in a small time obtain our
desire.

The Prince humbling himself again replied, Sir, I would not have presumed to
demand her on any other conditions than those you propose, and do assure your
Majesty that if I had not feared to have been prevented by others, I had not
thus have asked her of you, ere I had first wrought the King my father to
demand her for me himself by his Ambassadors, which shall be done in its time
fit, and when it shall please your Majesty to command it. And as touching my
Lady the Princess, I will comfort my self with this, that if she marry at
all, then is she (by your Royal liberality) to be mine. Having afterward
acquainted the King with the occasion of his voyage, how he was bound for
Sardegna to fetch home his brother, they accorded, that the one with his
daughter, and the other with his father should labor for the accomplishment of
both their desires, which was to be concealed till such time as the Princess
could be persuaded to alter her resolution. Then came they forth amongst their
attendants very pleasant and merry, which caused all to rejoice, being the
first time that a joyful look was seen in that Court, sithence the departure
of the Princess.

The Prince of Catalogna was in the mean time removed out of the Galley, and
carried to the city in a horse-litter; which though performed with much
honor, seemed nevertheless strange unto him, believing he should be there
detained prisoner. And being now visited by them, after that the King had
entertained him with some courteous speeches, Metaneone thus said unto him,

My Lord, I grieve more for your hurts than I have cause to excuse my self for
having given them you; for if you had (when you knew that my Galley was of
Mauritania) either used me friendly, and not threatened me, or but as much as
in some sort pronounced (not the name of your person) but the place whence your
Vessel was, then had I not felt the sorrow and displeasure I now feel, nor
you suffered the prejudice and loss you have and now do; for which if it
might be remedied, I would endeavor to give you satisfaction, not for that any
offense of mine thereto binds me, but because indeed such is the inclination of
my nature. The reasons that persuaded me to bring you hither, were your wounds
and the ill plight of your Galley, wherein (wanting so many of your folk) you
could not have defended your self from any one that had listed to injure you.
Howbeit if the importancie of my business could have permitted me, I my self
would not have feared to have conducted you home to the King your father, whom
I believe to be a Prince so just, that understanding how things passed, he
would have had no occasion to have wished me any harm; the like hope I of you
also: There being then no place nearer your kingdom than this, nor any King
more courteous and friendly to both our fathers, than its Sovereign here
present, I thought good to recommend you to his Majesty, to whom I have
related the disaster of our encounter, which grieves him so, as he desires that
you stir not hence in any case, till you be fully cured. Whereupon the King
(interrupting him) said, My Lord, Prince Peplasos, I need not add any thing
to what my Lord, Prince Metaneone, has spoken, neither will indeed your hurts
admit tediousness: we are (you know) friends and neighbors; lay aside then
all melancholy, albeit you are in a house where dwelt no mirth these many
days; have but the patience to stay till you be cured, and you shall then go
whither soever it please you. And albeit I know you came from Catalogna
unknown to your father, yet pretend I not to correct you therefore, much less
to judge between you both; only I pray you give me leave to acquaint your
Royal father of your being here, and the messenger I will send, shall not part
till you please.

Don Peplasos (not hearing himself accused of his fault) with a merry
countenance, answered; That he would willingly write to his father, thanking
therewithal very kindly, the one, and the other, with words, in show the most
courteous that could be, reserving nevertheless inwardly an implacable hatred,
rather to the virtue than person of Metaneone, who, having taken leave of him,
was by the King entertained with all such honors and pastimes as the time
permitted him.

The Queen acquainted by her husband of all passages, was exceedingly glad
thereof, and by his directions, presented the Prince (at his going away) with a
flat box all chased over with diamonds, wherein was enclosed Eromilia's
picture; which the Prince well knowing, would therefore by all means needs
kiss her hands. And thence (having embarked himself) with a prosperous gale
of wind passed over to Sardegna.

The End of the Second Book.
CAVALIER GIO: FRANCESCO BIONDI HIS EROMENA
The Third Book.
ENtertained was the Infant Polimero by the Marquess of Chia, without any
excess of extraordinary courtesy (for so would he have it,) where having
reposed and air'd themselves a while, they went thence to Caleri, causing the
slave to be brought along with them well guarded; whom the King (joyful that
he had gotten him into his hands) commanded to be close shut up in a strong
prison, till the time of his sufferings and punishment, which was to be
deferred until the return of the Princess Eromena.

Polimero would have kissed the King hands, (who understanding t^ came of
purpose to serve him, and for that end, desired to be made a Knight) seemed to
be delighted with his forward ^p^rit and gentle demeanor; and when he asked
who he was, the Marquess durst not discover him (so strictly was he tied by
promise to conceal him) which notwithstanding the King denied him not the
honor of Knighthood.

There waited then on his Majesty the Marquess of Bossa, with some other of
his Council, all the rest accompanying the Princess; which Marquess of Chia,
desirous to understand the state of business sithence his departure thence;
that other of Bossa (at this his request) in the presence of Polimero, thus
said,

After the Prince's misfortune (whereof I believe this noble Knight has
already been fully informed) the Princess marching out into the field, was
advertized how that King Epicamedo was with a strong army passed over to Cape
Luogodori, and that the Prince his murderers, being united and siding with
him, had (for his assistance) procured all that Country to revolt. Whereupon
(imagining that her speedy coming thither might hinder that infection to
spread abroad among the neighbors) she made forwards to those parts, and found
that Valentino (a small Castle forsaken by the men thereof, for fear of not
being of number sufficient to keep it) was valiantly defended by the women
that therein remained, against all the enemies united forces. Whereby she (very
joyful) divined, and seemed to foresee, that she (a woman also) was
fore-destined to defend that state; with which hope inspired, she increased her
army with all such as she met by the way, she assailed the enemy in the
nightime unawares, making of them such havocke, as Epicamedo was constraind
by retiring his forces to raise the siege from Valentino. Which Country for
being extraordinary hilly, afforded him the commodiousnes of retiring himself
without any hazard, till (after he had gotten out of the mountains) he was set
upon afresh by the Princess, hard by Villapetres, who did that day so renowned
exploits, that those of Camilla, and of a number of other famous women, were
nothing in comparison of hers. For she had three Coursers killed under her, and
personally affronted Epicamedo in two several encounters; at the first whereof
she unhorst him; but resolving at the second, either to kill, or take him
prisoner, hardly escaped the being killed her self; for being environed with the
Kings guard, her horse being slain, she was like to have been also her self
by them either slain or taken prisoner, had she not valiantly defended her
self with the death of more than fifteen of them. Neither perhaps had all
this freed her, hand not a squadron of women of Valentino, (who followed her as
Voluntaries) rescuing her from the danger she was in, remounted her on
horseback, maugre all those that fought against her; by whose example every
man behaved himself so valiantly, that the enemy (with his rancks altogether
disordered) was feign shamefully to retire himself under Villapetres.
Epicamedo remaining by the hand of the Princess wounded with two deep cuts,
whereof he was not as yet cured.

Having thus raised the siege of Valentino, chased away the besiegers, and
withal beaten them in open field, she forced them to retire into the very
Villapetres, and keep themselves close therein, as if they had been besieged.

In which mean time, those of the Princess her council of war were
diversely opinionated of what was best to be done; whereof some would have her
pursue the enemy until he were quite vaquished; others thought best, that
(having blockt up Epicamedo from going on any further by the opposition of the
valorous Valintinean women together with one part of the army) they should with
the other part overrun the country on the left hand toward Sassari, where
they understood the Admiral resided, who (ere he could be advertized of her
coming and of the discomfiture of Epicamedo) might (together with the city)
run the hazard of being taken prisoner; to this last advice the Princess
somewhat inclined, but was dissuaded by the nearenesse of the enemies Galleyes,
doubting lest they landing their men, might break those troops she left
behind her; or else dividing their froces pursue them, and environ them in,
betwixt the King and the Admiral. Whilst she stood thus doubtful what course
to resolve of, there arrived before her a Knight (to her full well known) who
kneeling down said,

Most excellent Lady, I come from the Fleet which as yet rides in the Port of
Torre, where the horrible treason against the life of the Prince was published
by the Traitors-selves, by whom the chief of that country (being called for
before them to Sassari, and earnestly wrought upon to join in the Rebellion)
seeing themselves in their power, could do no less than promise them their
service. But now being retired to the Fleet, and risen up in arms, have taken
the Count of Montevero prisoner, who was then aboard the Royal, in the
Admirals place, and because there is already a Galley sent to give his Majesty
intelligence thereof along by the West coast; I was also dispatched away in a
Frigate, with commandment to coast hither along by the Eastern shore. But
being by the tempest weather-beaten into Tolata, I understood that your
Highness was gone out with the army; and therefore imagining that the Galley
might by this time have performed that service without me: I came poast hither,
to acquaint your Highness herewithall.

The Princess hereupon (as soon as she read the letter, sent her by the
Commanders of the fleet) determined to put their last consulted enterprise in
execution, who (leaving in her camp five hundred horse, and five thousand
foot,) about the first watch in the night, set her self with the rest of her
forces on the way to Sassari. And this is the sum of all, that has been
hitherto done. But we expect with great desire further news, having already
received a confirmation of what I have now told you, by the Galley that arrived
here the other eventing, who has spent many days in coming hither, by reason
of those past tempests, and was also chased by certain Galleyes of Corsica,
that lay at Asinara, who had already understood of the revolt of the fleet,
who never lost sight of her, in all the storm, being winde-driven, or rather,
weather-beaten into the same place not far distant one from another; but as
soon as the wind grew calm, the Galley (being well rigged and manned) with the
favor of the night got quit out of their sight, and arrived here in safety.

The Marquess of Chia lovingly thanked him for this relation, and then taking
Polimero aside, asked him, if his intent was to part suddenly for the Camp,
which having understood so to be, he replied, Mine (indeed) was once the same;
but the conservation of our fleet gives me occasion to put in the place of
Admiral, wherein (if once I but desire it) I cannot have any competitor.
Therefore if you please, either to dispense with the obligation I have to serve
you only in this particular voyage; or else, to entertain your self here,
till such time as I have dispatched this business, which shall soon be (I
being assured to be sent back to the Princess) I shall receive it as a
special favor. The Infant (affectionately embracing him) answered, that his
company would be at all times most acceptable unto him. Howbeit that, for so
weighty an affair, he went to deprive himself thereof, praying him not to
neglect his business, which he would be exceeding glad to hear he had
effected, there being not any necessity of neglecting his affairs, for so
short a journey. Having then taken instructions for the way, and licensed
himself from the King, he set him forwards on his journey to Sassari, riding
with as much content as could be, to see himself free from domesticke broiles.

Carasio, seeing his Lord addressed to a war of every one so favored, was
very glad thereof; nor joyed it less Polimero's youth to survey a Country so
differing from his, where in stead of parched sands, and barren downs, he
feasted his eyes with the various aspect of most fertile hills, nature showing
her self so liberal, that being in other places sparing, she seemed here to
be prodigal, which gave him occasion of discorsing with himself, that the
pleasantness of Poggio, and others of his fathers seats, (compared with those
he now saw) were but mere apparances, and besides but artificial works,
requiring much toil and pains in conserving them, whereas there were here to
be seen the more than ordinary excellent works of nature, which clothed with
sundry devises, shamed all artificial colors, affording such content to the
senses, as they were capable to receive by the fruition of those objects
proportionable to their proportioned incliantions. And if this variety seemed
unto him so strange in a country so little distant from his in latitude, what
would he have thought of others far more fortunate and delightsome? Sardegna
being not of it self one of the best Provinces, though as then well enough
inhabited, and sufficiently rich to sustain its inhabitants, and withal to
contribute corn to many other countries, which grew superabundantly in the
Province of Luogodori.

Three days traveled Polimero without encountering any adventure; on the
fourth he saw coming riding toward him from afar off, a Knight on a horse,
droppin wet with sweat, and quite tired, which for all that could do by
spurring him, he could not make go on one step further. Whereupon, knowing
Polimero for a strange Knight (lifting up his beaver) he said unto him,

Sir Knight, I beseech you favor me with your horse, for mine being tired can
pass no further, yet must I make haste for the Kings service to whom I am sent
from the Princess.

Polimero hearing such an unreasonable demand proceed from a personage, of
whom, by his rich armor, and by what his aspect promised, such a request was
not to be expected, made answer,

Sir Knight, if I knew, that you could not perform your duty with any other
horse than mine, I would gladly give him you, to do the King or Princess any
service, whom I also desire to serve as well as you; but knowing that you might
have furnist your self in place, through which you have passed; or if you
could find none there, that you may speed your self howsoever at Cornetto, I
hope you will hold me excused, by so much the rather for that I going my self
to serve the Princess, should do her but simple service, if I were deprived
of my horse. But as the gods shall protect you, what good news bring you with
you? What has she done at Sassari? Is that Traitor the Admiral perhaps taken?
The Knight (altering his color at these last words) answered him; The taking
of the Admiral is not a thing so easy as you believe: casting with that word
his eyes about, to see if any body was coming, and seeing none in sight, he
spoke on: The Admiral was never Traitor, but a Knight that can revenge
injuries, as now he is ready to revenge this which thou do him, and to take
away as a good prize (together with thy life) that horse, thou would not
give him by courteous means; which said, he lightly vaulting off his saddle,
drew out his sword.

Polimero taking him (by these words) for the Admiral, was the joy fullest man
in the world, and giving Carasio his horse, drew out his sword, and said, Yea
marry, this is the only way to get the horse; if thou being the Admiral (as
thy words descrie thee) have the courage to kill me Knight-like, as thou
slew'st the Prince, Traitor-like. Well, then, come do thy worst, for I will
do my best, to revenge in his injury, the wrong done to all Princes. The
other replied not with words, but with a great blow which he made at his head,
ere he was in his guard, or had time to bring thither his shield, which had put
him in an ill plight, had it not happened to fall athwart, so as it lighting on
the crest of his helm did him no other hurt, than the cutting off of a small
piece thereof. To require which courtefie, Polimero, having put him to ward a
feigned blow, stroke wiht a true one at his helm, with such force, as hitting
him in a place unarmed, it there made an ample wound. The Knight (who desired
nothing more than a quick dispatch of the combat, seeing himself thus
disadvantaged in the very first blow) resolved with himself to adventure at
all. For the effecting whereof, having spied out his opportunity of closing,
got in to embrace him, throwing away his sword, that he might the better use
his dagger; then he stuggling to throw him down, tried his armor every where
by potching it, to see if he could find any place unarmed. But Polimero, being
fresher and stronger than the other, (lifting him up by the hams) threw him
flat on his back, and seazing on his dagger (whilst he lay amazed with the
fall) held its point before his helmets sight, bidding him yield; which because
he would not do, but struggled to get up, Polimero stabd him in a place
unarmed under the short rib, laying him thereby to measure again his length on
the ground; and taking him for dead (because he saw him stir no more) he
unlaced his helmet, to assure himself thereof, when seeing him yet alive
(though not in plight to defend himself) he said unto him,

Tell me (Sir Knight) in plain terms, who you are? Because, if you be the
Admiral, and had as well avenged the death of the Prince, as you have done
mine, you had not been in the plight you now are in, which had been much
better for you; for the longer the gods delay punishment, the heavier inflict
they them, as now they do to you, by not suffering you to die by my hands.
Which as he was speaking, he saw coming toward him a great crew of Country
Pesants, armed with pikes and javelings, who seeing the wounded Knight on the
ground without any helmet, straightwayes knew him; and not knowing Polimero
otherwise than for a stranger. Alas, My Lord, (said they) what mean you to do
with this wretch, which you keep under you little better than dead? How much
better befits it him to die by other means, seeing your hands are too worthy
for him, and he far unworthy to die by them. For he is (if you know him not)
the Prince his murderer, the Author of the Rebellion, the occasioner of the
war, and we pray God he prove not consequently the cause of our utter ruin.

Polimero glad of such an encounter, said unto them, My friends, if you will
promise me to bring him prisoner to the Princess, I will leave him in your
hands. How? (answered they) If you please to deliver him us, we will most
willingly obey you, not only for our promise sake, but also because it is an
imploiment we much desire; for (we pray you) be pleased to know, that this is
the Admiral, the common enemy, both of the Kingdom and of all good men;
howbeit for your better assurance, if you list to return back but two miles,
we will deliver him up (in your presence) to the Magistrate of Cornetto. That
will I not do (answered Polimero) you seem to me to be such, as I need not
doubt of your honesty, see therefore, I leave him in your hands, take him, for
I give him you: which said, he mounted on horseback, leaving him as yet in a
swoond on the ground. But they having laid him athwart his horse, without
bearing him any kind of respect, lead him to Cornetto, and delivered him up to
the Magistrates charge, who caused his wounds (whether he would or no) to be
searched and carefully looked unto.

Polimero (joyful for what had happened, and continuing his journey) understood
by the way how that the Princess surprising Sassari at unawares, had taken
prisoner the Baron of Frisano, but that the Admiral escaped away; and that her
Highness was withal speed returned under Villapetres, ere the King of
Corsica could be informed of her absence thence. This news made him (leaving
Sassari on the left hand) hold right on to Villapetres, whence come to
Valentino, he understood how the Princess was already arrived at the Camp;
wherefore he thinking every hour one year till his coming to see her, having
refreshed his horses, past on, and came to the Camp, just at such time as
Epicamedo's men had begun a brave skirmish; which growing greater and greater,
increased almost to the magnitude and form of a battle. The Princess stood
beholding it (from the top of a hillocke) encompassed with the principal of
the army; when looking aside, by chance, she spied Polimero descending the
side of a hill, in great haste, for the great desire he had to make one in the
battle. It seemed to her that she never saw Knight of a better grace and
seemelinesse (except her Brother Perosfilo) and not being able to refrain
looking on him, she perceived that he had a desire to fight: but he (come to
the place, and seeing the enemy at first but weak in number) stood still to
behold the skirmish, which by degrees increasing, began to exasperate. The
Princess would not suffer hers to be succored, for the great desire she had to
see what this unknown Knight meant to do; when he (seeing issue forth of the
enemies Camp a troop of horse, that came to charge the Princess her squadron
in the flancke, and perceiving no man stir from her side) put on Flammauro
with such velocity, as the wind could not have surpassed him in swiftness:
and then (without regard of being all alone, but preferring the necessity of
aid before the difficulty of the enterprise) himself alone resolutely
charged them all. The Corse Captain (desirous to break his lance in the
curace rather of a Knight than of a mean pike-man) ran with his lance
rested fully at him; so as in the midst of the carriere each of them hit his
opposite, but with contrary success; for the Cors burst his lance (as he
made account to do) without doing any further harm, and Polimero in the
encounter brake his also, but left a yard and a half thereof in his enemies
breast. Then reining his obedient Courser to the right hand to divert himself
from encountering the whole troop together, he managed him so dexterously, as
(having broke through them without receiving any blow) he turned face again
with sword in hand, sooner than they could do the like; and withal (ere any
one touched him) sent with three blows, three horsemen tumbling to the ground.
In the mean time, though all struck at him, yet was there not any that could
fully reach him, by reason of the great fierceness of Flammauro, who (as if he
had been inspired with a reasonable soul) would not suffer any one come near
him; yet would he come so near to the others, as his master might well come to
strike them: never in her lifetime ever eyed the Princess a more pleasing
spectacle, considering the valors of the Knight and Courser, so fitly shared
between them, as by assisting one the other reciprocally, they became
Invincible. Well knew she him to be a stranger, in that all her Knights were
well known unto her, imagining he could be no less than a Prince that
enjoyed so rich a treasure, as so unvaluable a Courser. Polimero seeing no man
assail him (after he had killed and beaten down above twenty horsemen) with
redoubled courage, began to charge them anew, but finding no armor that
either denied entrance to the fine edge of his damask blade, or resisted the
force of his victorious arm, nor any Courser that in nimble gyres, and
curvets, could match his Flammauro, he forced them to save themselves by
flight; himself breaking in suddenly with the same fury among the foot
squadrons, where those of his side following him, would have slain them all,
had there not been sent fresh troops to their relief. Who shooting a good
while whole clouds of arrows, gave Polimero cause to fear lest his horse
(which then by the trial he had of him, he esteemed more than all the
kingdoms of the world) might be thereby endangered; and therefore retired
himself from such a hazard. But the fiery Steed though obedient to the hand,
by his neighing, puffing, snorting and looking backwards, expressed how
unwillingly he retired, which he manifested so evidently as the Princess had
thereby occasion to say, that he needed not speech in that he expressed
himself better by his actions.

Polimero seeing him so willing, and knowing him to be so barded and trapped as
he could not be hurt elsewhere than in the legs, resolved to adventure him, not
without entering into the opinion of such, as believe the transmigration of
spirits into bodies, his Flammauro so fortuned, that having emptied their
quivers, they so closed in the shocke, as they had scarce room to use their
swords.

The Princess continued heart-ravished (as it were) with this her gust,
spectatrix of the sweetest sport that ere her eyes beheld; neither could she
tell (till she saw Polimero's helm off) whether she more affected the horse,
or the horseman, being so rapt with the pleasure she conceived, as she took no
notice how hers were disadvantaged. Whereupon the Marquess of Oristagno could
not choose but say unto her;

May it please your Highness to give me leave to succor our men, lest that
noble Knight judge us to be far more cowardly, than we have esteemed him
valiant; whereof the Princess was well content, but would not for all this
stir thence her self. The Marquess then followed with a noble troop of
Knights (being himself most nobly descended from the blood Royal, and withal
the richest of the Sardegnan Lords) issued forth at such time, as Polimero
(after he had a little reposed himself) was about to go to renew the charge.
Who seeing coming toward him the Marquess, richly armed, and not knowing who
he was, he staid for him, till such time as come to him, he said,

Sir Knight, I beseech you pardon us, for having left you alone, seeing your
matchless valor needs no succor; and truly, but that we doubted you would
have thought us discourteous, we had permitted you alone to undergo the brunt
of destroying Epicamido's whole camp, we are now come hither by her Highness
Commission to obey and follow your arms and command. Polimero (inclining
himself somewhat downwards) made answer;

Sir Knight, if my actions were such as might deserve the commendations you
give me, I should deem my self exceeding fortunate; but the little time that
makes me know you so courteous, makes me know also how little reason I have to
believe my self valorous, and yet that little in that respect alone, that I am
favored with your applause. As touching my not being succored, I have reason
to believe, that I needed not any, because of the justice of the Lady
Princess; neither could I (without being much to blame) entertain so unworthy
an opinion of such worthy Knights as ye are; nor is it indeed possible that any
one fighting for such a cause as this, can choose but be courageous if not
valorous: and for the rest, I am come hither with an intention to serve; if
therefore you be to fight, behold me ready to obey and follow you.

The Marquess (who was one of the most courteous of his time) had not left
Polimero's answer unreplied unto, had he not been prevented by the enemy, who
perceiving these Knights descend the hill, had formed a squadron of the best of
the host, to go encounter them, which the Marquess seeing now come galloping
toward him (with their lances rested) said to Polimero; The Lady Princess is
that only one that can parallel your courtesies, see where comes the enemy,
let us go meet them; at which words, he (spurring his horse) passed on. But
Flammauro at the only cheek of the hand (as if he had known his Masters
will) sprung forwards such a leap as he left behind him the Marquess.
Polimero had no lance, for he had broken it in the first encounter, so as
being encountered by many, he bore the brunt of them all, without moving ever so
little of his seat, yet stroke he down at every blow a horseman to the
ground, being assured if he failed any, his horse supplied his default, who
beat down so fast as even his own friends feared to approach him.

Epicamedo, who began by this time to recover, and had left his bed, being
desirous to see what was done abroad, caused himself to be carried up on a
hill, accompanied with diverse Lords, among whom were the Earls of Reparata,
Pussinera, and Castle Rabone, with the Barons of Ianque and Lagosardo all the
Prince his murderers, seeing now so rich a squadron on the enemies side, would
needs know who they were, wherein he was satisfied by these Lords, who well
knew them by their devices. But as they knew not Polimero, so were they
astonished at his valor. By this time had the horse (issued from their side)
received the charge, after the foot were cut all to pieces. Epicamedo, not
able to support this so foul a disgrace, (all swollen with disdain) called
for his arms. The Chirurgions were not able to dissuade him, who although he
was by reason of his wounds grown weak, yet was he far more stout than
feeble, and because he could not suffer his head (not as yet well cured) to be
armed, therefore would he needs go bare-headed. But those great ones that were
about him, in the end so prevailed with him, as (calling for their horses) they
quieted him with assured hope, that they would by the getting of that days
victory recover the honor of the field.

The Marquess of Oristagno (seeing the enemies foot overthrown, and their
horse but few, and these retiring) drew near Polimero to conduct him to the
Princess, judging the residue sufficient to make good the field; but now
perceiving issue from their side more than twenty troops of horse, he said: I
once thought that the enemy had contented himself with the loss he has
already sustained, but he (I perceive) is insatiable and will have more, let
us see what troops are these: looking then toward the Princess, he perceived
she sent him succor; and coming afterward to know (among the enemies) the
Count of Reparata and the other Rebels, he showed them Polimero, but more
particularly those that slew the Prince.

The Princess (seeing the conflict grow greater and greater) mounted on
horseback, and causing the Trumpets to sound, so rowsed up Epicamedo's
spirits, that she saw him send forth for a supply well near all his horse.
Whereupon she doing the like, and drawing nigh the battle, came to know all
the Traitors, of whom being desirous to take some alive, she discovered her
desire to the warlike Valentinian women, who always made good their places in
the flancks of her own troop, and then put her self forwards among foremost,
where Polimero was, that with one blow had newly beaten off his horse the Count
of Castlerabone: the women alighting strave to carry him away, which they
could hardly effect, because of the great resistance of the enemies side. The
Princess (grown furious to see them all before her) thrust at the Baron of
Ianque, which fortune so well guided, that it passing between his curace and
pouldrons came out at his back. Polimero who by the colors of Sardegna, by
her rich upper garment, by her horse roially trapped, (but above all) by the
comeliness of her person, knew her for the Princess; and observing her strive
to get this prisoner, put forwards Flammauro, who by making a large room, gave
the women time to save their prize; and then changing his sword into the other
hand, he compassed with his right arm the Baron of Ianque about the middle,
and spurring on his own horse, plucked the other sheere off his, which he
performed with such facility, as one would have thereby judged his force to
have been sufficient to have removed a Tower, and delivering him over to the
charge of the Valentinian women (whose design he well observed) he encountered
the Count of Reparata: whilst the Princess (in the same place) affronted that
other of Pussinera. But in respect all their Cavallerie ran thither to succor
them, the throng grew to be so pressing as neither the one part nor the other
had been able to stir, if Flammauro had not made them room, for he keeping
off with his heels such as were behind him, gave Reparata's horse such a
shocke, as made him (being not able to stand) press down with him (as he
fell) that of Pussinera, who tumbled down in a bundle with him, with the
legs of the one Count and the other under their horses.

And because Flammauro was that only he, that could make all stand off,
Polimero, leaving to others the charge of bearing away the prisoners, took
care to secure those, that bare them away from being hindered by such as would
have rescued them; wherein he had no small ado, by reason they were all upon
him, so as he had not got from them alive, but that the Princess rescued him,
who seeing him barricadoed about with the enemies horse (none of them daring
for all that approach him) being seconded by the Marquess, and the
Valentinians with an unresistable force, brake into their ring, by that means
freeing him from the danger he was in, without having the power, either to
speak one word unto him (although she was always close by him) or to separate
her self from him, though she knew no reason therefore. Wherehence I gather
(concede me I pray you this small digression) that among the hidden secrets of
nature, that of sympathizing is one of the truest, which if we judge vain in
respect of the operator, may yet prove to be not altogether such in respect of
the principles of nature. For as experience teaches us, that the influence of
lights and planets are true in the mutations of qualities here below, which
none can deny, that deny not sense it self; so may we also argue from the
like, that the other stars have also their peculiar influence, which if it be
granted, and that we allow them to be promoters of affections, then must they
be such also of love and harred, by reason of the diverse proportion of their
aspects, and not of elections or casual accidents; and if they, or these, be
changed from their former into a diverse proportion, and that the celestial
signs be found to be of diverse aspects, and that some of them be malignant,
others not; some predominant, and others obedient; this may proceed from the
foundation of daily conjectures, whereby we see one friend rule another, the
sons the fathers, and the servants also oversway and (in a certain manner)
domineere over their Masters.

So now Polimero, before ere he saw the Princess, became enamored of her; and
she (likewise without seeing him) fell so strangely in love with him, that the
more willingly she eyed and followed him, the less power had she to speak to
him; Nay, (almost deprived of all boldness and courage) she feared either to
look in his face or fall in conference with him.

He in the mean time scoured over all the field edged onwards by his great
spirit, and by the desire he had to show himself worthy of the favor of her
whom he had elected for his Lady and Mistress, stand long still to look on
her he could not, as well for a native respect potent in that age of his, in
teaching him that necessary circumspection which might give others no occasion
to take notice of his thoughts; as also because it behoved him to have an eye
both to himself, and to his horse, who delighting in the war, gave sometimes
such countertimes, as might teach a good Horseman to stick firm to his seat:
yet failed he not to cast a careful eye to her dangers, wherein he (abandoning
all other care) rescued her twice from being oppressed with the enemies.

Of all the Prince his murderers, there remained free, none but the Baron of
Lagosardo: who albeit he were fierce and courageous, yet fought he
nevertheless very circumspective of his person, not that he feared to die, but
because he feared to fall alive into the hands of the Princess. Him Polimero
knew not for one of them (though he had been showed him as well as the other
four) yet incountring him by chance, he struck him on the nape of the neck
with a back blow, which made him bow down his forehead to his horse-necke;
which he (come to himself) requited with a thrust in the flancke, whence began
to gush forth store of blood, which the Princess perceiving (and desirous to
revenge) violently flew at him with such a fury, that (maugre those that would
have guarded him, or her own determination of having him alive) she never left
him till such time as she saw him mortally wounded, fallen down and trampled,
not weighing a rush all the rest; especially because Polimero, though he had no
finger in her combat as long as it lasted, guarded nevertheless her person in
beating the way round about her with his Flammauro; by which means he defended
her from all such as would have stricken at her.

By this time the enemies could do no more, nor hold out any longer, having
lost almost all their Captains, so as there remained no other eminent
Commander than the King alone; for the remnant of the Rebels (being the Earls
of Sarda, Terra nova, and Longeria) were run away for fear of being taken
prisoners: So that if either the day had lasted, or Polimero not been wounded,
then even there had ended the war, and perhaps the life of Epicamedo. But
Eromena doubting lest his wound were mortal (in that she saw gush out thereof
such store of blood) caused a retreite to be sounded, and then suspicion
chasing away respectivenesse; she having lifted up her beaver, said unto him;

Sir Knight, so great is the obligation I owe you, that it grieves me, my power
is inferior to the desire I have to express my gratefulness: I see you
bloody, but know not how you feel your self: Do you believe that your wound
is very deep?

Polimero, as soon as he saw her face uncovered, permitted his greedy eyes to
run to such a longed for sight, thinking he saw the heavens opened, and
those parts, which with celestial symmetry formed that face, to be congregated
gods; howbeit he was dubious in the absolute distinction of the greater from
the lesser, seeing all generally Majesticall, and every one by it self worthy
of the service of so many more worlds. But those splendent eyes (full of
sparkling rays, that pierced through the concentred point of his heart) made
him a little stagger, whose luster was as that of Apollo, but their virtue as
of a greater Deity; for these in stead of dazeling the material eyes, strike
those of the mind with so reiterated rays, that there is no lightsome
splendour, either of Sun, Moon or Stars, which contains the thousandth part
of its own virtue so fully in it self, as these possess all of all theirs, in
a manner so unexpressable, as the most perspicuous wit could never form to it
self an Idea conformable thereunto: And although her language had its
pre-eminence, and that it had captivated the understanding in its first
apprehension; nevertheless the shafts of her eyes made themselves be esteemed
the arms of love, nay his throne, nay his heaven, nay Jove himself. Wherefore
having already lifted up his beaver, with an humble garb and true posture of
veneration he returned her this answer;

And who can ever presume (valorous Lady) to think himself worthy or capable
of serving you in such a manner, as that your deserts, and the duty of who so
serves you, exceed not a thousand times his service? or what greater
recompense ought any one pretend from your Highness, for any service than your
service it self? such have the gods made you, that being only and absolutely
singular in all excellent parts, you only should, for being such, be excladed
and exempted from the debt which others own by the common law of nature. As for
me I pretend nothing else than your service, neither expect I other guerdon
than that you would vouchsafe to be pleased to give me leave to serve you:
wherein if my fortune or your benignity make me so happy, as that my service
be acceptable unto you; I shall account in at unpretended gain. But as for my
wound, I think it be not dangerous, if my sense beguile me not, which indeed
it well may, seeing that who so lives with the gods is not subject to the
feeling of any pain; your divine presence is sufficient to ease all kind of
pains, and cure all manner of wounds, though deep and inward, as I repute
mine to be at this instant rather exasperated than given.

The Princess, in the lifting up he made of his beaver, rested so extazied, as
if she had been stricken with lightning, believing not till such time as she
heard him speak, that he could be other than a damzell like her self, whom
some emulation had drawn into those parts. But having afterward examined the
arguments for the contrary, she could not satiate her self in beholding him,
yet not all of him, for her eyes (become immovable) had not the power to
stir from their first object; so as fixed altogether on his, her eyes
twinckled not at all, and so exceedingly was she ravished by an unknown power,
as she was forced to understand the invisible intelligences that passed from
one heart to the other. But when she afterward heard his courteous conceits,
his modest pretentions, and his last words, of her not understood amiss; she
being such a one, as both for vivacitie of wit to conceive them, and for
incomparable beauties and exquisite perfections, to deserve them was every way
peerless, imagining withal that so lofty a thought could not be lodged
elsewhere, than in a Prince's heart) she with a gladsome countenance made him
this reply.

You are too too curious (Sir Knight) in prizing a feeble damzell so highly as
you do; and too little affectioned to your selfe-wards, in so slenderly
esteeming your own worth; for such have your services hitherunto been, as I
judge my self more than any other, indebted to that common law you speak of,
the exclusion from which if it could be granted me in any case, should then be
for services done me by my fathers subjects, who are thereto obliged by nature,
and by the favors they daily receive; but in this case a stranger has no
place, his service not depending on the law of subjection, but on his own
free will and election, wherewith he greatly obliges whom he serves. But
leaving this aside, methinks your wound has no need of delaying its cure,
which since it is such as you tell me, let us hence to our tents, where (I hope
in the gods) the danger will not prove such, but that you may be soon cured
thereof: for there have we good Chirurgions, and withal these our mountains
are full of virtuous herbs, by means whereof you will in a few days (I hope)
find your self recovered and a sound man.

Polimero would no further reply, for doubt of being esteemed audacious; which
she observing, put off her glove to touch his hand, as she was wont to do to
her guests, and he gently taking it in his, affectionately kissed it, to the
great pleasure of them both, acutely conceiving their joys to be equally
shared. The Marquess and others seeing him of so tender an age, and so rare a
beauty (after enterchange of courteous complements) could never have their fill
of looking on him, deeming his force to be unproportionable to his years, and
his delicacy to his valor.

Being come to the tents, and the Chirurgions sent for, he was (by special
order from the Princess) laid a-bed, and dressed in a tent not far from
hers. The wound was in the fleshly part of the flancke of a good wideness, of
no danger, and of a likelihood of being soon cured, whereof the Princess was
exceeding joyful, and had willingly gone in person to visit him, but that
modesty and her dignity forbade her.

The day ensuing, it was resolved in council, that no time, nor respite, was
to be given the enemy, already half overthrown, but that he should be assailed
in his trenches: when (as they were going out) there appeared before them some
Country Swains, who (delivering the Princess a letter,) told her they were
of Cornetto, where they kept prisoner the Admiral shrewdly wounded; whereupon
she being very inquisitive to know how he was taken, one of them knowing
Carasio (who by chance waited there to know what the Council would resolve of)
answered her; the Master of that same squire there, is he that delivered him
us, to bring him (as sent from him) to your Highness, but he is in so bad a
plight at this present, as that we could not bring him along with us. Hereupon
the Princess (knowing Carasio) knew also by him, whence the present came; so
as (turning toward the Council) she said; A happy star was it for us, that
conducted hither such a Knight as this, who in a small time has done more
himself alone, than all our forces together; for although the overthrow at
Valentino, and taking of Sassari were of importance, yet all had been to
little purpose without the taking of this Traitor and the rest, which were by
him taken yesterday; calling upon this for Carasio, she enquired of him if what
they said was true: which when he had affirmed, and saw that she joyed much
thereof, he further said; I believe not, that your Highness knows as yet all
that might in that respect make up your joys more complete, and thereupon
acquainted her of the imprisoning of the slave; How (said she) is the slave a
prisoner, and I know nothing thereof? It is most certain (answered Carasio)
and with that related unto her the manner how he was found at sea, by the
Marquess of Chia.

Scarce had he finished his discourse, when there arrived unawares a Poast from
the King, who brought also letters from the same Marquess, wherein (after the
news of the slave) he recommended Polimero, describing him by his aspect,
arms, and horse, giving her withal an inkling of his being highly descended,
and of his coming of purpose to serve her in that war. Which news afforded
her (as she conceived) a colorable excuse to go see him; and therefore asked
Carasio if a visit of hers would be discommodious unto him, who (having
answered her it would not) advertized thereof his Master; who (at the Princess
her entrance raising himself on his elbow) said,

The Tent ( Madame) in that it is your Highnesses, may perhaps deserve this
favor, but never I; although I possessed all the merits in the world: (and as
he would have spoken on) the Princess interrupting him, said,

Since then (Sir) the Tent (as you say) is mine, it is fit that I command in
mine own house, which otherwise I would not presume to do with you, but by
way of entreaty: Repose your self on your pillow, or I will get me gone,
courtesies are not supportable when they be prejudicial to your wounds. There
is no wound can prejudice me (answered Polimero) that is anointed with the
precious balsome of your Highness favors, yet must I needs for all that obey
you, for to that end was I borne. Whereat she smiling said, I could do no
less (Sir Knight) than come to see you, to yield you thanks for the present
you sent me ere your arrival hither, whereof I know nothing till this instant;
I pray the heavens I may be able to show my self not ungrateful unto you, for
(for my own part) I owing so much, have (without their aid) but little to
satisfy so great a debt. He then (willing to raise himself anew, and she
charging him to lie still) made her this answer:

Your Highness her presence enjoyes a virtue so excellent, as it is not
(either in respect of it self or of others) capable of receiving of the least
blemish of defect, so as what in others might be perhaps styled importunity, is
in your Highness no other than a favor, who being so bountiful a
distributresse of your courtesies will not suffer me to go away, without
largely participating thereof, for that I well know that they point fully at
me, so as I hope for more ease and good to my wounds from them, than from all
the balsomes, and sovereign herbs in the mountains of Sardegna; by so much
the more am I therefore indebted unto your Highness, by how much you exceeding
with your goodness and bounty, the weakness of my deserts, deem me worthy
of that merit which no dignity can deserve; for the rest, if presents ought to
be prised for their good qualities, then has your Highness no reason to
thank me for this, because among men there is not a worse than that Traitor;
or if by some consequence, or motive of just revenge, your Highness think
this present meritorious, yet cannot that neither make it thank. worthy,
seeing all men are obliged to justice, and Knights above all other, and yet
above all Knights I, who have dedicated my self to your Highness service, ere
ever I knew you.

The Princess, having fixed on him her eyes whilst he spoke, exactly surveying,
and considering with her self his beauty (which exceeded that of any other in
his time) his comeliness, and behavior, (gifts in him natural, and by
education perfected) together with the sweetness of his words (which
pronounced in a feemely order, and with a certain kind of inimitable
utterance won the hearts of such as heard him) maugre the vigor of her courage,
the virtue of her dignity, and her formerly made deliberation never to affect
any could, not choose but love him; which she afterward continued with a
passion so excessive, as there was never woman that ever more truly loved than
she. Moved then with the affects of love (borne, at the first sight, or ere she
beheld his face, and grown up by seeing him with his beaver off, but now waxen
ripe, in both seeing and hearing him,) she rested so troubled in her mind, as
she knew not what to say, till at length somewhat stammering, and bewraying
with her humide eyes, the state of her burning heart, she said unto him:

What shall I say to you? (courteous Knight) sithence that your virtue being
subordinated to the divinity, a type of all virtue, contenting it self with
it self, despises those fruits which humane virtue delights in among mortals?
You will be obliged unto me, and will maintain, that you cannot by serving of
me disoblige your self, if humane affairs proceeded in such a fashion, then
were the conditions of some miserable, and of others tyrannical: for those
straightly bound without being able to untie themselves, and these quite loose,
and free from all possibility of becoming bound, could never hold that
relation together, that nature requires equally among things not unequal.
Wherefore in that we are in nature equal, and therefore necessarily borne to
this relation, it must needs follow that who so serves, deserves; and that you
being the obliging, I must consequently needs be the obliged unto you:
otherwise (by treading the paths of divinity) all humane ways would be quite
destroyed. Your wounds (Sir Knight) though peradventure not your actions,
bewray you to be a man, and being such, how can you hold your self tied to
this snare of obligation, and to this chain of servitude without ever
pretending either liberty or reward? Nay, not so much as commendations, being
you must strip your self of that also, if you will sustain the machine of your
paradox? You free from all kind of debt and duty, either of vassallage or
otherwife, have done me so great services, as I may not endure to hear you
degrade (by the indignity of the prize) your worthy actions that so much
oblige me; and if your argument were true, the gods should never be exalted by
me, seeing their good turns extended no further than to the purging the world
of monsters, and to terrestrial things here below on earth, who nevertheless
ought with great reason to be adored, as those by whose means we receive all
goodness. And if by the other argument you believe you could not oblige me in
that you were already obliged to justice; give me but leave to tell you, that
the just man is indeed commended only by justice, not because we are not all
bound to be just, but because the law of justice does not compel us to have a
hand in all just causes; and therefore, you for having a hand in this, and in a
cause of such a nature, and withal with the hazard of your life (whereto
justice obliged not) acquire thereby the praise not only of a just man, but
also of a stout Champion, for which you deserve the guerdon, if justice cease
not to be justice.

Polimero, (seeing her so profoundly dive into the center of the Ethnickes,
with a resolution not to be vanquished) making her with all respectivenesse a
submissive cringe, to manifest his yielding as conquered, said thus unto her;
Let not your Highness imagine (I beseech you) that I mean to oppose your
courteous Tenants, by so much the rather because they tend to my favor. And
although that truth in its power can do more than all powers, this rule
nevertheless shall for this time suffer its exception; your Highness
generositie of necessity exceeding and surpassing truth it self. Pardon me (I
pray you) for so saying, for had I said otherwise, it would have proved a
species of Rebellion in my service, which (although your arguments rather stop
my mouth that can express little, than persuade my faith, which believes what
it ought) being it desires to conserve it self faithful, cannot choose but
confess even to the death, that the condition of my services, is nothing in
comparison of the royal merits of your Highness, which of themselves are such
as by vouchsafing to suffer them, to be known, is a guerdon sufficiently
satisfactorie, to whosoever is graced with the favor of knowing them.

Thus did love solace it self in these two Lovers, but with a certain
extraordinary order: for being wont in other to creep by degrees, in these
would he needs manifest his Deity, and show himself to be a god, though
blind, yet eyed sufficiently to spy out two spirits, who (participating of
celestial essence) merited to be by an extraordinary way infused with his
graces. Therefore would he have the beginning and the period to be both in the
same instant, and that from their reciprocal affection, should suddenly spring
forth a certain knowledge, as if they had been long before acquainted each
with other: So as (banishing all complements, and depriving them of all
whatsoever they had learnt, either by nature or from the Court, in the art of
dissembling;) he taught them to understand and discern the scope of their
different arguments, and yet would he have them understand mutually each the
others meaning, by the secret intelligence of the means already adoperated.

Eromena then (breathing amorous sighs from the internal center of her heart)
thus replied; I well perceive (Sir Knight) that under a false title of service,
you are resolved to command me, which (for the clearing of some opposing
ambiguities) makes me very desirous to know but who you are; for albeit I am
constrained to yield unto you (were it but for your valors sake, which makes
me deem you most noble) yet should I think my self exceeding happy, if
fortune therewithal concurred in the rest. Whereat Polimero (taking her by the
hand, and with extreme joy kissing it) returned her this answer: Your Highness
shall in this point be very shortly obeyed and satisfied, for I hold it more
difficult by prowess to make my self known to be worthy of what I pretend to
be already, than to be known, for that other, who as yet is altogether
unknown. Tell it then (replied the Princess.) Command me it not I beseech you,
said then Polimero; only be but pleased that the wars first be brought to an
end, and that my true service, which shall never have end, may establish its
foundation of actions; this accomplished, I will not only pray the heavens
(contrary to all my own arguments) to be favorable in granting a reward, but
will also beseech your Highness self to bestow one on me: neither shall I
presume to desire it at your Highness hands, if fortune and nature concur
not in a higher pitch, than I shall ever be able to arrive with the humility of
my service, considering the infinite deserts and high merits of your
HHighnesse. On this Eromena (desirous to know him, and not allowing those his
excuses) was disturbed by the Marquess and other knights, by reason of whose
coming she retired her self thence a little after; and so did these others
also, after they had passed with Polimero such observant terms of good
breeding, as (because of the last news) they judged convenient.

The morning following was Epicamedo assailed in his trenches; but not with any
particular valor of singular persons; for the Princess went not thither, and
Polimero lay wounded, the others suffered themselves to be governed by a common
and ordinary spirit, which commonly rules by ordinary means. So that the
fortifications being good, well flanked and as well guarded, and the defendants
become (by past knocks) more careful and resolute, not to give way to the
valor of the enemy, there therefore ensued an honorable retreat with small
loss of men, and no disadvantage of acquired reputation. the Corses (to show
they were not vanquished) in the succeeding days, issued forth incessantly to
their wonted skirmishes, with an intent rather of prolonging than finishing the
war; although many were of opinion that their best course had been to retire
themselves, in that their hopes were by so many contrary fortunes almost quite
overthrown. But Epicamedo (that of all the Corsan Kings was most courageous
and fierce, no whit daunted to see his designs broken off, his friends lost,
and himself forsaken of such of them as survived,) had already sent post over
into Corsica for new forces, so fortifying (in the mean time) the situation of
his Camp, as he made it of its self apt to bear the brunt of any sudden
assault, as might tend to the forcing of his trenches, which lasted many days,
until the recoverie of Polimero, who all this while had much ado to detend
his being concealed from the urging importunity of Eromena.

Whilst these things were a doing, the Fleets at sea were diversely governed.
The Sardan rode in Porto di Torre contented to conserve her self. And the
Corsan (who was stronger by ten Galleyes) commanded as Mistress of the sea,
scowring the coast from Tolata to Corsica, without any danger, when she
leaving fresh forces, and disembarking them at Terra-nova (a place near the
Camp) romed over all that river, leaving always eight or ten Galleyes at
Tolata to supply such occasions, as might fall out to be necessary, either for
the affairs of the army, or the Kings service. Now when all these of the
Fleet were returned from Corsica, and had landed some thousand foot, fifteen
of them wafted off toward Porto di Torre, to see if they could by any means
draw forth into the Maine, the Sardan Galleyes; which under the command of a
brave Vice Admiral lay at anchor in the haven, expecting the arrival of the
Marquess of Chia, with a good number of Galleyes, that were a rigging and
arming in the Arcenall of Caleri, toward the augmenting and reinforcing of
this Sardan Armado.

Now the Marquess had obtained of the King the office of Admiral, on
condition that Eromena thereto consented, wherefore he came to Villa-petres,
and got the confirmation thereof, by means both of his own merits, and of
Polimero's intercession, to whom he so performed his promise of concealing
him, as the Princess could not possibly come to know thereof any thing else,
but generalities, wherewith albeit she was exceedingly contented, yet remained
she nevertheless in a confused manner, confusedly disquieted. Returned
afterward to Caleri, he there staid waiting until the Galleyes were made
ready, wherewith (though inferior in number) he hoped to affront all the
Corsan Armado. In the mean time the other Galleyes (as I told you) lay at
anchor under the command of a Vice Admiral; who (because his power was
limited, and his Galleyes but twelve in number) would not venture them far,
knowing that the loss of these few Vessels might occasion the ruin of the
whole enterprise. The Centrees which he kept watching ashore on the Promontory,
gave him notice of the coming of the enemy, together with the precise number
of their Galleys, besides one Galley more that came from a contrary point
where of they knew not what to think. The Vice Admiral therefore judging it a
great shame to suffer himself to be assieged in his own haven, the enemies
having but the advantage of three galleys, or at the most but of four (if that
which was coming from the West, were also one of theirs) resolving to prepare
himself to fight, launched forth of the haven in good order, not believing
that the other Galley was any foe to them, because the kingdoms of Spain and
Maiorica (whence she seemed to come) were in good league and friendship with
the Sardegnan crown.

By this time the Corses had divided their fleet into three small squadrons,
where of two consisted of six Galleyes a-peece, and the third but of three,
which (being disentangled) might succor where occasion required; And the
Sardans divided theirs into two only, not reserving any Galley for succor.
Gotten then within shot one of the other, they began to let fly their arrows;
the three fetching a large compass came with their Archers to charge the
Sardans in their poope; and after they had for a good while maintained their
shot (perceiving the approach of the Galley of the West that with maine force
of oars came flying toward them) they went two of them to hail her, whilst
the other thirteen went on to grapple with the twelve Sardans, with such
shouts and cries, as made all the seacoast resound at the noise thereof. The
two approaching near to that other, and seeing her with three fanals or
lanthornes, but without any Standard, wondering what she might be, held still
their oars; the other did the like, but carried away with the mere force of
her course, she bare up so near the other, that the Corse Captain might
conveniently ask her whence she was? Where at she (knowing them for Corses)
plunging her oars suddenly in the waters, run full-but on the next to her,
giving her such a violent shocke, as she, being but of three and twenty
banckes, escaped hardly a sinking, and then being boorded by a brave squadron of
Knights, was (after a short skirmish) taken, with the death of such as strove
to defend her. Mean while her fellow-galley, thinking this stranger so busied
as she could not resist her assault, resolved to charge her stern, where
having settled her snout on the ladder, and reached out their grappling hooks
to hold her firm, that so they might mount her by skaling, they were beaten
back by one Knight alone, that threw down into the sea above fifteen of them
one after another, who were there drowned with the weight of their armor; the
rest (playing wide off with their arrows) were in a case but little better,
because the enemy (being exceedingly well armed) showred such clouds of
arrows, as forced this Galley to forsake her lost fellow, and fly back to
the rest for safeguard; but the stranger (not weying the want of her men that
were aboard the other Cors, seeing they were Masters there of) made amain
after this, whom she overtaking assailed, and in a short time (boording her
with her men) made her fellow captive with the other; and because she could not
choose but use some cruelty toward her for the assuring her self of her the
more speedily (she being resolved to succor those others of Sardegna) she cut
in pieces almost all the soldiers, and withal cut off her oare-ties that she
might not run away; which done, she bent her course toward the Corsan
Admiral; who, not able to sustain a new assault, having had but too much to
do with the Sardan Vice Admiral, remained in the power of the Sardans. Then
after assailing another, and taking her, it came to pass, that the Corsans
first losing their ods of vessels, and afterward over-match'd with disparity
and disadvantage, were all of them taken, so as there escaped not as much as a
Pinnaee of all their number.

The Vice Admiral, who before was in a doubtful plight, and had (without this
succor) for all his valor gotten the worst of the day, not knowing whose that
Galley might be, went aboard a Frigate, and come to her poope, he saw that
Knight (that with his own hands had tumbling down so many over-boord) clad in
costly armor, of a Majesticall aspect, and environed with a ring of noble
Knights, that honored him as their Lord; and therefore imagining he could be
no less than a Prince, he kneeled down before him; when the other (not
permitting him) said, Stand up (Sir Knight) for I may not hear you in such a
posture, whereupon he (rising up) answered; I will obey you (my Lord) for all
things oblige me so to do, yet shall this not hinder me to acknowledge, that
your presence merits to be by me spoken unto in such a posture and fashion. I
know I enjoy this victory by your means, and that it is to you, that the
kingdom of Sardegna owes this debt. I am therefore come to yield you thanks
for it, not conformable to your dignity, though such as may be better
expressed by the affection of a grateful heart, than by the unpolisht language
of a Knight that is more Mariner than Courtier. I will say no more, because I
judge your quality to be such, that to offer you my self with these Galleyes,
saved by your valor, would add so little to your greatness; as you would
peradventure disdain them. I am not indeed Admiral of this fleet, and
therefore ppossesse not such absolute authority as were requisite for your
service; nevertheless, so great is the service that the King my Sovereigne
has received of you, as I may in this particular without presumption assume
full authority, which shall be to offer you, besides his Galleyes, and those
that man them, whose hearts you have by your help won already, those also of
the enemies, acquired by your arms, that you may dispose of them, as to you
may seem good, being well assured that I can never do a service more
acceptable than this to my Sovereignes the King and Princess.

The Knight that had all this while listened unto him with a constant Majesty,
changing it now into a smiling countenance, thus replied; (Sir Knight) I can
do no less than accept very kindly your Noble courtesy which you could never
have manifested by a more generous spirit than your own; but as it befits me
not to accept it according to the largeness of your offer, so hold I it very
inconvenient not to accept of some portion there of, and that shall be your
amity. Leaving the rest for you and your soldiers, together with the honor
of the day, whereof if you will yet needs have me participate, it shall suffice
me to have with my coming, hastened your victory. I am Metaneone, Prince of
Mauritania, come hither to find out a brother of mine, who (I know well) is
come to Sardegna, with the Marquess of Chia, to make one in these wars; I
have a great desire to get a sight of him; and because he (for some respects)
will perhaps conceal himself from me, and shun my presence; I would feign be
so directed as I might unawares come to find him out, ere he knew any thing of
my coming, wherein if you can further me, 'you shall oblige me exceedingly.

The Vice Admiral, notwithstanding the Princes commands, kneeled down before
him, and because he could not come to kiss his hand, he reverently kissed the
skirt of his armor, and then (raised up again) he said,

Most valourous Prince, to reply or repeat things already spoken were super
fluous, especially considering that of so great a Prince as is your Highness,
all gifts are to be accepted, as I also accept all, save only one, where of
your Highness (though liberal) ought not to be prodigal, and that is the
honor of this days conquest; which if it happen that your Highness refuse, I
will erect to fame a Trophee thereof, so great, as you shall be (whether you
will or no) constrained to accept it. And as concerning the rest, had you not
mentioned particularly the Marquess of Chia, I could not have certainly
satisfied your desire in any thing; yet now I know that the youth that came
with him, lives unknown, and has performed such martial exploits, as it is
most necessary and requisite that Sardegna being already engaged to the one
for his land enterprises, rest obliged to the other also for his achievements
by sea: he has kept his bed (wounded) almost this month, and lives (not far
hence) in the Camp with the Princess. If your Highness please to go thither
by land, your way will be the shorter, but more difficult, if by sea, more
commodious, sudden and unexpected; whither I will wait on your Highness,
together with the whole Fleet; for in that the King of Corsica has but ten
Galleyes now left, I intend to seize on them, ere they can come to know any
thing of the loss of the others. Nor can the King Epicamedo escape death or
imprisonment, when he shall be thus deprived of his Galleys, being that he can
hope for no help from the Rebels; the greatest part whereof are taken
prisoners, and the remaining three, fled.

The Prince commending this deliberation as prudent, and seconded with the
approbation of the Count of Bona, told him, that he himself would partake
with him in that enterprise, the rather because that way was most commodious
for him. Returned therefore to Porto di Torre, and leaving there the Galleyes
they took, (except four which they caused suddenly to be armed and manned,
re-inforcing the others with the Corsan ghing) they set out for their
determined voyage.

Polimero kept his bed longer than he made account to do, for getting up one
day to go skirmish, his wound then half cured, bruised by his armor, began
to ranckle and fester; wherefore the Princess would not suffer him to arm
himself any more, till such time as that wound were fully cured, together with
two more given him the same day. It grieved him to the heart to see the
Princess in all dangers, and himself not able to succor her, the rather
because the enemy was so well fortified in his Camp, with sundry Forts and
redouts over all the field, as made him even despair. Such was (in the mean
time) the affection between them, that it was impossible to believe how
strongly it was joined with a passing modest discretion (a well known enemy to
fervent love:) but too too green youth in the one, and native modesty in the
other, moderated their affections, whence sprung those effects in love
unacustomed.

The Princess could by no means come to know who he was; which made her often
vex at her self for having had so little forecast, as not to have forced the
Marquess of Chia to tell it her, assuring her self that he well knew i,
although he made show of the contrary, the rather because in his letter to her
he wrote, that he was of a high descent. And albeit she could believe no less
but that she was beloved (for had she but imagined otherwise, she had been
dead a thousand times) nevertheless this constant concealing himself put her
in doubt, causing her to syllogize; That who so loves, the same obeys the
thing or subject beloved, but he obeyed not (because he told her not who he
was) and therefore he loved her not. Another time she would imagine that he
concealed himself for not being able to make himself known to be of such
blood as might be deemed any way worthy of her: Or if he were, that then he did
but profess affection only to pass away the time (during the continuance of
his stay there,) in pleasing his humor with the title of love. But when she
considered how his royal manners unmasked him, repenting her self of her
censure, she accused her judgment of temeritie, it grieving her that she had
her spirits so offuscared as in not knowing him, not to know her self. Only
she was certain, that if this torment lasted, her life could not long endure,
grown already impotent with the tedious suffering the violent fits of her
amorous fever, wherewith she had every day such a bickering, as caused the
corals and roses fade away from her sweetly Majesticall face, like one
languishing and fainting underthe burden of some tyrannous disease: which gave
many cause to conjecture, that the delicaete of her sex kept disproportioned
company with the stoutnesse of her courage, and that watching, weight of
arms, and other discommodities of the wars diminished the excellency of her
beauty, so that if the war continued, it might well revive in her the valor
of Perosfilo, but quite destroy the beauties of Eromena.

Polimero on the other side, the more his external wounds healed, the more did
his internal exasperate and fret. Well was he assured of the love of the
Princess, which made him not become insolent (conformable to the levity of
youth,) nay rather, though neither his stars had inclined him, nor her
beauties and good parts forced him to love her; yet had mere gratitude (a
great mistress of gentle spirits) been powerful enough (without either
influence of stars, or attraction of beauties) to have compelled him (in a
certain manner) even to adore her. And how much rather then by inclination or
compulsion, was he constrained to do it for diverse other respects? When he
considered the excellency of her singular endowments; by so much the more
worthy of all merits, by how much the virtues of both sexes being united in
her, had of the Idea of beauties (compartible among all women) formed one woman
alone, and withal (to make her more admirable) conferred on her al manly
valor and courage. And that therefore his was a fortune fortunate, above all
fortunes, to be beloved of her, who above all other women merited the sacrifice
of all hearts. And if every great Prince (how potent soever) had reason to
esteem himself happy, if he came to receive but the least of those favors,
which he hourly enjoyed; by how much the more should he, being poor, without
means, and the meanest of all his brothers, think himself (among the
happiest) most truly happy? It grieved him he obeyed her not in a matter so
frivolous, which she so much desired to know; yet he excused it, in that he was
ashamed to manifest himself ere he had given a more ample expression of his
merits; because the being sprung from blood Royal, was but a quality to
content the world. The nobleness of a mind so divine, as exceeded all Royal
state, requiring a quality more sublime to content it self; so as he for
being not able to reach with the lowness of his services to the hight of her
perfections would have utterly dispaired thereof, if he desire to serve her,
more than the service it self (eternally inferior to his duty) had not made
the way of her favor easy to his merits.

Little else could Polimiro ponder in his mind, the greenenesse of his years
not affording him as yet other effectual affections, than the less secret,
and his want of experience, depriving him of the light of nature, which is wont
to bear a great sway, even in childhood it self, unless a true love
(interposing it self) engender a virtuous eclipse; his speculations were
altogether of abstractions, for in not knowing he knew, and though he knew not
how, yet well knew he what he would feign have, and what he would feign not
have: Full little was he as yet aware of that the negative might have place in
a courteous Lady; he being not (ever so little) acquainted with those things,
(which though sued for) might be without discourtesie denied. Much was he
troubled and vexed for his hurts, thinking that the time spent in healing his
wounds, wounded him in losing so much time in her service, his heart persuading
him, that (with the ardent desire he had to deserve her) he found himself
sufficiently encouraged to chase away, not only from his trenches, but even
from Sardegna, both Epicamedo and Mars himself.

Whilst Polimero stood thus feeding his amorous melancholy, in came the
Princess, who accustomed to come every day to visit him, and the better to
shadow her affection, held her council of war about his bed, under pretext
(for the honor due to his valor) to receive also his opinions. Where, after
thanking her for the trouble and pains she vouchsafed to take in coming to
visit him, he besought her to give him leave to go out to the field, for that
he well saw that that air agreed not with her constitution, and that
therefore she being unaccustomed to hardness and disasters should do well to
take some course to avoid them. Whereunto the Princess (that well knew the
cause of her alterations) made answer:

My Lord, you would feign govern your self, according to the greatness of
your stout spirit, which at this present ought to resign its government to
your person, that may not be otherwise ruled than according to your present
indisposition; you well know and feel what prejudice you have got thereby
already; I pray you think on it, that it may serve you for a warning, to
dehort you from incurring again into the like inconvenience. My indisposition
is not such as you take it for, neither does any toil prevail over any
tenderness or ease that I have been formerly used unto; Have but a little
patience, and when the Chirurgians condescend that you may (without danger) get
up, then will I also be therewith contented.

Whilst thus with reiterated supplications Polimero endeavored to obtain his
request, there entered into the tent Carasio with a Currier come from Porto di
Torra, who kneeling down before the Princess, delivered her a letter, which
opened, she found to be the Vice-Admirals, and contained the news of the
victory, obtained against the enemies with the conquest of fifteen Galleyes;
which chanced him by the aid of one Galley, commanded by a most noble Knight.
And that now he was resolved (having armed four Galleyes of those fifteen he
had taken, and reinforced the rest) to assail (with the assistance of that
other Galley) Epicamedo's Armado at Terranuova; whereof he would render an
account to her Highness, whom he besought to charge the enemy by land, in
the selfsame time, if it seemed good to her Highness so to do.

The Princess having read this letter, gave it Polimero; and sending for the
Council of war, caused it to be read unto them, who approved of the opinion
of the Vice Admiral. And because the sea was about two and twenty miles thence
distant, there were placed many Centrees along the mountain toward
Castrodesen, who (as soon as they saw the Fleet appear and assail the
Corsan Armado) were to give a signal, with smoke in several places; which was
performed with such secrecy, that no man knew it, except the Council, and him
that (standing Centree at the sea) might serve to give all the rest directions;
nor was there any danger of his falling into the hands of the enemy, because
the Sardan horse was Commander of the field.

Polimero (when the Council was gone) turned toward the Princess, saying,
Alas, and will your Highness do me this shame, to let me lie lulled here
amongst the feathers in such an occasion of service, when others toil
themselves abroad in the field? Not I by any means, (answered the Princess)
so that the Chirurgians permit you but to go abroad; and as she would have
spoken on, in came the Chirurgians to dress him, who were so favorable
toward him in their opinions, that the Princess was contented he should get
him up.

Much was Polimero troubled in mind, ever fithence he had read the
Vice-Admirals letter, wondering with himself, what, or who might be that most
noble Knight therein mentioned. On this, jealousy already crept into his
imagination began full cruelly to sting him, making him believe that it was
some Prince, who (moved with the fame of Eromena) was come thither of purpose
to serve her. And because his heart was tortured with the passion he felt,
therefore he resolved rather to die than endure to have any rival; so easily
is humane wit altered, when it is once ravished with its affections: seeing
that he who before breathed forth naught else but virtue, now stung with the
Serpent of amorous envy (for such was his (though unreasonable) being that he
neither saw his favors participated, nor any person partakeable of them) he
suffered himself to be guided with the false imagination of having a rival,
till the day wherein he was cleared of that doubt, with no small amazement and
grief of Eromena; who on the other side raved therefore, believing that his
mind (surprised by some new thought) had fully alienated from her his
affection. And so indeed seemed it to be, he wanting art to dissemble his
passions; which concealed, though not disguised, deceived the judgment, that
took the one for the other: so as if Eromena were therein mistaken, yet was
she not to be therefore blamed, because Polimero an experienced youth, reasoned
with himself on this business, as if she had been faulty, and as if her
beauties and good parts ought not to have had the force of attracting other
than him alone; in so much as he became fretfull, and pettish, never beholding
her but with troubled brows, manifest expressers of more troubled thoughts:
whilst she that passionately loved him (knowing what little reckoning he made
of his wounds) could by no means imagine what might be the cause of so
sudden an alteration; whereof she conceived such a grief as pierced through
her very soul. She therefore desirous to be resolved thereof, conducted him
aside toward the trenches (under pretext of finding out a convenient place to
assail the forts) where (after a short discourse of what might there be done,
and seeing him possessed with his accustomed desire of combating) she said unto
him,

My Lord, I would not by any means, that the greatness of your courage should
any way prejudice your health, I well perceive you much altered, sithence you
left your bed, the reason whereof cannot possibly be, other than the feeling of
your self not well; which if it be so, I pray you let me know it, assuring you
that I have a greater share than you believe in your sufferings: And I protest
unto you, that if your wounds endanger you, by reason of a re-lapse (as some
days sithence they did) I shall be therewith displeased, and shall judge it a
displeasure done me by you. Polimero, who well understood what it was to be a
sharer in his sufferings, and what signified the declaration of her
displeasure; dying his cheeks with a fair vermilion, and become fully
consolated, returned her this answer; I yield your highness humble thanks, for
vouchsafing to take care of my health; which (among many other your noble
favors) manifests how deeply I am engaged unto you; and could I but fully
assure your Highness of what is unknown unto you, I assure my self that your
Highness would rest satisfied with my reverent gratitude. As for my hurts,
your Highness needs not doubt of them, my wounds being now grown to a good
pass; but if you see me malecontent, I think I have good cause so to be for to
tell you the truth, it liks me not well, that any other come to rob us of the
glory of this war; and had your Highness but given me leave when first I
besought you for it, I assure my self that we had constrained Epicamedo either
to return or die, ere any other came to deprive him of his army, and me of
the honor of doing my obliged duty. Eromena by her acuteness of
apprehension, soon conceived Polimero's drift, whereof she was very joyful,
well knowing that jelousie in its limits, is a daughter of love: wherefore she
said unto him; Let not (I pray you) what has happened displease you, which shall
(I assure you) be for your greater consolation and honor; the coming of any
other shall neither deprive you of that honor which your valorous actions
deserve, nor me of the obligation which I shall ever owe you therefore, more
than to any Knight of the world, how great or worthy soever he be; whereof
assure your self, and live contentedly, if the being thereof assured have any
power to make you such. Hereupon Polimero gently took her by the hand, which
she liberally reached out unto him (and affectionately kissing it) remained the
joyfullest man living: with great desire stood he expecting the signal of
smoke, which the day following appearing, made the Sardans give an all-arme,
though few of them understood the meaning thereof; which Epicamedo seeing, knew
not what to think, but perceiving them divided into three squadrons, and
advancing forwards to come and assault his forts, he also caused for their
defense, an alarm to be beaten. But Polimero, who was of opinion, that to
assail the forts was lost labor, and that it would prove the better course to
make on, and become masters of thetents, if they could (for the forts left
alone unsuccour'd, would afterward fall of themselves) wheeld about a large
compass; and then causing all his troop to alight, he assaulted the trenches
on the rear parts thereof suddenly, and with such a fury, that he forced the
guard thereof, and was himself the first man that entered, where leaving to
make good the front a strong squadron of horsemen, though a-foote, he with the
rest remounted on horseback, beating down all he met; wherein he found no
great difficulty, because there were no horse to withstand him (they being
issued forth with the King together with the greatest part of the army to
defend that part, where the assault was most likely to be given:) and so in
less than an hours space, became master of all the Tents.

The Princess on the other side (as soon as by the cries she perceived the
troops to be in a hot conflict) spurred on-wards; till (passing between Fort
and Fort) followed by her force, she affronted Epicamedo, who making head with
those few horses he had, not able to hold out long, was forced to retire
himself, causing a squadron of pikes to set forwards in firm battell-array:
By whom the Princess seeing her self opposed, caused hers to advance, who
(after a small resistance) put the enemy to rout for want of horse. Then
Eromena (disdaining to besmeare her hands with the blood of the vulgar) went
searching for Epicamedo, who having understood how the Tents were set upon, was
run to their succor, leaving in his stead the Marquess of Sagona: Whereupon
she (having selected a troop of the choicest horse, and left the rest to the
charge of the Marquess of Oristagno) pursuing him eagerly, found that Polimero
(after he had taken the Tents) was come forth to charge Epicamedo; who had with
him but a small Battalion of horse, not amounting to six hundred; but all of
them of the prime Nobility of Corsica, his greatest confidence being in his
foot that failed him; for when they saw the Tents taken, the enemy victorious
in the front, and now come to charge them in the flancke (themselves being
therewithal disordered, and the greatest part without any pikes for having
burst them in the former encounter) grown quite heartlesse, they sought to
save themselves by flight: so as being for their better way of escape divided,
they were (for the most part) slain, whilst the King skirmifhing with
Polimero, and hurt in the hand and flancke, was forced to yield himself. Of
the six hundred horse escaped but a few, who flying toward the Fleet with
hope to save themselves, were met by those that were coming to bring news of
its loss, and then being all scattered abroad some in in one place and some in
another, they were by the Peasants robbed and killed.

Polimero (having laid the King in sure hold) ran under the Forts, where the
fight was yet maintained; but the Corses (not able to withstand any longer, nor
having any place of retreite) throwing down their arms, yielded themselves,
the greatest part of them being already slain in the first hot skirmish; and
the Forts (after they had stood as spectators of the slaughter of their men,
and imprisonment of their King) yielded themselves over into the mercy of the
vanquishers. Thus were the Tents taken, the Forts rendered, assaulted, and won
in less than two hours space. And now Eromena, desirous to see what fortune
had done with the Fleet at sea (leaving all the foot to repose themselves)
taking along with het Polimero and two thousand horse, set her self on her way
toward Terranova.

Metancone used such diligence in this voyage, that (without help of any
wind) he in one nights space compassed about all Capo Luogodori to Terranova,
being little less than a hundred and twenty miles, where he found the Corses
without suspicion, and had found them also buried in sleep, without either
watch or ward, had not the Fleet as it passed by Capo di Sarda, been
descried; he found them with arms in their hands, not because they made
account to fight, but only to observe the terms of martial discipline: They
took these Galleyes to be their own, returning (as they thought) victorious,
and the two over and besides the fifteen, to be prizes taken away from the
enemy; the rather because the three lanternes were not borne by their
Admiral; but when they descried the colors of Sardegna, and on the Royal
those of Mauritania, they knew not what course to take: fly away they could
not, because their ladders were ashore their hatches out of order, and some of
them unfurnisht with oars; so as being assaulted, there was more ado to kill
than to conquer them; and such of them as escaped ashore, met with the
Princess and were taken prisoners. Metaneone seeing the enterprise so well
succeed, was very glad thereof, and longed for with impatience the long-wish'd
for fruition of his brothers company, coming stealingly toward him, wished
him to retire, for that he had descried many troops of horse, which could be
no other than the enemies, seeing they came from that part of the field whereof
they were Masters.

Metaneone (thus surprizd) knew not what to resolve of, thinking it a shame to
retire, and a desperate danger to stay their coming; When the Vice Admiral
said thus unto him, I cannot believe that these are enemies; or if they be, I
am sure they have but a few horse, wherewith they can do us no great harm:
howsoever as it is not fit we leave the Galleys unmann'd, so is it not any
discredit or dishonor for us to retire until we be better assured of the
matter: let us therefore (if you please) retire every man to his charge. The
Prince thereupon (seeing the Count de Bona of the selfsame opinion) made a
fair retteite, causing the Archers to stand ready at the loope-holes, and all
the rest with their arms in hand. But no sooner appeared those horse in sight,
than the Vice Admiral knew the Princess by her Banner, and Metaneone his
brother by Flammauro. Being then sorry he had retired, he came ashore from
the Galley, followed by the Count de Bona, and all the other Knights.

The Princess and Polimero never lin gallopping till they came to the haven:
where the first man of all the fleet that Polimero knew, was the Count of Bona
his governor, and then next his brother; whereat with a shril voice he sudenly
seritch'd out, Oh ye gods what is this I see? The Princess (seeing that
something ailed him) asked him what was the matter? Nothing Madam (answered he)
but that I cannot imagine what this Prince makes here. And whilst she was
asking him what Prince that was (without getting any answer of Polimero, who
remained as yet astonished) they were come to the place where he was. Eromena
perceiving Metaneone coming to meet her, hearing him styled Prince, lighted
off her horse, to whom Metaneone drew near to kiss her hand, which she not
permitting, and he not persisting in his offer (as a courteous Knight should
have done) but running (as if he had been besides himself) to Polimero, he
straightly embraced him, saying, And will you (my sweet brother) be
perpetually mindful of my foul fault? What, will you abjure nature, and for
one discourteous brothers sake, abandon a loving father that tenders you so
dearly? Behold me here in token of repentance, desiring your pardon; I beseech
you forgive me: Suffice it you, that the knowledge of an error is a sufficient
punishment to a generous heart; if such you can but think mine to be, that
haveso undeservedly offended you. But (my dearest best of brothers) do but
consider how all things have their time; the wrongs are done and past, the
repentance is now present, and the penance shall be to serve you, now when my
service is not acceptable unto you; which if it were or could be, I should
esteem it a great honor unto me. These his words were accompanied with tears
so lively, that (whilst he on the one side embraced him, and the Count of Bona
on the other side kissed his hands, and wept over him like a child) the
standers by were forced to bear them company in doing the same, though
altogether ignorant of the mystery of their proceedings.

Polimero at the first, knowing his brother and his disposition, could not
choose but doubt of some evil intention; but afterward seeing him come in such
a fashion and speak unto him in such a manner, accompanied besides with the
Count whom he well knew would not deceive him, striving to unhelme himself but
could not (so transported was he with the overmuch haste he made, and of the
strange commotion of his affections (having lifted up his beaver, he taking his
brothers hand; would needs kiss it, with no less respective humility, and
humble respectivenesse, than he would have used toward his Royal father. But
Metaneone more and more affectionately embracing him, and closing his face to
the visard, could not satiate himself in kissing him, not affording him
leisure to speak a word, much less to answer. Carasio seeing what his Master
would feign have done, helped him off with his helm; whereof Polimero being
freed ran again to kiss his brothers hand, and he in the mean time with
affectionate embraces, clasped him so closely, as it was unpossible for him to
speak a word, until at last, quite wearied with kissing and weeping, they
were feign to defist. When Polimero after a short pauze turning toward his
brother, said;

My Lord, I know not how I have merited so much of the gods, as to be (for
ought I see) received into your gracious favor; I will not flatter my self in
believing that I deserve it, but believe rather that your goodness moved to
pity my youth, has bin pleased to exceed all excess of courtesy, by
receiving me in the degree of such a faithful servant as my duty binds to be,
and of so obedient a brother as nature made me. I beseech you vouch safe to
concede me only the first attribute, in your esteem, and that shall content
me; so that your Highness would be pleased to accept in good worth the
sincerity of my good will, excusing the weakness of my years, which have
given your Highness occasion to be displeased with me: but of my willingness
to deserve your Highness favor, let (I beseech you) my voluntary exile, and
my choice of going unaccompanied (to avoid your Highness displeasure) be an
assured token: for the rest I submit my self to your good will and pleasure,
being most ready to do whatsoever you shall please to command me.

Metaneone, that had converted his former hatred into the most perfect
affectionate and truest friendship that could possibly be found in any brother
of the world, embracing him anew, said unto him; Oh peace, peace, my dear
Polimero, it becomes not you to speak in this sort, for the witnesses that
testify against me are without exception, and above all, my own conscience. I
am not come with an intention to grant you pardon, but of purpose to beg and
receive it from you, so that you then forgive me, I shall think I have
obtained the greatest part of the happiness I wish to enjoy in this world.

Feign would they have exceeded, when the Count of Bona (interrupting them)
said to the Prince; No more, (my Lord) no more. My Lord, the Insante Polimero
cannot brook to see the person of your Highness so submissive; neither need
you doubt that his good nature is any whit mindful of what is done and past.
Which said, he (taking again the hands of Polimero) kissed them with a
fatherly affection.

The Princess that stood all this while an amazed spectatresse, having (the
mean while) caused her helm to be unlaced, said to Metaneone; (Worthy Prince)
I beseech you give me leave to interrupt your joys, we can no longer forbear
to know who you are, as well that we may thereby come to know what this Knight
also is, (who having done as such notable service would never hitherunto oblige
us with his name;) as also that we may honor you conformable to the merits
both of your noble person, and of the favors you have done us; which said, she
withdrew him aside from the rest, whilst Polimero went again to embrace the
Count and to entertain the Mauritanian Cavaliers.

Metaneone related orderly unto the Princess all that had passed between him
and his brother, and how his father had charged him to bring him back again:
which when the Princess heard, she thought her former joys but bitter now,
that she understood her lover to be a Prince, waxing so pale thereat, that the
apprehensive Prince observing it, said on; My charge was indeed not to return
without him; but in respect I see what wars your Highness is like to have in
your Kingdom, and withal for that (me thinks) I see that my brother has
been fortunate in your Highness service, I will find a way to content my
father without taking him hence.

The Princess having by this time recovered her spirits, well perceived the
acuteness of the Prince his apprehension, which though it made her blush, yet
was she not thereat displeased; but entertained him with all such gentle
terms, as best became a courteous Lady to use toward a deserving Prince;
hoping to find him a co-adjutor and furtherer of her desires: And then turning
toward Polimero; Is it thus (said she) that you deal with yourfriends; My
Lord Infant Polimero; in not suffering your self to be known, thereby to
load me with shame for not having honored you conformable to your birth and
quality? Whereto he (all joyful) made answer, (Right excellent Princess;)
Too too much have I been honored by your Highness, I would it pleased the
gods, that you thought me worthy but of some part thereof. Whereupon she taking
him by the hand, (and joying together for the arrival of the Prince his
brother) wrung it amorously, and he again affectionately kissed hers, to his
exceeding great content.

The Princess, afterward and all the rest, when they understood the manner of
taking both the Fleetes, went to renew their complements with Metaneone,
confessing the war to be brought to an end by the valor of these two
brothers.

The End of the Third Book.
CAVALIER GIO: FRANCESCO BIONDI HIS EROMENA
The Fourth Book.
THat evening tarried the Princess (somewhat incommodated) in Terranova, whence
she advertized the Marquess of Oristagno how the Fleet was taken; (and in
regard her coming thither was unexpected, and her necessary provision as then
not arrived from the Camp,) Metaneone persuaded her to sup with him in his
Galley, which he caused to launch out of the haven with the sweet consort of
his trumpets, at the pleasing harmony whereof, the Ghing rowed so mainely, as
they made her in less than an hours space out-strippe her fellow Galleys
(which were the Vice Admiral with three others of the choicest of the whole
Fleet) leaving them (to the wonder of every one) above three miles a-poope of
her. Much ado had the Princess to satiate her eyes in beholding the rare
beauty of the Vessel, with the rich curiosity of her hangings and furniture,
which far exceeded those of many royal Palaces.

It was now Summer-season, and the calme-sea was from the shore-ward courted
with a gentle breath of air, whilst the sea-strond and winding creeks of the
Island, afforded the eye a spacious and delightsome prospect. The Princess (in
the mean while) was served with such exquisite diversity of banquets, as that
she seemed to be in a dream; so strangely was she amazed in observing the
abundant quantity, and rare quality thereof, together with the richness of
the plate, and order of service in a Galley at sea. And to the Sardans the wine
(above any thing else) seemed excellent, who now perceived themselves deceived
in the opinion, they til then held, that their white-wines were the best and
richest of the Universe.

The prince had for his pleasure diverse kinds of strange creatures, which
Affricke is continually and daily accustomed to produce; wherewith the
Princess was exceedingly delighted, because they being taken, were very gentle
and tractable, and every one in his kind manifested by his gesture the
diversity of his temperature, wherein Nature discovers the treasures of her
providence.

It grew toward night, when intending to return, they descried (not very
far off them) something that floted on the sea; which such as at first took
it for a fish, perceived it to be none, for that it dived not but stood still,
without turning, either for the noise of the oars, or voice of men. The
Princess, who (taking pleasure to look all about) was the first that saw it,
would needs know what it might be, and therefore causing to row gently toward
it, ere they came to touch it with their oars, she perceived it was a woman,
who fasthanding a little plancke, floted on the sea. The Frigate (which stood
near the Royal, and that for swiftness was not her inferior) went to fetch
her aboard, where they found, for subject to their consideration, an exquisite
bcautie that in her they saw, with the evident symptoms of a miserable fortune;
pale was she, and lean, hare-footed, and bare-legged, with her feet sorely
bruised, and full of gags and scarres. Mong'st these so rue-full conditions,
there shined in her face a royal Majesty, and in her dying eyes a pity, able
to cause to moan the very Tigers themselves. There covered her snow-white
body (which by her alablaster legs and ivory arms, might easily be judged
to be such) a course gown of ships russet freeze, made carelessly without any
order, just like one of those, wherewith statues are sometimes wont to be
covered withal: hardly could they make her let go her hold of the plancke,
because, when danger, travel and fasting had bereaved her of her
understanding; then nature, which in such occasions fails not, had forced her
vital spirits into her hands and fingers; so as now freed from peril, and not
comprehending it, she continued her holdfast without slacking it any thing,
following altogether the instinct that governed her, being not able to follow
reason, which she wanted, because she wanted the more ignoble part, which was
the sense. There was none so flintiehearted, as not to pity so compassionable
a spectacle; but far above all the Princess, who having caused her to be
laid on a bed, was careful to see her dried by her trusty damsel Aretia. Who
not like a waiting woman, but like a diligent Squire followed her Lady without
ever abandoning her for fear of any danger how perilous soever; she dried,
rubbed and chafed her, so as her revoked spirits returned by little and little
to their proper residences, to the astonishment of the miserable weak one; who
seeing her self in such a place, knew not what to imagine; she peer'd
steadfastly on the two standers by, her mouth she opened, but spoke never a
word; in being silent she spoke, and yet in speaking she uttered never a
syllable, tormented with agitations of mind, the more grievous, for that the
body oppressed with long sufferings, lay as if it had been deprived both of
life and senses. The first things that came to life in her were sighs and sobs;
and next tears, which being not sufficient to exhale and evaporate the
heaviness of her heart, would feign be accompanied with a kind of a voice not
shreeking or displeasing, but moaning and wailefull, able to move the very
stones to pity. The Princess (who with her damzell were all that were of her
sex among all that company) would needs be a sole co-adjutor in this charitable
office, having for modesties sake excluded all the rest; and calling for some
cordials and restoratives, gave them her with her own hand, comforting her,
entreating her, and courteously compelling her to take them; because no one
means alone was sufficient to persuade her, neither had altogether prevailed
with her, but that fixing her eyes on the royal she-warrier, she became
astonished at her beauty and behavior, which persuaded, and (as it were)
constrained her to obey her; little are she, when having recovered a little
vigor, she turning toward the Princess, with a feeble voice scarce audible,
said thus unto her;

I know not (fair one) what you may be, whether a woman or a goddess, if a
goddess, then know you well that pity is ill bestowed on me, and that it
were true commiseration not to give, but to take away the feeling of my
griefs: but if a woman, let me then tell you, that the having used it to
me-wards, has been a cruelty, as in me nature it self was more cruel in
procuring my escape, and I most cruel against my self for following her
instincts; which said, she (become clay-cold) remained in such a plight, that
for a good while she seemed to be rather dead than alive.

The Princess, who by her speeches (which ofttimes are express signs of
inward conceits) conceived to be in this woman some (of I know not what) kind
of worth and singularity, having called for vinegar and odoriferous waters,
ceased not to use her uttermost endeavor with affectionate care to revive her
again, which quickly succeeded as she desired; and seeing her come again to
her self, though little better in the rest of her organs and members, only
she strove to get up to come to kiss her hands; the courteous Princess
(holding her down, and incessantly besprinkling her with those waters) spoke
thus unto her;

Alack (good soul) Leave off I pray you all other thoughts, but such as
concern your self, courtesies in you are now out of season, neither is there
any one here that looks for any such, which though there were, yet might such
be well satisfied with your willingness, which in you appears not otherwise
resisting than against your self and your own good. Be comforted, I pray you,
and resolve with your self to live; for albeit your afflictions be great (as I
imagine them to be by the condition wherein I found you;) nevertheless ought
you by all means be consolated; good and evil stand not always in the same
limits; that evil is only deplorable that is altogether remediless, and in
such a case necessity should comfort us; fortune (Sister) is unstable, and her
wheel voluble, so as we ought the rather presume to look for good, being in
an ill case, than on the contrary; for as good cannot attain to excess, so
can it not be either long or stable; and the excess of evils, as it is easily
encountered, so is it also as easily diverted, it being a sting that so long
lasts, as the malign aspects endure, which as they increase in their excess,
so decrease they in their recesse, and with its mutation change themselves into
a better aspect. The sick woman, who with great attention had listened unto her
(fetching a deep sigh) returned her this answer.

Alas (Valorous Lady) what doleful consolations are these for me; grounded on
a foundation as sandy as are constellations. But, if what you infer, be
true; What then (I pray you) is the reason, that few are the fortunate, and
innumerable the unfortunate in the world, who withal ever remain such? Or if
they assay mutation, yet is it not substantial, but only somewhat extenuated
from more to less. How many are there that live in continual poverty? How
many in perpetual imprisonment? How many are there that are misetable in all
kind of misery, whom (in regard of the infiniteness of the number) I need
not specify? And yet in them may be discerned many accesses and fits of evil,
but never a period of any, for they never feel its recesse, although the
heavens go round to them as well as to others, neither go the stars slower
for these than for those. And as touching what you say of good and prosperity,
It is ture, that there is nothing more slippery and flickering, nay such is it
of its own nature, as it cannot make it self enjoyable; the passions of the
mind make it less delightsome and imperfect, especially being accompanied (as
it ever is) with cares and fears, whereby it does not only lessen, but grows
not to be what it is taken to be; where (on the contrary) the desire to
continue or rather to go onwards in prosperity, augments our discontents;
which infused into us by the imagination, spring up successively like ill
weeds in a good foil, without either tillage or seed, thriving the better in
the more tempestuous weather, and becoming perpetual from season to season,
bountifully repaying the earth an hundred for one, manifesting thereby its
being far more liberal than just, and a better friend to it self than to
other men's labors.

The Princess astonished at her discourse, would feign egg her on a little
further, for the better discovering among obscurities so palpable, the
cleerenesse of an elevated capacity; wherefore she said unto her; The cause
(sister mine) of our error in believing that evil has a greater stroke over
us than good, proceeds from our own passions, as you your self have
confesessed; though in respect of themselves they be of equal weight. The
palate is more digested with the bitter than pleased with the sweet, though of
its proper nature it love and affect the latter; the reason is, because our
senses make us more sensible of ill than good, which if we consider rightly,
we shall have no reason to complain of nature, which made not contraries with
proportion more contrary in the one than in the other. The black is no more
black, than the white is white; albeit the one is discerned better than the
other, not for any defect of contrariety, but by reason of the quality of the
eye, that is more inclined to receive the impression of the one than of the
other; the Sun (likewise) which for his brightness should be more apt to
be seen, is nevertheless (for a like reason) less seen. If then it be so
(as most assured it is) Why then comfort you not your self now that you are
certain of having passed the period of your evils, by the escaping of death,
the extremest point of all misery? So as necessarily your misfortune declining,
it is malignite in the recesse prepares for you in his change argument of
consolation, and seeing that changes are no other than mutation of qualities,
you ought to suppose that it must needs be from bad to good.

Alas Madame, (answered the woman weeping) consider I pray you that reason and
sense cannot be weighed with equal weights, because reason is either so
fleeting, as she will not suffer us easily to lay hold on her, or else light
and wavering, if she chance to be formed by use or opinion. But the sense
being weighty and of certain consistence, remains active, and deceives not,
unless it self be beguiled by some alteration: well said you, that so should
I do, for indeed so would I feign do; but first make you these scales even
(if you can) by giving me either so much reason as sense, or else no more
sense than reason, and then will I both obey you, and comfort my self. But
(woe is me) it is their irreconcilable disparitie that makes my miserable
estate inconsolable in that the practice of the Theoricke is in them too too
different; the one being more easy to an eloquent tongue, than the other to
the stoutest heart, when it shall have occasion to put it in practice. Now as
touching the excess and period of my evils; know (most noble Lady) that if men
could content themselves with food only, as do the wild beasts, then might
the argument be good; for you (of your commiseration) having freed me from
death, which was the period of evil; (me thinks) reason tells me, that I am now
in its recesse, for that the way of life is opened unto me: but too too
miserable is our condition to be contented to live only, and to live to our
selves alone; there is none but knows that we must live for others also,
neither say I only as he, who held that we are borne to our Country and
friends, but I hereto add that we are likewise borne to our own affections,
and among them above all to honor, which subsisting of an unknown and
delicate element, receives its influence from the course of the more delicate
spheres, which conjoined to these materials, are in the point of their period
diverse in quality, even as mine are; so as the recesse of ill in the one is
the recesse of honor in the other: How then can one live in the recesse of
ill, with the hope of the access of good, when the recesse of honor engenders
the access of infamy, that stands in the opposite point? But to speak with
your own principles, you ( Madame) well know, that it is not one sole aspect
that makes us become miserable, but our meeting afterward with other new
aspects in the way of theirprog ressions; and the being of the malign stars
(which the learned call the Unfortunate) of superior situation, and by
consequence heavier and slower, which being in some sort intricated with the
fixed, that are slowest of all, are never more disinveloped, but accompany our
few days with infinite evils; which being limited by death, and deprived of
all power of hurting us in a life freed from their fetters, pursue us
nevertheelesse to our very graves, with an abominable and ignominious fame;
which i say not because I believe it to be so indeed, but because that who so
gives those principles credit will be induced to believe no otherwise. And I
(for my part) cannot choose but subscribe to the opinion of such as believe,
that the fates and constellations are no other thing than the providence of the
gods, whereunto if I now trusted not more than I do to the celestial figures,
I should utterly despair.

The Princess (observing her to speak with much pain and great perplexiti of
mind) thought it not good to trouble her any further, albeit she much desired
to know both her, and the original of her misfortunes, the rather because she
well discerned in her ordinary signs of no ordinary person; leaving therefore
Aretia to accompany her, she returned to the Princes, to whom she related what
discourse she had with her, expressing her self to be gladder of this prize
than of that of both the Fleets. They lodged themselves in Terranova as well as
they could, where the sick woman was carefully looked unto, and lodged as
commodiously as the straightness of the place would permit, who by means,
either of the Physicians, or of comfortable repose recovered together with her
strength, her before exiled beauty.

Whilst the Princess continued with the weak woman, the two brothers had time
to confer together, where Metaneone informed his brother of all that past
between him and his father, and how he was by him sent to find him out, whom
therefore he once intended to have conducted homewards; but perceiving (as he
thought) in that Princess probable signs of an excessive love toward him,
and considering withal how the tie of honor straightly obliged him to defer
his departure thence, till the wars were ended, he knew not what course he
were best to resolve of; howbeit he held his own return necessary, because
he was to entreat his father to demand for him a wife (and there related he
unto his brother all the story of Eromilia) yet knew he not well how he could
go home without him. And that on the other side in procuring him to return
with him, he should do very ill, for that he might thereby mar his fortune,
and hinder his advancement, which he ought rather by all means to further and
procure, not only for the gaining him such and so great a Princess, but also
for that when himself had obtained Eromilia, they might between them make (as
it were) but one state of Mauritania, Sardegna and Maiorica, and so become awed
of all their bordering neighbors.

Here the Count of Bona (perceiving the Princess coming) interrupted their
discourse; and as soon as they came ashore, counseled them both to abide in
Sardegna, undertaking to be himself the Ambassador of their commissions, not
doubting but that the King would be for that time contented to know that they
loved one another; of whom he promised them to procure for the Prince an
Embassage for Maiorica, and for the Infant troops of aid for Sardegna,
wherewith he might (for the furtherance of his marriage with Eromena) conquer
the kingdom of Corsica, who also (now that he was known for a Prince) should
in the mean time endeavor to bring his loves to a determined end. Of this
proposition the Prince liked well, desiring it might be suddenly put in
execution; whereupon both of them wrote to their father conformably, as well of
the friendship confirmed between them, as also of the reasons that constrained
them to stay some-time in Sardegna, and withal of the need they had of being
favored by his Majesty, in what should by the Count of Bona (to whom they
wholly referred themselves) be manifested unto him more at large: to the same
effect wrote they likewise to their mother, sisters, and brothers; telling
afterward the Princess, that they, being resolved to serve her in those
wars, thought good to acquaint therewith the King their father, to the end
that he might not grieve, in that he saw them not return homewards; whither
they meant to send for that end the Count of Bona, whom they besought her
Highness to honor with some command of hers, if such an occasion might any
way prove serviceable unto her; for which the Princess kindly thanked them,
telling them withal that she herself would also write to the King, being
bound to thank him for the favors she had at their hands received, which
accordingly she did with as lively a gratitude as by paper and ink could be
expressed.

The Count went speedily aboard the Royal, and in two days he arrived in
Tunis. The King seeing him come wihtout the Princes, became thereat strangely
amazed, but had no sooner understood the occasion of their stay, and perused
their letters, than he was therewith fully satisfied, and exceedingly
comforted. Those two businesses were proposed to the Kings Council, where the
Count of Bona showed the utilitie of matching the Prince in Maiorica to be so
evident (especially comprehending the other of Sardagna of him held for
assured) that no man opposed the conclusion thereof; yet stirred he not from
Tunis till such time as there were eight thousand foot, and two thousand horse
ready levied for Polimero. And for Metaneone, it was the Kings pleasure, that
the same Count (as soon as he had disembarked his forces) should go treat
of the match with Maiorica, giving him for adjutants three of his fellowpeeres,
to the end that the embassage might be the more solemnly performed.

Eromena in the mean while, lived now at her own hearts sweet content, having
not only fortunately vanquished her enemies, and ended so dangerous a war,
but come also to know Polimero for the son of so great a King, as his
condition could not give the people any occasion of murmuring, and therefore
meant she (as soon as the state were well appeased and fully settled) without
any further delay to return to Caleri and marry him; from which although the
death of her brother (as yet fresh in her memory) did in some sort dissuade
her; nevertheless when she considered with her self how incapable of
government her father was, she was persuaded that the world would commend her,
for making choice of a Prince of such exquisite conditions and known valor;
the only obstacle indeed was his somewhat too green youth, for which she
doubted some would grumble at her, the rather because the dise quality of
years (she being at least by six years his elder) made the difficulty the
greater; but love (suppressing all such considerations) made all these skores
even: so as she (having sent for Polimero) told him that she had not as yet
rejoiced with him, according unto her mind; for having obtained her so long
wished for desire of knowing him, nor expressed (as she ought) how sorry she
was, that he had not made himself known unto her sooner. But he on the other
side endeavored to excuse himself with many reasons, among which some were,
that he being desirous to become worthy of her favors, thought it expedient to
obtain his intention therein, rather by real feats of arms, than by bare
merit of blood, being a condition he was sure could never fail him; that he
was bound to thank the heavens, in that he saw till then all things succeed
well, save only one which he as yet wanted; and as she thought to ask him
what that might be; It is a thing (said he) that I cannot express unto you in
words; but if your Highness would vouchsafe but to look into my heart, you
might there see it protraied, which you shall there no sooner see than know it
to be no other thing, than an ardent desire of being your servant till death:
which as he said, his speech failed him, as he would have pronounced the last
accents. Now Metaneone (knowing his youth too tender for the managing of a
business of that nature and importance) had before hand lessoned him what he
should say, wherein he following his instructions, thought himself afterward
to have made more ample manifestation of his courage, than if he had fought
alone against all the world.

Eromena, being glad he had thus begun to break the ice, returned him this
answer; My Princely Lord, I understand not well what you would say, being that
you are too great a Prince for my service, for well see you how I am served by
no other than simple Knights; and the services I have received of you, are
indeed no services but favors, which rather bind me to be your servant, for
the obligations I therefore owe you; and for me to look into your heart, alas,
how can I possibly do it without your prejudice, which I would not do,
although it were to save my own life. It is true, that a Painter might in your
hearts portrayture place my Picture, and so might I by that means come to see
it without harming you: do but tell me then (I pray you) how was it that he
did it, and who he is, and I will be his scholar.

Polimero, waxen by this time somewhat bolder, replied; Right excellent Lady,
your Highness ought not refuse my service, because I am a Prince, but should
accept of me the rather for being such an one; and for the Painter you need
seek no further than your Royal self, because your Highness is both the
Painter, and Portraiture; who if you had the power and skill to portray your
self in my breast, may more easily behold there the excellency of your Pencill,
which is so far from harming me, as it is the only restorative that can
prolong my life.

Here as he would have spoken further, his speech failed him, so as waxen more
vermilion than the freshest rose, and kneeling on the ground he affectionately
kissed her hands, which she withdrew not, but was well content to suffer his
warm breath to satiate it self with that (to him) more than an Ambrosian
banquet: Well (said she) my Lord Polimero, what if I should see my self in
your heart, could you then find in your heart to see your self in mine?
Whereto he (without letting her hands go) replied. But how dare I (peerlesse
Lady) without infinite presumption deem my self such a Painter, as to place
my unworthy picture in so worthy a Tabler, wherein if I were favored with one
sole thought of yours, I should think my self the happiest knight that ever
was borne a mortal? You are (said she) indeed no Painter, nor have I any
picture of you, or your making; yet well know I you for a perfect sculptor, for
here have you carved your lively statue, breathing as you see it; which said,
she (holding before him a looking-glass) proceeded, Whether of us now is the
best Artificer? I, that only placed in you my lifelesse Picture; or you that
have graven and carved in me your sculpture with its complete parts and
lineaments, accompanied with all the lively organs and living powers of the
intellect? If so it be (answered the overjoyed Polimero,) I ask then no other
boon of the immortal gods; but having never known my self for such a one a
could accomplish so notable a piece of workmanship, for which I shall be all
my life's time obliged to my self, I am constrained (because the word of so
great a Princess, cannot fully satisfy my belief herein) to beseech your
Highness to favor me with some authentic assurance, by whose virtue this
statue may abide in this place, secured by an irrevocable title, conformable to
the laws of the world, as I assure my self it is already according to the
laws of love.

The Princess hereat passionately inflamed, leaving him nevertheless in his
kneeling posture, and taking him with her arms gently about the neck, thus
replied; (My dear Lord) to the end you may be fully assured, that I will be
yours according to the rites of the world, as I am already yours by the power
of love, for irrevocable assurance of the one and the other, I give you this
earnest: and with that (kissing him) spoke on; Now see whether such an
assurance can by one of my quality be ever either revoked or denied. Whereupon
he drawn on with so sweet a bait, would feign become somewhat bolder, but
wanted the boldness to venture, so checked was his forwardness with the curb
of bashfulnesse, till afterward his being assured increased his courage in so
modest a way, that holding on a mean path between excess and defect, he
needed not any more, either bit or spur. The combat was of kisses, wherein
fortune showed her self indifferent, there being no one kiss lent, that was
not as amorously repaied; till at length for fear of being discovered, though
neither weary nor satiated, they sat them down, where (banishing all coyness
and love-hating respects) now and then reciprocally interchanging sweet
embraces, they recounted each to other their intended designs. Eromena well
approving of his sending to Mauritania for fresh troops, together with his
design of Corsica, whereon her mind (distracted with amorous thoughts) near
fastened, and now thought she it fit, that he under went that enterprise, that
so that kirgdome being by him incorporated to the kingdom of Sardegna, might
make their nuptials more approveable and better liked of, he having no other
thing to endow her withal. Upon this she would needs the day following, have
her Council summoned to sit, whereunto, having invited the two Princes, she
proposed the state of the war to be considered in its future limits.

The proposition was, whether it were their best course (now they had the
Corsan king prisoner) to hold the enterprise as accomplished, and so license
their soldiers or no? and if no, then to resolve of what they were best to
do? Some held it fitting that the wars should so rest determined; others
were on the other side of a contrary opinion. Whereupon Metaneone being
requested to deliver his opinion, excused himself by alleging that being but
so lately arrived there, he was unacquainted both with the country, and
interesses thereof, and therefore referred himself unto his brother, who
(having served the state) could not choose but have a more exact knowledge of
its condition. Polimero, being thereunto earnestly importuned, at last
delivered himself in this sort.

If State-affaires (Sovereign Princess) carried with them no other
consideration than that of the present, I should hold for vain any other
opinion, than that of peace, and should think the best course were to lay
arms aside, and enjoy the fruit of conquest achieved by the valor our arm
of your Highness, but considering them not as the short days of men, but
according to their lasting perpetuity, a prudent Prince ought to square out,
and settle his government in such a manner as the same may last, not for his
life only, but even as long as the world can endure; It is true, your
Highness has already freed this kingdom from the cruel-lest Rebellion that
ever was raised against any Prince, and withal taken prisoner that King, who
(to become Tyrant here) so inhumanely nourished it; but this can suffice but
for the present, what should follow is to prevent future dangers, which cannot
be otherwise effected than by measuring the Kingdom of Corsica with the same
measure wherewith its King would have measured this of Sardegna; the former
being so near a borderer to the latter, as they almost join, and by the ill
which that has, and would have done: to this may be comprehended the danger of
the evil it may do hereafter; I grant that your Highness has for this once
been so fortunate as to suppress him; yet is not Sardegna sure to have
always the same conduct, prowes and fortune. The good husbandman believes not,
he has sufficiently rid his land of noisome weeds, by cropping their leaves
only, unless he also pluck them up by the roots, ere they fall to seed
anew. So should your Highness also advane your victorious banners in the
kingdom of Corsica, which once subdued, you may unite to this crown, which
until you do, the wars may well be ended in opinion, but never in effect;
for Corsica having now lost its King may choose it self another, and so either
of it self, or by the help of other Princes make perpetual incursions into
this Kingdom, which that they will attempt, I am the rather induced to
believe, because the humor of those people is naturally revengefull, especially
now that there is not a house among them that has not felt heavy losses by
this war, and the fugitive Rebels, nestling themselves in the Bastilica, may
thence get themselves easily settled in their ancient patrimcnies, their treason
and offense not sufficing to make them so odious as not to find some favorers
of their actions among those they have commanded and swayed over these four
hundred years: and Corsica being a poor country, the inhabitants thereof for
being needy will come shift for their living to Sardegna, where under the
pretext of forragers they will maintain a war so lasting, as no valor shall
be able to destroy them, so well fortified will they be found by the
advantage of hills, and strongly barricadoed by the strength of woods, as there
will be somewhat to do to dinde them out, but much more to come to fight with
them. But if your Highness would be pleased to resolve of the contrary, you
shall avoid all these inconveniences, neither shall you find any considerable
opposition, for that you shall invade a kingdom, that ownes neither King,
Captain, nor soldiers, and shall withal find it deprived (for ought I
believe) of Galleyes, arms and Council, now that all the best of them lie
slain in these wars. And though foreign Princes would endeavor to succor
it, yet should they find it lost and won ere they came, so as such an
enterprise cannot indeed any way redound to their good, or honor, who have
neither interest nor reason to succor such as cannot but be utterly forlorn.
Now some one may object, thatto suppose that no neighboring Princes can lay
any claim thereto, is false. Well, I grant it, but let us (I pray them) argue
who such may be, for I see but only five that may justly be reckoned in this
number; three whereof also I will immediately exclude. The first shall be the
King my father, I will not say for my sake, for that every one will scarce
believe, seeing that Princes square out their actions by the rule of their own
ends, but becase he never aimed at the command of the sea, neither can the
greatness of Sardegna breed in him any jealosie; considering that look what
difficulties stranger Princes shall have in enjoying it, the self same
difficulty shall she have also in possessing the Dominions of others,
especially in the firm land: for the same reasons, I exclude for the second
man the Etrurian King; though not the King of Maiorica, who is the third; but
because his forces are not such as need be feared; there remain yet the King
of Sicily and Ligurie: this last may not do it, because the Tuskan King his
neighbor will not suffer him to over-grow him in greatness, so as if he
should strive to possess some others territories, the other would not let
slip the occasion of seazing on his. And if the Sicilian King do but as much
as aim thereat, he must necessarily make enemies of the Mauritanian,
Ligurian, and Etrurian Kings, besides such others as command the other side the
Faro, if he but offer to join new kingdoms to his own, who (besides his being
rich and potent) is sufficiently well seated to put all the rest in a jealousy
of him. But let it be granted that any of them (excepting the King my father,
for whom I offer my self an hostage) would be easily tempted to take up arms,
yet let any such whosoever he be but balance, the certain charge, that must
be necessarily disbursed, with the uncertain benefit, that may perhaps be
reaped therefrom, and he shall see that as it cannot be compassed with a few
men, so the transportation of great forces, will require great Fleets, which
cannot be rigged under a great deal of time, which though they could suddenly
provide, yet shall they meet with many other difficulties in being (for want
of convenient havens) compelled in the selfsame time, to fight against the
wind, sea and us. I omit the consideration of what the blindest see, which is,
That Sardegna shall be rid of its bad neighbors, and shall by commanding in
stead of awing them, become glorious and dreaded of all such as would either
harm or infest it; I overpasse also such consequences as might be deduced from
the augmentation of forces, territories and revenewes, considering the
commodiousnesse of its situation. Other considerable difficulties I believe
there are none, whereof though there were, yet can I not think them to be such
as may be paragonized with the different state of these two kingdoms, besides
no difficulties should ever hinder the performance of necessary resolutions.
But now because it is no policy to credit the Counsel of such as share not of
the perils that may chance to spring from the root of such advise, I here
porferre your Highness to participate thereof, not only with my person, but
also with such troops as shall be thought requisite for that employment, which
I hope to obtain of the King my father, and of the Prince my brother here
present, so your Highness will but vouchsafe to accept of them.

The Princess, that with great pleasure had all this while listened unto him,
kindly thanked him for his proffer, as though it had been a thing strange unto
her. And because she well perceived that the matter when it came to be resolved
of among the Council, would not prove so plain, but that it might meet with
some oppositions, by reason of such jealousies as might arise from the proffer,
therefore gave she order that they should among themselves treace thereof.

The Marquess of Oristagno, who ever sithence Polimero was known for a
Prince, began to guess at the cause of his coming to Sardegna, as he had also
before that taken notice of the inclination of the Princess, deeming that love
of hers to be well employed, since that (if she married at all, she could not
make choice of either a fitter or worthier husband) resolved to set forwards,
and bring to head that business, being well assured the should thereby both
please the Princess, and do the state good service; therefore opposed he
openly such as held the Infant of Mauritania's propsition dangerous (inferring
for an example the Trojan horse for a caveat to fear and mistrust both the
gift and giver.) His reasons were, that it was not to be doubted, that he who
so had begun to merit, would not continue so to do, as well for desire of
glory, as for hope of reward, he being the last of the sons of Mauritania,
and therefore without means: that in case he harbored any evil intention,
his forces could not stead him much, for that theirs would be more than thrice
so many; and that sithence they might without loss of their own men gain
themselves a kingdom (to them so commodious and necessary) he held it a great
folly to refuse it. Many other things touched he by the way, whereby the most
acute smelt out his drift, wherewith they were so far from being displeased,
as all of them without any opposition, willingly concurred in the selfsame
opinion. Whereof the Princess was a glad woman, who having therewith acquainted
Polimero, caused both him and his brother, to be called in to the Council, as
though she had told him nothing thereof; where (having extolled his noble
exploits in the wars, taking occasion to fall in speech of his last proffer)
she told him; That although the Council was somewhat loath to make use of the
kingdom of Mauritania, yet notwithstanding, that in respect of the known good
correspondencie ever held between that and the Sardegnan crown, it had now
resolved to accept of the troops by him offered, to the end that he might
with them and those of Sardegna proceed in his Corsan enterprise, as he had
proposed. Then turning her self toward Metaneone (when she had made a great
Encomio on the Fleet, won her by his means) she confessed, that the King her
father, her self, and the whole kingdom, were exceedingly obliged to the one,
and the other; for which all of them together would be ready at all occasions
to serve them, the King their father, and kingdom: whereunto the brothers
having answered each for himself, gave in courteous terms such assurance of
their good intentions, there was not any that doubted of their sincerity.

The Princess had already posted a Currier to advertize the King her father of
the victories; and now determined she to send him the Councels resolution, and
withal the King Epicamedo with the other prisoners; much had he desired to see
the Princess, whereto she would by no means condescend, pretending to
detain him not as a prisoner of war, but as a Traitor, guilty of injured
Majesty, because her brothers murderers had never attempted to take away his
life, had they not been backed by him; so as he indeed was the author of that
murder, those wars, and all other ils that thence proceeded.

Many days staid the Princess in Terranova, expecting the coming of the rest
of the army from Villapetres, to march thence onwards to the next country of
Luogodori, which lies in the utmost point of Sardegna in the sight of Corsica,
to the end she might assure her self of those countries formerly possessed by
the Rebels, and might also thence with more convenience (at the arrival
thither of the Mauritanian troops) transport them over into Corsica

Aretia in the mean time had used all possible diligence to restore to her
former being, the weak woman, whom they had saved from the merciless sea,
which for her bodily plight was not very difficult, but for the state of her
mind, seemed a thing impossible, in that she found her weaker every day than
other, and (as it were) repenting that she died not. The Princess now
disentangled of public affairs, and desirous to know who she was, went in
person to visit her, who having by this time understood that this was the
famous Princess Eromena, received her with profound humility, by the
Physicians direction she kept as yet her bed, though much against her will;
where the Princess, sitting down by her, joyed much to see her a living
woman, hoping that as she had already gotten this point, so she might in time
also come to gain the other, which was to bring her to some degrees of comfort
by entertaining her with mirth and pleasant company: wherein she was
nevertheless very much deceived, because a refined melancholy, having first
been an infirmity of the mind, and then come to be a bodily disease, and so
grown to be a residence of different substance is wont to prove (for the most
part) mortal and incurable. I had come sooner unto you (said the Princess)
but that I thought good to give you first time to recollect your spirits, and
yet wot I not well how I ought to entertain you, because the outward
expressions of your fortune show you to be otherwise than your proper
conditions discover you to be. I beseech you to clear me of that doubt,
assuring you on the faith of a noble maiden, that the curiosity to know it,
tends to no other end than to assist you, which I will do without sparing any
thing I have. Here is no body present but Aretia, for whose secrecy I
undertake as for my self.

The woman (standing awhile in a muse, without making any answer) fetching at
length a deep sigh, not without tears, said unto her;

Royal Princess, your requests are commands to me; and although to satisfy
your Highness therein, be but as it were to draw fresh blood out of green
wounds, and to fester an old long sithence inulcerated sore, yet can I for all
that do no less than obey you.

My name is Eleina, my Nation, the Narbon Gaul, my Country, Arelate; where my
father is he that bears both Crown and Scepter. My mother was the daughter of
the Celtan King; know her did I never, because she (presaging my misfortunes)
lest she should see so unhappy a burden, died in childbirth of me. With such
quaint tenderness was I bred up, as children of my birth and quality are wont
to be, but much more fondly; for being the only child of my father, who
(although a Widdower at four and twenty years of age) would never condescend
to marry again, for all that his subjects earnestly besought him thereto, so
much overswayed him, the exceeding great love he bare to my mother, for whose
sake he also tendered me the dearer; for the fuller expression whereof, he grew
more obstinate in his intended resolution, so as I was esteemed and honored of
the world, as undoubted heir of that Kingdom. My childhood spent I in many
noble disciplines; for being borne to a Crown, I was educated not as a woman,
but as a Sovereign Prince: and withal to make my present state more fully
miserable with the memory of passed glories, the Knights errant deemed
themselves not worthy of the seeking adventures, ere they had first had the
adventure of seeing me, which came to pass, either because things a far off
had a greater priveledge of opinion, than things more at hand; or because there
was in me some esteeme-worthy thing which I knew not my self; suffice it, that
such was the effect, whether the cause deserved it or no. Being arrived to
sixteen years of age, such was my misfortune, that there came to Arelate as a
Knight errant, the son of the King of Catalogna, whose name was Don Peplasos.
This Prince making a show of being enamored of me, speak, and wrought so far,
as I (drawn on rather by my destiny, than by any love I bare him) persuaded
my father to give me him for wife; which he did, (being not used to contradict
me) though sore against his will, and with the tears in his eyes protesting he
did it merely to satisfy me, himself for his own particular, liking not
well of such hasty weddings, and much less of the bridegrooute. But I,
over-tired with the great number of Suitors, without knowing which of them to
choose, (detained in this ignorance by the tenderness of age, but much more by
my simplicity in not knowing what manner of thing love was, wearied with the
trouble of being so wooed, and foolishly curious to see my self a wife) made
choice of him, to verify that old Proverb, Women ever choose the worst. With
him lived I seven years without bearing children, which seen by my fathers
subjects, who would by no means be commanded by the Catalonian nation
(abhorred by them by a natural antipathy) and much less by him, whom for his
bad usage to me-wards, they hated more than death it self, they earnestly
besought my father to marry, so that at last he, won by their importunities,
but much more by my letters, took to wife a fair and virtuous Princess, the
King of Aquitain's daughter, who; bare him the very first year a male-child,
which as much contented the people, as it madded and discontented my husband,
who seeing himself deprived both of that kingdom, and also of any hope of
having by me any children, determined to avenge the one, and remedy the other,
by doing away my person.

It fell out in the mean time, that fame extolling abroad the two neighboring
beauties, which were yours, and that of Eromilia, (Princess of Maiorica) he
(being the vainest man living) not knowing which of both to choose, was much
tormented in mind, for being indifferently enamored, as well of the one as of
the other; but considering yours, without possessions and dominions (the
principal object of his love) during the life time of your brother, that only
mirror of Princes, and withal fearing you for the fame of your valor, which
would not (as he thought) willingly brook ill usage, he bent his inclination
toward the Princess of Maiorica, from whom he withdrew it again, when he
understood of her being promised to your brother, which occasioned not the
taking away of my misfortunes, but the differring of them for my greater evil.

Now Don Peplasos loved a gentle Knight, if he may be said to love, to whom
nature gave no inclination to love other than himself, besides the being of his
nature, disposition, and conditions, so far alienated from those of Don
Eleimo (for so was the Knight named) that it seemed impossible to form thereof
a true friendship; but as every rule is wont to have, (so has this also) its
exception, at least on the behalf of the Prince, who being presumptuous, and
so far deceived in himself as to repute his own vices to be virtues, easily
believed, that Don Eleimo (a virtuous Cavalier) took them for such indeed; to
him therefore discovered he his inhumane designs: but he (which well knew his
nature) although he durst not contradict him, yet was he so moved by the
instinct of his own virtue, as he could do no less than advertize me thereof.
And because either to speak or write to me might prove dangerous, he only
wrote to me to find out some one trusty, with whom he might confer without
any suspicion.

The husband of my chief chamberlain, named Don Elavio, was one of the best
esteemed, and noblest of the Catalonian Knights, whose conditons when I had
well examined, I judged him a man worthy of my secret. And he having conforted
me, went to confer with Don Eulavio, to whom he showed the letter, which he
had (as I told you) written unto me, according as we had first agreed on, to
certify him, that he was sent from me, and afterward (burning it in his
presence) used with him, on my behalf, such courteous language, as might suite
with an affair of such importance. To whom Don Eleimo answered, that without
the testimony of the letter, himself alone was a sufficient letter of
assurance and credit. And with that he told him, how that the Prince, having
taken me to wife, not for affection sake (as he made me believe ere he married
me) but for mere covetousness of the Arelatan kingdom, which not succeeding
according to his expectation, (my father being married and having a son, and
I proved a barren woman) was resolved to put me to death; but considering the
good opinion which the people and his father also had of my honesty, he
determined to work his ends another way, and that was by poison, which he
intended to put in practice ere long, having already so wrought with my
Physician, as he had got him to promise to make him some of purpose, which (for
not being violent) should in the end of certain days work their effect,
without giving any color of suspicion. All which when I understood, I know not
which was greater, either the hate I bore my husband for so barbarous a
cruelty, or the fear I had of not being able to preserve my self; and having
before my marriage been very curious of simples, whereby I knew such as might
more easily be used to hurt me, I prepared for my self such antidotes, as I
hoped thereby to preserve my life, as it came indeed to pass; for I in using
them, so prevented the danger, as I could not have poisoned my self, although
I would. Yet was I not therein uncircumspect, for some of them I took (being
assured by the antidotes) others would I not take, because I knew they were too
strong, being forewarned of all of them, and of their qualities, by the good
Don Eleimo; whereat the Prince wondering, after many fantasies and conjectures,
(most subtle as he was) imagined that I was informed thereof, but not thinking
of Don Eleimo, he began to mistrust that the Physician (moved either by pity
or avarice) had made me privy thereto; but when he afterward saw, both by his
protestations and proceeding in the practice, that he proved as trusty to him
as treacherous to me, he could not then choose but suspect who it was indeed.
And therefore he (intending now to kill two birds with one stone) forethought
how to take Don Eleimo so napping, as he might punish him, not for the good he
did me, but for the evil he might lay to his charge to have done with me,
which he perhaps believed so to be, as one deeming it impossible that mere
piety and pity (which he being never acquainted withal, himself believed to
be in no other man) had moved this Knight to do me this good office; nor
could he imagine that any other interesses induced him thereto, whom he well
knew to be a noble and rich Cavalier and my self so poorly entertained, as I
had ordinarily little more allowed me than a private Lady. Confirmed then in
this article of belief, he, for many days, did nothing else but pry into our
actions, though to no purpose, we being so far from any such intention as
imagination it self could not fancy us more alienated therefrom.

One had Don Eliemo among all his servants no less dear unto him, than
himself was to the Prince; on him fixed Don peplasos his eye, judging him a fit
instrument for his designs; and seeing him ofttimes in his fore-chamber,
waiting for Don Eleimo, took occasion to call him, under color of asking of
him something, or bidding him do some petty service, so as he puffed up with
such like favors, and already framing himself high fortunes, began to despise
such mean preferments as might be pretended from Don Eleimo; Nay, so great
was his presumption, that thinking one day to unhorse his master himself out
of the Prince his favor, he grew by this imagination, both to envy and hate
him; so uses fortune to sport her self in humane things, as in a noble mind
one generous act prevails more than all wordly interesses; and on the
contrary, in a base mind, one sole interest can do more than all the ties of
virtue, the one to save the innocent contemnes his Lords favor, and the other
to obtain it by betraying the guiltless, makes himself guilty. Now when the
Prince thought he had sufficiently prepared him, he found one day
opportunity to speak unto him in this wise.

Catascopo, I purpose to receive thee into my service, but charge thee not to
speak a word thereof to any man living, especially to Don Eleimo from whom ere
thou part, thou must (for a business that imports me) observe, whothose of my
wives family be that frequent him most, and in this and every other action of
his, penetrate the deepest thou can possibly; wherein, if thou servest me
well, I promise to make thy fortune such as thou shall not need envy thy
Masters greatness.

Catascopo, who joyed not a little to become thus the Princes favorite,
promised to serve him with all observant diligence, wherein he could already
assure him, how Don Eulavio used to come often to visit him, and that (for the
most part) by night, locking themselves in privately, both alone, very
circumspect, that no man overheard them; and that one evening among the rest,
when Don Eulavio was gone, Don Eleimo stood a long while looking on a Jewel,
which the other had left him.

The Prince (thinking he had now gotten all that he desired) bade him in any
case steal away that Jewel, which he promised to do, well knowing how to
filtch away the key of the study wherein it was laid up. This Jewel was my
mothers, being a triangle of three rich diamonds, each angle whereof was
enriched with a great pearl; I sent it him by Don Eulavio in token of
gratitude, and he (as Don Eulavio told me) accepted it very unwillingly, his
heart seeming to presage unto him his ensuing evils, seeing that he abhorring
it as a thing mortiferous, praid him sundry times after he had received it, to
bring it me back again; which (I believe) he did, not that his imagination
stuck in what his heart presaged him; but because he blemished his nobility
(as he thought) in doing mercenarily that action, which had no other end than
it self. It was an easy matter for Catascopo to satisfy the ill intended
curiosity of the Prince, Don Eleimo concealing not himself from him, for that
he deemed him to be as faithful a servant, as himself was an affectionate
Master; so as he made a shift to steal away the key, and then filtching away
the Jewel, brought it forthwith to the Prince, who (knowing it to be mine)
looked after no other evidence, but condemning me unheard, would by no means
let slip a season so opportune to his villainies: Being then risen out of his
bed, and causing himself to be followed by those of his guard, he went toward
Don Eleimo's house, that adjoined to the Court, intending to surprise him
there, but that the heavens permitted not, because having occasion to call to
Catascopo (who lay in his chamber) without receiving any answer, he was forced
to rise himself, when not finding him there, whereat he was much amazed, til
having sent for a candle, he perceived at the first sight, the study door
open, and finding not therein the Jewel, he suddenly suspected the cause,
wherefore the Prince favored the Traitor. What to resolve of in that instant,
he knew not, seeing that to stay there was dangerous; and to get him gone
would be judged a sign of manifest guilt. Whileft thus his troubled mind
inclined while to the one, and while to the other resolution, behold he
perceived through a window, (which by good fortune stood the open) a great
glimmering of lights, and no small crowde of people; among whom were also the
Archers of the Court; whereupon examining in his judgment (in the twinkling
of an eye) the cruelty of the Prince, who was both headstrong and inexorable,
he resolved to shun his own ruin, as the lesset evil, reserving a place and
time more proper, for the clearing of his innocence, which was mine by
consequence; taking with him therefore some coin and Jewels from out his study
(by the being there whereof he comprehended, that the robbery tended not to the
filtching away of a Jewel, but to the murdering of him in his life and
honor) leaving unstirred his family (who little suspected any such accident)
he slipped him out by a secret door that lead to his lodgings, whilst the
Prince caused the street door to be furiously beaten down to the ground. The
confusion of the poor servants which then lay in a deep sleep, cannot be
expressed, no more than the fury of the Prince, who because he found him not,
took on him like a mad man; whilst those of his train not believing that he
could be fled away in so short a time, in causing him to be sought for all over
the house, gave him the more time to save himself: who (being suffered to
pass through the gate of the watch, not so much for giving them the military
sign, as because they knew who he was) went aboard a Galley (feining some
business for the Prince) wherewith he got himself to the King my father in
Arelata. The Prince (in the mean time having sent all over) found out at
length the way of his escape, when though he speeded all the Galleyes after him
sundry ways, and to diverse places; yet was it not possible for any of them
to over-take him, because he having chosen the best Galley never suffered the
Ghinge to repose their oars, till he arrived in Aquamorta.

Don Eleimo being thus escaped, there remained yet Don Eulavio. Now there
served Don Eleimo a slave given him by Don Eulavio, who (having been well used
by both, and seeing the misfortune of the one) ran instantly to the other,
thinking it his best course to save himself in the house of his first Master,
ere the Officers feazed on him for a chattle with the goods of the second. Now
Don Eulavio used gaming very much, (and as fortune would have it) he then was
at play, when seeing the slave appear before him, he (rising off the table
with a great heart-beating) asked him what he would have? And (having
understood the cause, though not the occasion) suspecting what was indeed, and
judging his stay to quit himself thereof would prove dangerous, he loding the
slave with a ladder of cords (made in his youth for his stolen love-sports) and
taking his way toward a part of the city, formerly perhaps observed by him
for such like occurrences, speedily descended the walls, leaving there the
ladder behind, sithence when, there was never any news heard, either of him
or the slave. The Prince thus frustrated of his first hope, came running to Don
Eulavio's house, which he found open, and repleate with servants, waiting for
their Masters, that were there a gaming; but scouting on further, and detaining
such as would have run in to give notice of his coming, he suddenly rushed
in himself among them; where every one stood up to honor him, and he (finding
there missing Don Eulavio) enquired for him, after whom when every man had
sought and called too, they perceived in the end, he was gone his ways; which
when Don Peplasos understood, there was no man that durst as much as look on
his fiery eyes, for he laying aside all gravitie, spoke and did things
unworthy a Prince; all the servants there sent he packing to a close prison, as
he had formerly done with Don Eleimo': neither were those Knights whom he
found a gaming, any thing better used by him; whilst I (wretched woman) lay
(thanks to my quiet conscience) deeply plunged in a profound sleep. Many
years before slept I al'alone, the Prince never coming near me, but at the
request of the King his father, which was seldom, and then with a demeanor
rather irksome and disgustful, than any whit contentsome for the conversation
of married folks, unless it be in an affectionate way, is no pleasure but a
torment, and savours rather of beastiality than humanity. There slept always
two gentlewoman in my bedchamber, where stood a small lamp continually
burning, because my melancholy being grown to be a formal infirmity, I ever
found my self troubled with some indisposition, orther, either of stomach or
spleen, so as there passed not a night, wherein I needed not both remedies,
and the company of some to comfort me; for my head was so replete with vapors,
as I saw and suffered what another woman (how ill disposed soever) could not
have as much as imagined, much less seen and endured. With a great rumbling
came the Prince rushing into my bedchamber, by reason whereof my fit of
sickness seizing on me; as soon as I understood the occasion of his coming
thither, I swounded and fell in a convulsion, so extremely violent, as I was so
fortunate as not to hear with mine own ears those injurious terms which (I
afterward heard) he gave me. He would by all means have caused me so naked to
be cast into the bottom of a dark dungeon, had not the king (who came running
to see what this hurly-burly meant) hindered him to do it; who hearing him
accuse me of adultery with Don Eleimo, by the isntrumental means of Don
Eulavio, told him, that the judgment thereof belonged to him as King, and
therefore bade him get him to bed, telling him that what he had done was
sufficient, assuring him withal, that as he would have me burnt, if he found
me guilty, so would he also allow my innocence such favor as it merited;
whereupon he parting away (though much against his will) the King would not as
yet leave me, but patiently attending to see the end of my fit, and conferring
in the mean time, while with the one, and while with the other of my gentle
women, he well perceived the Prince his suspicion to be either vain or
malicious. Returned to my self (if so I may say that found my self then in a
worse plight than ever) the King drew near me, consolating me exceeding
courteously; and having first suffered me to vent out my tears, for the
disburdning of my heart, he then told me; that albeit he never had occasion in
so many years, to suspect my honesty; nevertheless, being that the gods had
given him the Scepter of Justice, he could do no less than hear such as
accused me, to the end he might the better hear me also. And that if I knew my
self innocent, he saw no cause I had to grieve, seeing that I might assure my
self that no tie of affection should prevail with him so far, as to suffer
me to be wronged. I (that felt my self struck through the heart by so
dishonest an injury) assured by my conscience, answered him, that the not
condemning me, obliged me never awhit, because finding me guiltless (as most
certainly he should) he was obliged to publish me innocent; but that (to free
me from the evil opinion of the world, wherein I was fallen by this imputation)
lay not at his dispose, unless he would be pleased to prefer the rites of
justice before all respects of blood, by judging my malicious accusers by the
strictness of the Talion law. The King stricken inwardly with my words,
stoodawhile in a maze, and afterward (bidding me good night) retired to his
lodging, leaving with me a guard, with express order, not to suffer the Prince
to enter my chamber.

The day following, the fame of this accident was rumored abroad, not only
through the City, but also over all the King dome, with such discontent of the
people, murmuring in so open a manner, against the person of the Prince, as
made him (being no less timorous than cruel) ready to go besides himself;
neither was there any Marketplace, Temple, or Common-walke, where there was
not punctual scrutinie made of my life, and behavior, followed by a general
judgment on my behalf every way favorable. And in truth, though I had
harbored a dishonest intention (which was (God knows) far from my thoughts)
yet was it impossible for me to have ever put the same in practice, being that
I went no where unaccompanied, nor staid I ever by night or day in my own
chamber all alone, neither (which is more) favored or affected I ever any one
of my women more than the rest, but esteemed them all equally alike, bearing no
other different respect toward them, than might serve to manifest my better
liking, to such of them as I found more diligent in my service, so as it was
impossible for me to be accused by other than malice it self, which
nevertheless by the aforesaid means could not possibly prejudice me, because
it could no way allege time or place; although (by its mischievous malignitie)
it could devise how to allege persons.

The day following the King would feign know of his son the cause of my
accusation, who related unto him all that he gathered out of Catascopo, with
the contumacie, and suspicious flight of the two Knights where of he formed a
consequence of my offense. And then examining Catascopo (who conformed himself
in all things to the Prince his allegation without varying in any thing) it
happened that the accusation (though most false) seemed somewhat likely to be
true. Whereupon the King (misinformed) came to me, and explained all that was
laid to my charge, opening unto me by his propositions a large field to clear
my innocence, which I manifested unto him so apparently lively, as any man but
he, would have instantly absolved me, and condemned the Prince. But alas, No
man ever hated his own flesh, so as it was no marvel, if his fatherly
inclination, hindered him to discern the malice of his son; he would not
believe that they went about to poison me, because the Physician denied it, for
which I (having no other testimony than the two Knights that were fled and
gone) alleged my distillations, and some words carelessly let slip from me,
whereby my women discovered in me such like suspicions. I denied not the gift
of the Jewel, though for the occasion I told you, further alleging, that Don
Eulavio being (as every one knew) a noble Knight, it was not a thing credible
that either I should use him for a Pander, or that he would have been so base
as to suffer himself to become such a one: but seeing the King for all this
stick firm to the evidence of his son (which was the gift of the Jewel,
and flight of the Knights,) I showed him how the gift had its occasion, and
much more the flight of the Knights, that had been very wilfully sottish to
have trusted themselves to the discretion of an unjust and cruel Prince, who
if he made no conscience to procure my death, for being excluded of his hopes
of the Arelatan kingdom, and for the aspiring to that of Maiorica, much less
would he have made, to put them to death, to the end he might thereby, not
only revenge himself, and suppress the discovery of his mischievous
practices, but also rid himself of me for ever, at the price of my life and
honor. In the end I besought him that my Physician might be examined by
torture, whereof he was well contented; but he the very day before he was to be
examined, was found strangled, to make the world believe that he hanged
himself for fear of torments. My reasons (in sum) had availed me little,
if (in less than eight days after this accident) there had not appeared an
Ambassador from my father come scowring with maine force of oars, on a well
rigged Galley, who having presented the King with a letter of credence, and
acquainted him with the occasion of his coming, delivered him also a letter
from Don Eleimo, containing the whole story of my case, without varying a
haites breadth from what I had formerly related. And (because the Ambassador
suddenly upon his arrival, would needs have audience, ere he spoke with me or
any other) he prayed, as soon as the King had read the letter, that he might
see me, to confront therewith my deposition; which could not be denied him; and
finding me in a plight so deplorable, he comforted me, with assuring me, that
my fathers tenderness of affection to me-wards, was no less now than when I
was his only child; and that when he were assured of my honesty, he was
resolved to defend it, though it should cost him his life and kingdom, that he
was sent thither to be an assistant at my arraignement, which he would have
prosecuted with all rigor, that so my innocence might be the better cleared,
that the maine proof consisted of one sole point, which was, to see if what I
said, was conformable to what Don Eleimo had told my father, and now written to
the King of Catalogna there present. Much was I comforted in hearing this, and
after, having asked him how my father did, I related unto him (as formerly I
had done to my father-in-law) the advertizements many times given me by Don
Eleimo, with the several antidotes by me taken, whereof I showed them the
receipts, wishing them to ask the Physicians, if such were effectual against
poisons. I made known unto them in the end how it grieved me, that my Physician
was hanged up in prison, for fear lest he discovered (on the rack) both his
own and the Prince his treachery. Which when the Ambassador heard, he asked
the King what he thought of it? Whereto he not knowing what to answer,
(reading again Don Eleimo's letter, with strange mutation of colors) said, he
would go confer with his son: to whom, when he had showed the letter, and
made with him a great stir about it, he at length resolved to have all things
hushed up, wherewith I not contenting my self (but requiring the death of the
false Catascopo, with some public declaration of the Prince, for the
manifestation of my innocence) could by no means possible obtain, either the
one or the other, for Catascopo, disclaimed from having ever named me,
maintaining all he averred to be true without any prejudice to me; and the
Prince, by alleging love to be a thing full of doubts and fears, not only
excluded himself from the obligation of giving me such satisfaction, as I
looked for, but also pretended to have withal obliged me, in having so basely
defamed me. I would feign have returned home to my fathers, but entreated by my
father-in-law, deceived by the false penitencie of my husband, and counseled
by the Ambassador not to do it (being that my husband could no ways make a
more public declaration of my wronged honesty, than to keep me with him) I
was persuaded to stay; whereof I soon repented me, now that a justly conceived
disdain had taken away from me all the residue of love; and that there
appeared to increase in him a desire to free himself of the known ill opinion
that every one conceived of him, imagining my life to be unto him a perpetual
upbraiding of his infamy.

It fortuned that a year and somewhat after that these things succeeded, the
valourous Prince, your brother, was slain, whereupon a new frenzy being come
into his head of getting the Princess Eromilia (a thing which could not be
whilst I lived) he resolved to make me away; but not knowing what color to
have for it, now that my honesty was so openly known, he thought of a
thousand ways, whereof no one liked him; at last he lighted on one, the most
villainous that ever humane wit could imagine.

Now there stood seated on the Pirenean mountains, a Temple dedicated to the
goddess Juno; whither such married paires, as had lived disgusted, came from
remote parts on pilgrimage, to pray the goddess to grant them reciprocal love
and concord. Don Peplasos (in whom was never before seen any sign, either of
piety, or religion, become now forsooth in an instant devoutly religious)
invited me to this pilgrimage; whereof I (that much needed celestial help)
was (God knows) exceeding joyful. Me-thought that my prayers were already
heard, and that I saw my husband become an altered man, for that the desire to
be good (which he seemed now to have) argued in him a beginning of goodness.
Nothing would he resolve of without me, touching this journey, participating of
my advice, as well for the manner thereof, as for the company we were to take
along with us; wherein (he seeming to be exceedingly mortified and full of
contrition) we resolved to go disguised, without any manner of pomp; taking
with us but one servant a-piece: but because I thought I could not (for
modesties cause) be so conveniently served in my occasions by a man servant, I
told him that in stead of a man, I would take along with me a waiting woman, he
(telling me that it was fitting I should so do) replied; that to prevent
future accidents, I should do well to take along with me also a manservant,
for that we knew not what dangers might befall us by the way, and that
therefore it were not amiss, to choose out such a one as I knew for aman of
valor, whereunto I very willingly condescended, and being by this proposition
quite cleared of all suspicion that might have stuck in my mind; albeit, so
simple was I, as that I never once doubted of any thing; I selected me one,
whose name was Calaplo, a harmless and comely young fellow, though never till
then known to me for a man any way valiant; and now my mind settled on no
other thing than my journey, having clothed our selves in pilgrims weeds of
course gray cloth, we set our selves forwards on our journey: whither he
offered not to take along with him Catascopo, to show how unwilling he was to
displease me; albeit though he had brought him along with him, I would never
have disliked it, having before resolved with my self to forget whatsoever was
past; in his stead took he a right noble and valiant Knight, and such a one,
as I cannot believe that he knew any thing from this treacherous plot, but
rather that the Prince took him with him of purpose, that his deceived
goodness might deceive others. Come to the Temple, we adored the goddess,
and presented her with rich gifts, whereat I believed, she smiled to see them
come from two hearts, the one a Traitor, the other betrayed. I (full of
religious faith) continued all the day in the Temple praying, not without
feeling a very great commotion of fear in my mind, though I saw no reason
why, and therefore imputing the fault to my infirmity, I fervently besought
the goddess to comfort me. In the mean time my good husband (whilst the
Knight was at our lodging, which was very far off, left behind there of
purpose, under color of keeping company with my woman, who was somewhat ill
at ease) sent my man to fetch him a little wallet, which (having given him the
key thereof) he made him open, showing him a good quantity of Jewels and gold
(as indeed there was nothing else therein;) then causing him to put all in
again, and lock it up fast, he said unto him; Here take this wallet, and get
thee gone suddenly into some country, so far off, as it may not be known
that thou art living in the world, for if ever I come to know it, I vow thou
shall not live one hour after. The young man (hereat much amazed, taking the
wallet) went his way without any more ado. And he coming hastily into
theremple, invited me to go see a white Do on these mountains, whereat I
smiled that he took it for a Do, where it was more likely some kind of
Chamoy or Wilde-goate; but he obstinately persisting in affirming it to be a
Do, I gathered up my self to follow him. And because my Physicians had told
me, that exercise was good against my infirmity; it was no difficult matter
for him (we having not as yet gotten any sight of the Do) to get me to descend
through places so rugged and craggy, as it was impossible for me to return
thence back again. But he telling me he had the day before gone the same way,
and that a little further was a very fair path, whither we were necessarily to
go, to return back again; I then (though too late) perceived my self
deceived; wherefore (bursting out a weeping) I besought him to have compassion
of me. But he (waxen by this time cruel, and growing more and more savage)
made me trot so long, till seized on by one of my wonted fits) I fell down
deprived of all sense or feeling. What become of him I know not; for it was
dark night ere I came to my self; when I found I was gotten into a steepie
and rockie dale, a long days journey distant from the place where I swounded.
How I was carried thither, I know not, much less how I came to be left
bare-foote and bare-legged, and stripped naked of all save only this gown of
my unhappie pilgrimage; and certainly I would have chosen rather to have died
a thousand deaths, than to have been left in such a plight, for my tender
feere could not endure the sharpness of the stones, neither (which was worse)
knew I which way to go, assuring my self, that to return back again, was
impossible for me, so as putting my self into the hands of fortune, I made
choice to descend the less difficult way, going for the most part on all
four, and sharing among my knees, legs, and hands, the pains which my feet
alone were not able to suffer. But come at last to the foot of one mountain,
where began the ascent of another, without having seen all the day long any
living creature, lifting up my eyes by chance, whom might I see but my servant
Calaple, who beheld me, but knew me not, so great was his astonishment to see
me trudge in such a fashion; till constrained by my weariness to sit me down,
he came to know me by the pitious moan I made; whereupon he (with a voice
somewhat loud) thus said unto me;

And is it possible that you are my Lady the Princess? Alas, what cruel
destiny could make any man become so barbarous as to put you in such a plight?
I now perceive, that the cause of my exile was to make the world believe, that
I were run away with your Highness, (and here related he unto me the charge
and command the Prince gave him, whence we gathered the scope of his malicious
intention.) Whilst we thus stood talking, behold there came three highway
thieves, that set upon him unawares, where I saw him valiantly defend himself;
till they in their fight so changed their ground, as I (losing the sight of
them) knew not what thereof succeeded, for there being a profound steepy dale,
and a great fall of waters, between the one mountain and the other, I must
have fetched a large compass about to get whither I had seen them, which lay
not in the power of my feere to do, and besides, I imagined that I could not
have found him otherwise than dead, for had he been alive, he would not have
failed to have come to find me out. All that night lay I in that place, where
the firmament was my Inn, the earth my bed, passions my meat, and tears my
drink; being kept waking with the new pain of my feet, accompanied with the
cold, without any hope of rising ever thence any more; so tired and tormented
was I with all extremities of anguish and vexation. Scarce was it day, when I
was found in this plight by a country swain, who (taking compassion on me)
lifted me up, and (comforting me in pitiful manner) carried me into a
Cottage, where I was lovingly entertained by his wife and mother, who (having
restored me with fresh eggs, and anointed my feet and legs) laid me in a
rusticke bed, with such a diligent charity, as more they could not have done
though they had known me for what I was. Three days abode I there, and might
(if I had lifted) have stayed there longer, but being that these exceeding
poor people could not furnish me with victuals for my journey, nor the
shepherd neglect his flock to accompany me, nor I discover my self for great
shame (having got them to show me the way to the sea, to embarke my self) I
went on my way; and in stead of rewarding these poor creatures with gifts,
according to the state of my birth and quality, I was glad to accept of them
some bread, and an old pair of slip-shooes, according to the state of my
fortune, to save my self from starving for hunger, and from quite spoiling my
feet: but wherefore go I thus prolonging the matter? I made a shift to get me
(though with infinite sufferings) unto the seashore, which I no sooner
descried, than I was from a-farre off espied of certain Pirates that lay there
a roving about the shore, who having seized on me, fell to a great strife
whose of theirs I should be, but because they saw me grown very weak with
want and weariness, they suffered me to repose my self, agreeing that the
chance of the dice should assign me an owner. It was the eighth night that
we continued sailing (though they steered on no direct course, but romed up
and down, according as occasions offered them hope of booty) when I heard them
jarring among themselves with swearing they were a-ground, and crying out of
the steere-man to hul, they seemed to be all at their wits end, for fear of
splitting. The wind was somewhat sharp, but even and level with the sea,
without any surging billows; when I (seeing my self fallen into the hands of
such a rabble of rascals, resolved either to free my self or die) threw me down
into the sea with a plancke, whilst the Foist (carried away with the wind) got
far wide of me, in the twinkling of an eye; and the night being so obscure,
as I could not descrie the shore, I kept my self settled on the plancke till
the morning, when being by weariness and fasting, reduced to the pass wherein
you found me, I had the fortune to receive this benefit from so worthy a
Princess, who will vouchsafe (as I hope) to help me yet to get home to my
father, as I beseech your Highness to do, obliging thereby both him and I,
for all the remnant of our lives time.

Eromena, who had attentively listened to the refluxes of so unjust a fortune in
a Princess of so great merit, and who had before understood by others the
former passages, said thus unto her; (Noble and virtuous Princess.) there is
not any debt due from me to the gods (although I owe them many) which I
esteem greater than their having made of me the instrument to break off (as I
hope) the course of your misfortunes. I beseech you to rest you merry, and to
think your self at home at your own Royal fathers house, whither I will send
you so well accompanied, as you shall not need to fear either Don Peplasos or
the Pirates. Here are the Princes of Mauritania, to whom I pray you to make your
self known, and to any other whatsoever; for I do not only care little, that
the Prince of Catalogna know that I profess friendship unto you, but mean to
make him know withal that I will for your sake profess enmity to him. And
then without staying for an answer, (having sent for the two brothers that
staid to come in unto them) she related succinctly unto them the recited
History: wherewith as Polimero was transported to an affect of compassion, so
was Metaneone violently carried beyond himself with a passion of wrath,
discoursing and arguing with himself, how that all the ill done this innocent
Lady, was intended to the making miserable of his Eromilia; being very sorry
he had not known it sooner, for then Don Peplasos had not so easily slipped out
of his hands, whom (when his brothers affairs and his own were once settled)
he resolved to chastise at any hand. With diverse ends therefore comforted
they Eleina, promising to hazard in her assistance both their powers and lives,
so as being by them thus consolated, and by the Princess supplied with
whatsoever befitted her state and quality; she thanked the gods for having by
such unfortunate means, so fortunately conducted her thither. Two days then
after dispatched Eromena a well furnished Galley to the King of Arelate, with
hers, and his daughters letters, not consenting to let her go her self,
because she intended to detain her some days, till she were recovered of
her sufferings, and then to send her home better accompanied.

In the mean time the two brothers conferred together of their affections,
impatiently expecting the Count of Bona's return; whilst the Princess (to
prevent the loss of time) assured her self of Luogodori: confiscating the
estates of the Rebels, and therewith bountifully recompencing the merits of
diverse Knights, that had in this war worthily behaved themselves, so as the
kingdom was in a small time peaceably settled.

The Count of Bona, having got all things requisite for his charge, hasted over
into Sardegna, where receiving intelligence of the Princess at Terranova, he
fetching about the Islands end came to Portoditorre, and leaving the Fleet ride
there, went thence to Sassari, where the Princess then resided. The Princes
(having courteously embraced him) and understood of the expedition he brought
with him, were thereof exceeding joyful; but Eromenaes joys far transcended
theirs, hoping that this Corsan enterprise would make up her marriage.

The Marquess of Oristagno (who in his youth had been one of the most amorous
Knights of his time, and who by great practice on himself and others, was
grown to be a skillful Physiognomist in the affairs of love) seeing her
desires written in her face, thus spoke unto her; Your Highness has done for
the state one of the two things you should do to make it become fully happy,
opulent and flourishing (which is) to have reduced it after such great tempests
of war and rebellion to the pleasant calm of peace and obedience. The other
thing that is yet to do, is, to find out a husband worthy of you, to the end
that you may have a companion to bear a share with you in supporting the
weighty burden of government, and to bestow on us a fair, goodly, and
generous posterity.

The Princess blushing (though well pleased with so unexpected a proposition)
returned him this answer; Certainly I believe (Cozen) that you never meant to
be old, seeing that you are not yet about to leave off your youthful humors,
would you have me marry, when there is no man (for ought I know) that will
have me; Do you think it a thing seemly or fitting for one of my sex and
quality to go woo for a husband? By the high gods (replied the Marquess) your
Highness has reason to conceive of me as you do; for by my goodwill I would
never grow old; Where is that man living that desires to be unpleasant? Take
away but the jocondnesse of our thoughts, and what are we (old men) good for?
seeing melancholy makes a man noisome, both to himself and others; and mirth
in old age is the gift of heaven; It conserves a man, and makes his company
become desired of every one, which if in youth it be dissolute and wanton, yet
has it in graver years its gravitie, and its peculiar ways, so as under the
bark of pleasantness lies hidden the substance of the Theoricke and Practicke
of the world, which being the only book for perfecting man, instructs without
error, unless error be caught hold of, in its beginnings, and in the simple
vulgar opinions. The Princess smiled at his discourse, and (to give him
further matter thereof) she replied.

Oh how simple are those encomions you make of old age, of that shivering age,
which cannot be pleasant, because it wants the vigor of blood, the efficient
cause of mirth. Your Highness may reason as you think good (answered the
Marquess) that reason of yours may hold good in old dotards, as (being long
sithence fallen from being any more themselves) are good for nothing; but yet
give me leave to tell you that such as fortify their minds, against the
defects of time with good government, against fortune by enjoying her favors
indifferently, and against their own rebellious affections, by having gotten a
habitude of commanding them, fall not under the censure of this your reason;
for such (keeping themselves from both extremes, (that is) from such things as
befit no other than young men, and from excess of melancholy (which is most
habitual in old men) may (finding themselves free from mental perturbations)
conserve themselves a long time in a healthful and pleasant disposition; in
whom if mirth cannot engender love, yet makes it them at leastwise become more
sociable and useful to such as are enamored, not without awaking withal the
memory of their own particular loves, which in them cannot for all that be
blamed, for being confined within the limits of an affection overswayed by
reason. You will say then (replied the Princess) that if an old man would
conserve himself in a blithsome disposition, he then ought by consequence to
procure its effects, and therefore the effects of love. I say it, and yet I say
it not (answered the Marquess) The wife old man may be master of the affects
of the mind, but not of the progressions of nature, necessary to the
consideration of such effects, against which there is no word either of
Prudence or Philosophy that can suffice; Yet remains there in him, I know not
what thing, which I cannot express, that makes him, though having himself
laid by his arms, delight nevertheless to see them exercised by young men in
the terms of legal affection. Now touching what I have motioned unto you,
your Highness should do it of your self, and not wonder at me as you do,
for if I were not grown old, I would not stay till some other should put me
in mind of businesses of that nature. Whereat the Princess smiled, saying;
And whom (Cozen) shall I take to husband? There is to Prince but will (when he
has married me) reside in his own country; and I again will by no means
leave mine: and for wedding a private man, who will commend me? Neither the one
nor the other should your Highness do (said he) but read a mean path
between both; and being asked how? he proceeded saying, I mean some Prince
noble and valourous, though without any means, for such a one can not be said
to be a private man, who (in being a Prince) shall be a match befitting your
greatness, and (for having no dominions) will do all whatsoever is requisite
for your affairs. Yea, but could you name me such a one? (asked with a grave
countenance the Princess.) Marry, that can I well, Madame (answered the
Marquess) Whom could your Highness ever choose more noble, valiant, and
generally beloved of all men, than the Infant Polimero? Whereat she (changing
her color, and standing a while in a muze) said; I know, that to match my
self is necessary, because to continue as I am, is for many respects
disconvenient unto me; albeit (as your self know) I have ever had but a small
inclination thereto; but the maine difficulty consists in finding out such a
one as may give the people satisfaction. I cannot deny but that the Infant
Polimero ownes all those conditions you speak of, yet reason will not that I
be she he should aim at, neither believe I, that he will ever offer to look
for me, for fear (perhaps) of being rejected for want of means. Nevertheless
if you think that this marriage may make for the public good of the kingdom,
take you care then of the managing thereof, and (for my own part) I promise
you not to swerve from your Counsel.

The Marquess, kneeling down before her, and kissing her hand, undertook the
charge thereof, assuring her he would conduct it in such a manner, as she
should therewith rest well satisfied, which indeed he afterward accordingly
performed: for taking opportunely hold of an occasion to exaggerate before the
Council, the favors of the two Mauritanian Princes, and to exalt the valor
of the younger; and descending handsomely thence to the occasions and affairs
of the time, to the infirmity and decadency of the King, to the sex of the
Princess (though valorous, yet feminine) he at last in general terms
proposed the necessity of matching her with such a husband, as might reside in
the kingdom. Whereupon all the neighboring Princes, and others also further
off being named and proposed, he found oppositions against every one, except
Polimero, whose age and nature, he considered to be apt to receive the air
and customs of Sardegna; who although he wanted Dominions and means, yet
wanted he not forces and warlike troops, but could upon any occasion procure
(as he had done at that present) great supplies of his father and brother,
whose amity was more profitable, and enmity more dangerous to Sardegna, than
all the rest of the neighboring Princes.

Some there were that feared there was some dissembling or double dealing in
this business, so patly proposed in the instant of the arrival of the
Mauritanian forces, as if they menat, in case they could not obtain their
desire by fair means, to enforce them thereto with their powers; which the
Marquess perceiving, assured such of their being therein mistaken: wishing
them withal to deliver themselves freely, if they thought that such a match
would prove any way inutile or prejudicial unto them, assuring them of the
Mauritanian troops, as well as of their own native Sardegnans. Their
disputations were at length reduced into resolutions; that the marriage of the
Princess was necessary; that there was not alliance nor match better, nor
fitter for her, than that of the Mauritanian Infant: and that the Marquess
should treat thereof, by way of proposition, as proceeding from himself, giving
thereby rather way and encouragement to the Infant, to demand her, than cause
to believe, that they were already resolved to give her him. The joy that
Eromena thereof conceived, as it was exceeding great, so was it nevertheless
exceeded with an incomparable prudence, whereby she well knew how to conceal
it, answering the Council that they should find her conformable to their
deliberation.

The Count of Bona after he had delivered his Lords letters, and discharged
himself of the troops and Galleys, being licenced to go on his Embassage,
wafted off (as soon as he had received the Princes letters) with a prosperous
gale for Maiorica, where he, and the other Ambassadors were received with all
such solemnities, as befitted the Ambassadors of so great a King. And because
the business was before resolved of, and this solemn office done, merely for
public satisfaction; it was easily concluded on, and Eromilia promised to
Metaneone Prince of Mauritania, upon the sole condition, that she would ever
marry at all.

The End of the Fourth Book.
CAVALIER GIO: FRANCESCO BIONDI HIS EROMENA
The Fifth Book.
IF great was the fame of Eromilia's beauty whilst (abiding in Maiorica) she
was promised in marriage to the Prince of Sardegna, far greater was it, when as
soon as his death was published, her retiring also was instantly divulged
abroad, the resolution and occasion whereof, with a reasonable indifferency,
wrought a general amazement, so as such as before had her heard commended for
the extraordinary industries of nature observed in her, now rapt with new
(partly curious, and partly amorous) affections deemed that man happy, whose
fortune it were to win her in this loss of her self, being it seemed not so
inconvenient for any other, to find inventions to steal her away; as for her,
to invent (her self) the means of depriving her self of the world. And
albeit the business in it self stood not founded on reason, that a Princess
(especially of so great a merit) should be constrained to alter her (upon what
occasion soever grounded) indeed rather compassionable than blameworthy
resolution. Nevertheless some discoursing by way of argument, approved it as
an act lawful to search after, and finding to gather up such Jewels, which
thrown away by an unwise (and as it were) a prodigal owner, were exposed to
the hazard of being stolen away by the unworthy, and so to become subject to
light into their base and abject hands; neither could such an attempt (so it
were confined to the bounds of honor) be (for all that) styled rapine, the
intention of the act, being to restore the thing so seized on to themselves;
and though it be true that its maine scope and ends tended to gain, yet does
every kind of labor deserve its hire, nor is that kind of usury unlawful
which in recompense of its pains, desires but the simple lone of the thing
found.

Suchlike were the reasonings of sundry young Princes of diverse Countries, who
like sphericall lines came to meet all in one and the same center; nor is it
any wonder that a cause remote, should produce and bring forth the selfsame
respects in persons remote each from other, seeing the universal soul that
moves and inspires the vaste world, is even one and the same. But those (among
the rest) that gave themselves most to these imaginations, were the Prince of
Tingitana and one of his brothers, with the Princes of Andaluzia and Granada.

The King of Tingitana in those days commanded as Sovereign all that part of
Afsrike that lies on the Ocea sea, as far as six degrees beyond our Tropike,
grown to be great there by fortune and reach of wit, (if wicked subtiles may
be styled the effects of wit.) This King had four sons, that were ever at
discord among themselves, who (having together with their breast-milke sucked
ambition and desire of rule) could never quiet themselves with other thought
than in being every of them left sole without competitors. The King old of
years, but elder in wickedness, grown expert in knowing the pravitie of his
sons by his own, moved rather by a jealous zeal of himself than any
affection he bore them, had severed them asunder, by assigning to each of them
the government of a kingdom; with the revenewes whereof they maintained
themselves in an honorable and splendide fashion, without ever abandoning the
precepts of soothing and dissembling being a maxim placed in the frontispice
of the school of those (therein so accomplished) Princes; wherein every of
them so exceedingly profited, as the fathers self, though a great experientist
in that art, was (for all his cunning) deceived for believing those
affectionate-seeming demonstrations to be really true, that were indeed but
counterfeit, which nevertheless served for nothing else than for gins and
traps, to ruin and overthrow one the other.

Argilo the first borne (who bare the title of Prince) aboade in Fessa (a
kingdom assigned him for his share.) Anterasto the second, in the fortunate
Islands; The other two possessed two kingdoms in the Meridian parts, the one on
this side the lesser, the other on the other side of the greater Atlas:
purposely placed so distant each from other, to the end that their
neighborhood might not occasion, or give them any subject of enmity. The King
himself resided at Morocco (the heart of his Dominions) thinking he could
more easily bridle the evil inclinations of his sons, by keeping them thus
severed at so large distances, especially the two eldest, who troubled him more
than the rest; but humane prudence is wont to light on oftentimes by shunning,
what but for shunning, it had not encountered: for Orgilo (having understood by
the Lord of Velez of the coming of the Princess Eromilia) grew suddenly
desirous of enjoying her, guided thereto rather by his beastly appetite, than
any kind of true love, for being unapt to receive those flames which shine but
in gentle breasts stored with noble thoughts, where-from his was so far
alienated, as (for having never harbored a gentle quality) he gave himself
over to be a sordid receptacle of all kind of foul and mischievous
enterprises: only one sole thing in him seemed to look with a face of virtue,
which was a bodily force inconsiderately used, and a generous seeming spirit,
the abundance of his vices straightning him too much from being able to lodge,
either true magnanimity or real bounty: With such and the like qualities
purposed Orgilo to work his own ends on the noble person of Eromilia But
Anterasto, who, with the ambition to reign, and with impatience to be longer
bridled, lived unfortunate in the fortunate Islands, having understood by the
spies he kept in his brothers Court, all his designs, and how he had caused
to be calked and rigged a Galley in Mamora for the stealing away of the
Princess of Maiorica (thinking he might better bring his project to pass by
sea, ariving unawares, than by land with the rushing noise of people, wherewith
he might also run the hazard of working a jeloufie in his father) thought now
or never to lay hold on this so fit an occasion to crush him, and therwithal to
possess the beauty of the most famous maiden in the world. Seteld in this
resolution he caused two Galleyes to be put in a readiness with such expedition,
as he was shipped and at sea, ere it was openly known that he had any intention
to embarke himself; steering on, because of the length of the voyage, night
and day till he came to lie in ambush behind a little rock, without the
streights of Collonne; where, having understood by a frigate which he sent
before to Mamora, that his brother stood on the point of departure, and well
knowing that the Pegno della morte could not easily be forced, he held it his
best course to advertize the Princess beforehand of Orgilo's intention,
thereby obliging her to receive him in, as a defender (being altogether
ignorant of the vow she had made^) Whereupon, having to that purpose instructed
one of his Knights he dispatched him away in a frigate with letters of credit;
who arriving thereby night, and by the center hindered to land, said, he was
sent from a knight, who was a special servant of the Princess, concerning a
business much importing her Highness, whereat Perseno (thinking he came from
the Prince of Mauritania) came down to the seashore to welcome him, having
already understood by Metaneones letters all things that had succeeded him
sithence his departure thence, as the taking of Don Peplasos and his designs,
the King of Maiorica's promise of giving him his daughter, his arrival in
Sardegna and finding out of his brother, with the history of Eleina, and of
the Mauritanian Ambassadors sent from his father to the King of Maiorica
concerning that marriage; neither was it twenty days sithence there had
arrived a Galley sent by the King himself, with particular news of the
promise he had made, of which he wrote not openly to his daughters, thinking it
better that the Countess and Perseno should at some convenient opportunity,
possess her thereof, charging them by several letters to persuade her thereto.
So as Perseno, thinking now that some one sent from Metaneone brought him the
same news, came running downwards; when he soon perceived himself
beguiled, discovering this stranger knight by his speech and habit to be none
of his, grown by this means somewhat suspicious, and seeing the other in his
answer not fall from generalities, but persisting in saying he had letters to
the Princess, touching a business of much consequence, he ushered him up,
entertaining him with the best countenance that could be, and then recommending
him to the company of some Knights of special esteem, he placed him to sup
with them, wherehe drank his share of the precious wines of Malaga, wherewith
they ceased not to ply him, till such time as he was known to be grownei
somewhat altered. Perseno in the mean time, having made privy hereto the
Princess, and acquainted her with his suspicion, besought her by all means to
give him audience, which she refusing to do in respect of her vow, Gierosando
(falling a persuading of her to do it) told her, that her vow bound her not
from such persons, which though it did, yet could it but tie her only from
being seen, but not from being spoken unto, and that therefore she might well
speak with him without permitting her self to be seen of him: much ado had
they to persuade her to it, till at length, being'egged on with the necessity
of knowing the businessei she suffered her self to be over-swayed.

The messenger was therefore brought in, and a candle so placed, as she could
not be seen; whereat he (being already informed of the occasion of the vow)
was no whit displeased, but sent in before him his letters of credit; which
when the Princess had perused, and seen whence they were sent, she grew to be
more curions and desirous to hear him, who used not many words, and those few
ill expressed and worse linkt together, whereby was discovered unto her the
design of the Prince of Tingitana, and how that Anterasto came purposely to
defend her, being as he was a Knight obliged so to do, but that in regard the
other was his brother, he would not give the King of Tingitana his father cause
to think, that he thus assailing him by the way, was moved so to do for any
other end, than for the obligation of Knighthood, in respect whereof he
intended to give him leave to come under the rock, and there to punish him;
which he had done without making her privy to it, but that he doubted that she
(not knowing how the matter stood) might fear some sudden assault. The
Princess stood hereat some while in a muze, without making him any answer;
till by questioning him how Anterasto came to know of this attempt and what
moved him to incur the hazard of succouring her against his own brother, she
gave him occasion to tell more than was either demanded of him, or committed to
his charge to reveal; Insomuch as he affirmed that the desire of enjoying her
beauty, and the affectionate love he bare her, made her become his brothers
enemy. Now Eromilia had formerly understood of their hatred and malice,
whereby she knew that the occasion of this service, sprung not from any love
to her, but rather from the hate he bare to his brother, and that such like
love in subjects that obscured the sweet affection of fraternity, could not
prove to her otherwise than dismal and unluckie; reviving therefore her
memory with the designs of the Pirates, than whom she judged these more
dangerous, she answered him, that she held her self obliged to the Infant
Anterasto, which she would make known to the King her father; Howbeir she
marvailed much that a Prince so noble, as his brother was, could harbor so
theevish a spirit, especially considering how she resided in the territories of
Tingitana, where she expected to be protected rather by him than by any other.
Howsoever she bade him, (seeing he was so minded) come and spare not, for that
she was not so ill provided of men and munition, as that she had not thereof
both number and store, sufficient to defend her self. And that therefore
seeing the coming of his Lord Anterasto was needless, she prayed him to spare
himself that labor; as well for that she stood in no necessity thereof, as
also because she desired not that he gave his father the King of Tingitana any
cause of disgust, who could not choose but suspect the worst of these his
proceedings: and then rewarding the Knight with rich presents, she licenced
him. But to the Countess, who seemed to be sorry that she accepted not the
assistance of Anterasto, she said, She was loath to give him any occasion or
excuse to come, being assured that his purpose was no less abominable than
his brothers, and that (God willing) she would defend her self from the one
and the other.

The first thing which the Princess did, was to send away the two Galleyes
that rode in the haven to save them, being disfurnished of their soldiers,
employed for the manning of the holds within, from being seized on by the
enemy, but much rather to give her father notice of the danger wherein she
stood; and then caused all her forces to be severed into diverse places, not
doubting of being able to defend her self for many months, the place being
well fortified and provided of victuals.

By no means would the faithful Perseno lose this so fit an occasion of
letting her see, how that her stay there was an invitation to any one to come
to steal her away, who being till then extolled for her virtues and prudence,
was now like enough to incur a contrary censure, seeing the daily perils
sufficed not, either to make her become more wary, or to change her
resolution. Besides, the expenses and distasts of her father, who hazarded the
bearing the brunt of some dangerous war, with one Prince or other, whereof
two might pretend themselves already injured, who were those of Catalogna and
Tingitana; telling her withal, that God requires not of us ought beyond our
power, but is displeased when under color of doing him service, we do what we
should not do: that Peros^ilo's soul could receive no satisfaction from these
her lugubrous loves; but that her age, the laws, the kingdom, and the King
her father desired an end in this business; and that if heretofore it behoved
her to match her self for convenienceies sake; she was now by necessity
constrained thereto, it behoving her of force to have one to defend her, and to
give her self to one, thereby to avoid the being thus injured by all.

Eromilia blushed to see her self so nearly touched with these reasons,
knowing them to be true, by the feeling she had of the present dangers, more
than by any thing else, which seconded rather with the tears, than the
arguments of the Countess, drew her at last to promise them (as soon as her
year ended) to return home again. Full glad were the Countess and Perseno,
to have gained on her this point, beyond their expectation, and therefore took
further occasion to instill into her memory the modesty of Metaneone, who,
finding her Pegno della morte unwalled and disarmed, would not so much as offer
once to put foot ashore, for fear of displeasing her; and now they observing,
that his name sounded pleasantly in her ears, and that she listened willingly
thereto, signified so much unto the King. Perseno writing besides unto
Metaneone, whom he besought to favor them with a convoy, being that her
father had not a Fleet sufficiently potent to resist so many enemies.

Anterasto's messenger returned in the self same time, when by her flagges was
descried Orgilo's Galley gliding smoothly on the crystal surface of the calm
sea, glittering by reason of the reflection of the golden Sunne-beames, nor was
it long ere she entered into the streights, where they lost sight of her. She
passed some four hours before night, and went with an intention (being that
the wind withstood her not) to arrive the day following at the Pegno della
morte ere the break of day, thinking that hour of all other the fittest time
to surprise it.

In the mean time Anterasto wayed anchor, and coasting Spain, took on him to
steer a different way, but at night tacking about, held the same course, by
crossing the streights, and coasting along the shore of Affricke; wondering not
a little why Eromilia would not be seen, for which he believed not her vow an
excuse sufficient, because he, that never was of any Religion, or ever knew the
gods, judged of all others by himself. And understanding further (by the
messenger) wonders of her perfections, which the more unapt he was to judge of,
seemed by so much the more strange unto him, he grew the more desirous to
possess her.

Whilst these two (so near in blood and resolution) were poasting toward the
fatal place prepared for them by destiny; fortune (resolved to represent now
a complete Tragedy) had in her seen assembled the two Princes of Andaluzia
and Granada, which with an equal design, had each of them put in order a
Galley, to come to the possession of those beauties which were judged so much
the fairer, by how much the more they were hid and prohibited. Their fathers
Dominions were somewhat near adjoining, but their thoughts so far from any
neerenesse of sympathizing one the others, as they themselves but too well
knew, that either of them ever endeavored to cross the others intentions. Nor
should it seem strange that all of them ran with so small forces to this
enterprise; being that their hope and aim was not to force the rock, but to
surprise it, for who so would have made provision to take it by force, had need
of greater power than theirs within, or (attempting it with an equal force) of
time, (the father of inventions,) wherewith the neighbors would have been
awaked, and so the execution of their designs interrupted. Wherehence we may
gather, that an unripe and imprudent counsel proves oftentimes better than a
prudent and mature direction.

The Prince of Andaluzia had before his setting forth of the haven, descried
afar off a Galley, who crossing the seas, took the direct course he meant to
steer, suspecting therefore that others might intend as he did, he launcing
out, traced her, till such time as (the Sun declined) the darkness deprived
him of the sight of her. The other, who was the Princes of Granada, albeit she
saw this Galley make after her, yet was she nothing suspicious of her, but
steering onwards, arrived by three hours of the night, at Pegno della morte,
with as little noise as possibly she could, suffering her self to be carried
merely with the force of her course without any further help of oars: which
nevertheless was not so secretly performed, but that the scouts of the Pegno
descried her, expecting (because of the notice given them) no less than to be
assaulted. The Knights, without any noise stood every man ready to make good
his ground, and (that the enemy might think himself the more secure) as much
as the very rounds had retired themselves.

The Prince of Granada (armed at all pieces) was the first that set foot on
ground, followed by two hundred resolute spirits (the greater part whereof were
of the bravest Knights in his Country) amongst whom one (who had bin there
before to view the fortificarions) was the first man that (by a scaling ladder)
mounted the walls, causing (in the selfsame instant) diverse oaths to be
fastened in places less difficult. The great silence kept within, made them
hold the enterprise for accomplished, there being neither Centrees, nor rounds
to be seen. But the skaling ladders were no sooner full, than (with the
showring down from on high, of logs of timber, fire and stones) the assayers
were all beaten down, bruised and killed, and the ladders (for the most part)
torn and rent all to pieces. Whereupon the Prince renewing the assault, and
loosing then more than before, seeing the place inaccessible, retired himself,
just as there came a Galley rushing into the port with great fury; upon the
sudden arrival whereof he (neither knowing whose she was, nor willing to fight
against so many, making up a squadron of such as remained alive) marched down
to the sea shore, to see whom it was; but receiving no answer, he waxed bolder,
and just as he opened his mouth to hail them again (with his beaver lift up)
there hit him a shaft in the very mouth, that pierced him quite through the
nape of the neck, wherewithal showred so great a cloud of arrows on the rest
of his troop, that almost all of them lay dead in the place; whilst those of
Andaluzia not so much as once quitted their standing, whose Prince mad angry
for being discovered, assayling with a sudden fury the Granadan Galley, easily
took her, and understanding whose she was, was passing glad thereof.

These two Princes were Cozen-germanes, grown at ods for certain lands, and
other pretentions of the brothers their fathers, become now withal rivals and
pretenders to one and the same beauty, which sole occasion had been sufficient
ground of enmity. Howsoever the Andaluzian Prince could not choose but grieve
now that he saw the other dead, being that neerenesse of blood, must needs
work something in any one, whose heart is not waxen altogether inhumane, and
resolutely given up to hate and revenge. Yet was not the Tragic example of
his Cozens death, sufficient to warn this unfortunate Prince from tumbling
down the precipice of the same fortune, albeit by the chillinesse of diverse
shivering fears his first heat were frozen, for grown now near his end, he
could not give place to the opposition of reason, because it lay not in his
power to resist the will of heaven; so as seeing himself thus guided by so
wavering a passion in the place where his misfortune led him on to slay his
Cozen, he more now enraged than enamoured, commanded his men to give the
assault, resolved (now that he found himself grown to that pass) either to
take the rock or die. But alas, what could he do with so few men against that
hold, which was of its natural situation so strong as it could not be won but
either by surprisall, or by far greater forces, than his were? Whilst he,
thus despairing of what he would have done, but much more desperate for what he
had done, made account to retire himself, behold the Prince of Tingitana
(hearing the noise of the conflict) comes sweeping amain over the swelling
waves, and seeing the two Galleyes left unmanned, thought it his best course to
seize on them, left they might be made instruments to indamage him, which he
soon accomplished, for finding in them but very few fighting men, he put them
all to the sword (without sparing one of them) even to the imbruing his
Princely blade in the base blood of the raskally Ghing.

The Prince of Andaluzia seeing himself thus surprised (having retired his men
from the walls) stood ready to receive this second unlooked for enemy, who
landing with no great difficulty, and understanding by a prisoner the case of
the Cozens, (grown choleric to see his design thus thwarted) came fiercely
on with sword in hand, desirous rather to kill him with his own hands, though
with danger, than to shoot him through with arrows as he might have done
without any peril at all.

This Prince Orgilo was great of stature, and strong as any Knight of his time,
who for knowing himself to be such, never knew what fear meant, which
engendered in him an undaunted temeritie. But as his force was greater than that
of a savage beast, so was his judgment less than that of man. Stay to be
backed by his he would not, but went on himself alone, to charge them all, and
had made them all retire too, had there but been any place of retreit.

The poor Andaluzo stood almost under the walls, whom Perseno taking for
Orgilo (as he took also Orgilo for Anterasto) defeated with logs and stones;
so as the true Orgilo had no great ado to make an end of the rest, having
first with his own hands killed the Prince as he had desired: which effected,
he knew not what to do next; but he from below, and Perseno (with his) from
above, stood looking the one on the other without speaking a word.

The night was exceeding fair, so as the Moon being then newly risen,
discovered them each to other; When Orgilo (seeing himself injured by none,
and thinking to delude them) told them who he was; and that being advertized
of the intentions of these two Princes, he was come of purpose to interrupt and
chastise them, being an act that concerned him, not so much for being Prince of
that Country, as because he more than any other was desirous to serve the
Princess of Maiorica their Mistress. Perseno (dissembling his knowledge in
those passages) answered him, That that act of his was such as might be
expected from a just and generous Prince, for which he kindly thanked him, on
the behalf of the Princess, and the King her father, both which would
therefore remain his debtors, but that he was only sorry for one thing, which
was, that he had put himself to that trouble without any need, for if he
thought himself able to oppose two Princes, and frustrate their designs with
one only Galley, he might easily have imagined that the quality of the
Princess her servants, was not so lither and effeminate, not their valor so
slender, as not to know how to defend themselves against so few in a place so
strong: and that therefore it had been sufficient for him to have sent the
Princess intelligence thereof, without exposing himself to such a hazard; or
if he would needs come, wherefore came he not then by land, which he might have
more easily done, and with more men too, being that there wanted no Barks at
Velez, to pass them over to the rock? Strange seemed this language to Orgilo,
who judged him too arrogant, and withal too sawcily subtle for penetrating and
touching him so near the quick of the truth, which made him disdainefully
thus reply; I know not what thou art, that speak thus indiscreetly; I hold
the Lady Princess for the most courteous damzell of the world, so as I have
cause to wonder, that she retains in her service a fellow so discourteous as
thou art: It besits not thee to examime or pry into the actions of Princes who
govern themselves according to their particular uncontrouled wills and
understandings, not staying to have their actions scanned, by the measure of
the common judgment of the vulgar, for the most part false and remote from any
true principle. Somewhat more he would have said, when his own men (pointing
with their fingers) showed him two Galleyes that came entering the port,
whereupon (believing them to belong to one of the dead Princes) he ran
hastily to the shore to hinder their disembarking.

All this while had Anter asto hastened the best he could, for fear of coming
too late, doubting of the fortunate temeritie of his brother, from whom he
assured himself the Rock could not easily be won by so few men as his troops
consisted of, if his brother but once possessed it. And seeing ride there three
Galleyes, he was not afraid of them, but marvailed to see them so silent,
taking them to belong to the Princess, and imagining that his brother was not
as yet there arrived: drawing nearer them, and seeing two of them full of dead
bodies, and the their with the colors of Orgilo (which he soon descried
together with himself standing on the shore) he imagined that he had taken the
Galleyes, but that for not being able to take the Rock, he had then retired
himself. His first resolution was to seize on the Galleyes which succeeded him
fortunately, for causing his Archers to play at those squadrons he saw
marshalled on the shore, he gave them no time to remount aboard their
Galleyes, as they sought to have done, shooting them at his pleasure, though to
no great hurt of those others, who (kneeling on the ground, and covering
themselves with Targets closed together one athwart another) sheltred
themselves from the shot.

Orgilo had with him the bravest and expertest soldiers of all Assrike, so as
though inferior in number, he no more feared this assault, than if he had had
equal forces to withstand it; nor would he retire himself one step from the
ground he stood on, which was there, where such as came ashore, were of
necessity to land.

Anterasto (seeing the slender service his arrows did him) made on toward the
shore with a Frigate, whereupon his men (seeing him go with so few, against
enemies that so well defended themselves) leapt into the water to rank
themselves with him; who would have found enough to do, had they not been
armed with lances, wherewith (maugre the obstinate courage of Orgilo) they
forced a place to land the rest of their troops: yet him could they never have
forced, if his own men had seconded him by doing as much as he did, who not
caring a rush for the pikes and lances, but encountering them boldly, burst
them with his breast in shivers, so confident was he in the fine temper of his
Cuyrasse, not stirring one inch off his ground, but blaspheming heaven, and
abusively injuring his followers, branding with infamous titles, and direful
menaces the most valiant of them, who (having retired themselves not cowardly
but discreetly for being over-matched in number and arms,) as they forsook
him not in effect, so came they far short of equalling his temerity, reduced
to the point of obstinately resolving not to stir thence a foot. Anterasto,
glad to see him brought to this straight, and desirous to make use of this
advantage, commanded his troops to keep the enemies so separated, as they
might not be able to come to reunite themselves any more with their Captain;
wherein he was straightwaies obeyed; for two hundred of them falling into a
close order, interposed themselves between them, leaving Orgilo all alone,
without possibility of being succored by any, whilst he, with his sword in
both hands, made himself large way, without being hurt of any; for all shunned
the whisk of his mortal blade, which had by its keen cutting, shown it self
to be both well tempered, and of finest edge and metal.

Anterasto, who was a Knight of great valor, and though not so strong, yet
more dexterous and wary than his brother, whom he desirous to kill with his
own hands, (not so much for any distrust he had of his, who would (if they had
known him) have borne him respect, as to carry away together with Eromilia and
a kingdom, the rich spoils of three sovereigne Princes) bravely encountered
him hand to hand, wounding him with a main blow on the elbow of the sword hand,
which although it struck him not down, because of the goodness of his armor,
yet was it such as so benumbed him, as he was not able to requite him with the
like: so as favored by this opportunity to make use of his point, he bore him
a thrust under the vauntplate, between the two cuyshard pieces, bursting
through the mail that assured that part of his body, and running his sword in
his belly four fingers beneath the navell. Full well preceived Anterasto that
he had mortally wounded him; yet not satisfied with giving him his deaths
wound, but desirous withal to let him dying know by whose hand he fell.
Pround wretch, (said he) thou art now come to that pass which thou thoughtst by
thy treacheries to bring me to; die thou shall now (maugrethy stout
mischievous heart) by my hand, and I will kill thee fairly, as becomes a good
Knight, although thy treacherous life nver deserved at my hands so honorable a
favor.

Orgilo, knowing his brother, and not grieving so much for his death, as to dye
by his hand, seeing he could not use his right arm, and that there was no way
for him but death, being therefore loath to lose any time in making him any
answer, he (throwing away his shield, and patiently suffering himself to be
wounded anew, without offering once to put by any thrust) with his left arm
strongly grasped Anterasto, whom he (being endued with extraordinary force)
bare to the Shore-brink, which was not above ten paces off, with telling him,
Die then I will, for so will my misfortune have it, yet shall not thou
(insulting traitor) outlive me, for we will both march hand in hand to the
other world, where if there be any field to fight in, I now mortally defy thee
to an eternal combat. At which word throwing himself down headlong into the
water with him, (maugre all his struggling to get off) he bare him down to the
bottom, whence neither of them returned ever sithence up again.

Anterasto's Knights, there present, little thinking to see their wrestling
come to such an end, were nothing careful to help their master, seeing the
advantage he had already, much less when they came to know his enemy; but
when they saw both of them so plunged in the Sea, they remained thereat much
astonished. The Frigates ran to their succor, but too late; and one who
disarmed himself to dive under water to fetch them up, soon repen^ed him of
his intention, when he saw it was to no purpose at all, seeing that if they
were dead, all his labor was in vain; and if alive, yet was it more than he
alone could do to bring them up again, who besides would have had so much sense
as to keep him under water with them, taking him for an enemy, and so should he
have been drowned for at^nd man. But indeed, the truth is, that they cared not
much for either of them, all men fearing and hating as well the one of them as
the other; so as there were some of them that interposed themselves between the
two squadrons that yet continued fighting, who understanding the case, and
knowing themselves for vassalls of one and the same King, lifting up their arms
(in token of accord) appeased their mortal fury: But seeing themselves on the
rock, where they imagined the Princess to have great treasures, they resolved
to force the place, under pretext of revenging the death of their lords, by
sacrificing to their souls the bodies of such as defended it. Nor could the
strong situation of the place restrain them, who grown courageous by their
false imagination, prepared themselves to give the assault.

Returned into Sardegna was the Count of Bona, with an happy answer to his
embassage, to perfect the happiness of Prince Metaneone, who the self same
night in his sweetest sleep, thought he saw some one awake him ingreat haste;
the chamber was without light, yet thought he that all the wall on its foreside
stood open, so as by Moonlight he might see, that he that awoke him was
Perseno. Fain would he have risen on his elbow to salute him, when the other
(without uttering a word) keeping him down with one hand (with a look
melancholic, and all besmeared with blood) showed him with the other, the
Pegno dellamorte assailed by many men, who strove to come scale the walls.
Metaneone, turning about to know of him who they were, and how he came thither,
lost suddenly the sight of him, and desirous thereupon to rise up, he saw no
more neither battle, nor Pegno, nor any opening of the wall, but the obscure
pitchy darkness of the night, with the chamber in its former natural terms
and dimensions: come to know himself awakened, he marvelled much to see his
imagination work so strongly on him, as to make him not only think his dream
true, but even to believe that it was no dream at all. Returned to sleep again,
there passed not an hour ere he was in the same manner again awakened by the
Countess of Palomera: Seeing again through the breach of the chamber, the
Pegno assaulted; but as he would have asked her somewhat, he saw she was quite
vanished away, and in her place appear the Princess his Lady and Mistress,
who from the windows of the Castle, beckoned unto him to come to her succor.
Whereupon, throwing away the coverler, and rising up suddenly without further
examining whether it were a dream or no, now he saw himself awake, nor
believing it less true in that he saw the Well closed up again, having called
up his servants to bring him lights, he went to the next chamber, where
Polimero lay, to whom when he had related the vision, he told him, how he was
resolved to hie him thither, because he could not believe that this vision (or
dream whatsoever it was) contained not in it some mystery; and had upon this
parted suddenly, but that the occasions of the wars persuaded him to stay
till day, for the avoiding of such suspicions, as might be concelved of this
nocturnall and sudden resolution.

Polimero (being as yet very sleepie) said unto him, My Lord and Brother, to
stay till day will doubtless prove to be your best course, because so
sudden a departure cannot choose but be ill taken, and much censured;
especially, seeing you cannot go so alone, but must take with you many of your
Galleyes designed for the Corsan enterprise. And (then having pawzed awhile) he
proceeded. I cannot believe that either too light, or too free-feeding has
occasioned you this dream; for being that you supped last night, these
fantasies could not proceed from any weakness; and on the other side, seeing
you fed not superfluously, there is no place left for imaginations, so
particular, and distinct, as those you saw; neither is (indeed) your
temperature or complexion, any way subject to melancholy; but I should rather
think, that you were (ere you slept) troubled with some imaginations that
caused you to see, in this your dream, such resemblances as were represented
unto you.

No (brother) no, (answered him Metaneone) it was not any distemperature
proceeding from diet, that has produced these effects, much less any
imagination, or melancholic passion, for I went to bed merrily enough
disposed; and albeit I deny not that my thoughts are ever busied about
Eromilia, yet am I sure they are not any thing spiced with melancholy, which
though they were; how is it possible for them to have shape so distinct a
dream, if it may be said a dream to find my self broad-waking, gotten up,
and withal to have spoken once with Perseno, and another time with the
Countess of Palomera, and to see the self same things the second time, as at
the first, not sleeping, but broad waking; and which is more, the assault, the
very place, nay, my Lady Eromilia's self out of my chamber, laid then open to
the heavens, and splendour of the moon? To these last words Polimero
halfe-smiling made him this answer; The seeing now your chamber as before; the
knowing of the great distance of the persons you saw, and much rather of the
place which of it self is immovable, may assure you, that yours was but a
dream, though such, as of it self is not altogether to be slighted: for many
are of opinion, that the knowledge which we have of the gods (for as much as
concerns pure nature, and its instincts) depends, partly in the order of such
things as we see in the world, and partly on the motions of the mind in
dying, and on the quietness and sweet temper of the senses in sleeping: for
the soul being in that instant free, and in its pure celestial disposition
foretells us things to come, thereby instructing us how we should govern our
selves, which also befalls oftener the good than the bad; the former
participating of the divinity in a certain manner, which the evil do not. By
this came in Divination, which many well-ordered Commonwealths, not only
believed, but also governed themselves by it; which as I cannot commend, so
must I needs confess, that who so denies not the divinity, cannot deny the
examples of divine admonitions by way of dreams, whereby have been ruled both
men and kingdoms: only what I think not well of, is, to credit every dream
indifferently; because, as the denying of divine admonitions is impiety, so
also to believe that all dreams are divine admonitions, is both superstition
and vanity. I know not what to say of it (answered Metaneone) but well know,
that the world (for the most part) excludes those things for which it can give
no reason, whereof I believe this to be one. Nor can all the Philosophers that
ere the earth enjoyed, make me believe, that their ignorance in knowing the
reason of things can make that not to be, which experience teaches us, cannot
choose but be in effect. Which he expressed so passionately, that Polimero
could not choose but smile thereat, and therefore said unto him; It is an
ordinary thing for such as desire to surmount others in knowledge, to come
short of them therein. To deny either the sense or the effect of things, is, if
not ignorance, at least a sophistical and foolish wisdom; for if this so
were, who could give us a reason of the gods? who have bestowed on us many
things, not that we should know them, but that we might use them.

There Is not a people in the world but believes, that things to come may by
some means or other be foretold, the examples whereof are infinite, and the
consent both general, and authorized, if not by the reason of the efficient
cause, yet at least by its effect and success. We may then conclude that your
dream, (not proceeding from any alteration, but reiterated with the testimony
of your own self broad waking) is a voice come from heaven to call you to
succor that Princess, whom (being you) you ought to defend against all the
world.

The Prince seemed to be herewith satisfied, though not yet well quieted in
mind; for having spent the residue of the night in preparing himself for his
journey and in rowzing up his followers, he with Impatience longed for the
appearance of the new day, that he might take his leave of Eromena. But the
Mauritanian Knights being scatteringly dispersed over the lodgings, it happened
that the hearing the noise that was made in knocking in so many places, and
understanding it to be down by Metaneones order rose up all-astonished in that
she knew not the occasion thereof till having sent for him; he and his brother
both came and participated unto her the business, wherewith she then remained
well satisfied: for the imagination of not knowing* what to imagine thereof,
had before very much troubled her. But now she offered him the whole fleet, and
(if need were) her own person also, judging it by the quality of the dream
impossible, that this fair Princess stood not in some dangerous plight.
Metaneone, (yielding her therefore condign thanks) told her, that he left
with her his brother in pledge of his service, and besought her courteous
pardon, assuring her, that no other occasion could have been able to have drawn
him from her service, (especially at that time) except this employment, whereto
he held himself the more obliged (albeit he had had no such interest therein
as indeed he had) because he thought that heaven it self had thither called
for him in particular. Howbeit, he meant not to take along with him any more
than six Galleys, in that he saw in the vision (whereto he gave credit) the
enemies to be but few in number, leaving the others with the rest of the
shipping, to be disposed of by her Highness as her own, for such would he
have them be. Whereupon, loath to lose any time, he suddenly parted (after he
had taken his leave of the Princess Eleina, who was also come to see what this
stirring meant.) By the break of day came he to the Fleet, where embracing
Polimero, he praid him to send their father word of his departure, promising to
advertise him of whatsoever should befall him. And then (having taken his leave
of the Marquess of Oristagnio, who would by all means have accompanied him,
the Count of Bona, and the rest,) he hoist up sails, with so great a desire to
be in Afric, that thinking a good gale of wind not sufficient, he would
needs have his oars plied withal, which he was fain to countermand again,
seeing the Seas swell, and the winds maintain of themselves a stiff gale,
according to his own desire.

Eight days without ceasing continued his navigation, always attended on,
either by favorable gales, or gentle calmes, which (in respect of the
goodness both of ghing and vessels) no whit disadvantaged his voyage. In the
morning of the ninth day was by its dawning discovered to his view, the Pegno
della morte; and within an hour after were discried, four Galleys running
into that haven, which confirmed him in his opinion, that his dream was not
false, wherefore causing the oars to assist the sails, he arrived there two
hours after Sunne-rising.

The Soldiers of the two brothers had done their utmost endeavors to assail
the walls, during the piece of night that rested, but seeing at last the loss
they sustained, they retired themselves, with an intention not to get them
gone, but to procure of the Lord of Velex some supply of men, till such time as
their King (being thereof advertised) either sent or came himself to avenge
the death of his sons, for which purpose they had sent to him a Galley. And
as they thought in the mean while to repose themselves, they saw strike into
the ^port four Galleys, whose lord being Don Peplasos, seeing the armed
troops under the walls, with such a number of dead bodies, would not resolve
of any thing, till perceiving how few they were, and seeing the Galleys
opposing him not, as soon as he came to know who they were, and what had
befallen them, he proffered them (on condition they would but assist him to
take that hold) the whole place it self, with all therein (the persons only
excepted:) quick enough were the Tingitanes in accepting this proffer, who
suddenly choosing themselves a Captain, sent him to conclude the accord, so as
having landed the fresh forces, and gotten new Scaling-ladders, they re-began
the fight; the defendants being tired out with fighting all the night long,
without once closing an ey: whilst Perseno, who had the main care of all
things (both in commanding and performing) discharged the duty of a good Knight.

Don Peplasos (seeing that place could not be taken by scaling, unless it were
either at unawares, or by night, caused a Ram-engine to be landed, which,
together with its testude, they settled on its wheels, covered with great
searses of Goats-haire, to save it from fire. The Ram was fastened with a
strong chain, and supported by two timber-beams, joining angle-wise under it,
reared up against the wall, in the lowest, evenest, and most accessible part of
the Rock. Which done, he (to beat the defendants off the walls) planted above
forty Catapults, and Crossebowes, which so galled the defendants, that many of
them were thereby killed and wounded; among whom Perseno made one, having one
arm little better than lost by a Crosbow-shot. The Ram began already to work
its effect, and the wall (which was new and hastily built) began soon to yield
to its ruinethreatning-buts. Remedy there was none, for the leaden Cilinders
(which are used to bruise the Rams) the milstones likewise and pillar-pieces
were not beforehand provided, ^no more than the sacks stuffed with straw, which
are usually let down between the wall and the Ram, to abate the force of its
mighty thump: not had they as much as iron Wolves and Crows to graspe the Ram
withal; for having not (in so short a warning) forethought of assuring
themselves against other than a sudden assault; using stones for a shift, in
stead of oil, sulphur, pitch, and lime, when it was dangerous for the
defendants as much as to peep out, so incessantly were they played upon by those
murdering engines.

The Princess Eromilia (whom fear had caused to strain courtesy with her
religious vow) stood o'recharged with grief, looking out through a window of
the Tower, a wailfull Spectatrix of the unhappy conflict: repenting now too
late her obstinacy, knowing now by a feeling experience, her fathers reasons to
be true, Perseno's persuasions good, and the Countess her counsel both
wholesome and holy. But (alas) what comfort or help can repentance bring in a
season when it can do no good? The Countess that stood by her (albeit moved
and grieved to think that the Princess her self was the sole cause of all
these evils) omitted not (for all that) that reverence, which a faithful
servant in all respects owes his Lord nor yet lost she the occasion of giving
her a gentle touch and feeling of her errors, by telling her that Princes (how
prudent soever) should never deliberate of any thing of themselves alone,
especially when affection makes them become passionate, and therefore apt to
deceive themselves; which (as she then told her) she thought good to put her in
mind of, not for the present, when the evil could not be remedied, but rather
to fore-warne her from incurring the like danger in succeeding times. I would
to God (answered the Princess) that it might do me good hereafter, whereof I
much doubt, because I see no way to shun this present ruin. The Gods will
therefrom deliver you (answered the Countess) whereof I conceive already an
assured hope. See you those Galleyes there? If my sight beguile me not, they
are the Prince of Mauritania's; your Highness has better eyes than I, I
beseech you look, if the Admiral has three Lanters, for if it has, then
sure they are his. The Princess (who had stood all the while, with her eyes
fixed on her own danger, fetching a deep sigh) turned her look to the
seawards, and spying there the Galleyes, she all joyful, cried out, that one
of them bare such lanternes; but this consolation lasted not a moment, when she
now saw they wall battered down, the enemy enter in, and her men fly upwards
toward the house. Perseno, seeing the case thus irrepairable, being resolved
to die, retired himself fighting with his unhurt arm, without lending any
ear to the Catalan, who had by public proclamation granted life to such as
laid aside their arms, yet were there for all that but very few that followed
not Perseno's example.

In the beginning of this service were found to be near about five hundred
fighting men, between such as were sent thither from the King, and those that
were taken out of the two Galleyes; whereof lay dead almost three hundred, and
of them the greatest part slain by the Machines; with the rest went Perseno
retiring, though always fighting, but the steepinesse of the rock (making for
their great disadvantage, by discovering to the Catalognian Archers, the rear,
as well as the front) was cause that he lost many of them, so that at length
his feeble self wounded again with the push of a pike, and then trampled under
foot, gave occasion to such as remained to yield themselves to the enemies
discretion; whom the Tingitans would have put all to the sword, but Don
Peplasos, who aspired to Eromilia's favor, would by all means have them all
spared; giving them withal leave to gather up Perseno, who lay, though not
dead, yet dangerously wounded, by whose fatal ruin were utterly overthrown
the nowruined hopes of the poor distressed assiedged; the house not being any
whit fortified, but depending altogether on the fortune of the walls below.

The Princess all this while never stirred off the window, where having called
one unto her, she caused him by waving about a sheet fastened to a pole, to
make signs to the Galleyes to hasten their course, insomuch as Metaneone with
all the rest saw it, and grieving at the slownesse of the wind though
favorable, he caused the Ghing to plunge their oars anew in the foaming
deep; by means whereof he quickly appeared so near the view of Eromilia, as
he might plainly discern her dolorous gesture in the act of imploring his
succor; and the Countess with her hands beckning unto him to make all
possible haste.

The defendants a little before (when they saw the enemy got in) had locked
fast the Tower, and fortified its gate with chests and coffers (though it was
of it self sufficiently strong, being barred all over with iron bands) hoping
to keep themselves free, until the arrival of Metaneone, which fell out
indeed as they expected; for Don Peplasos unwilling to offer any violence
(being already assured that he had her in his hands, and well knowing that
for want of provision and men to defend her, she must needs at last have
yielded) came himself in person to the gate, using the most humble and loving
terms that could be. But the Princess when she came to know him (grown no
whit dejected to see her self thus penned up by one she abhorred more than
death it self) up-braided him his treacheries so disdainefully, that he
thereupon re-assuming his natural disposition, and laying by all fained
courtesies, was now a preparing his engines to beat down the gate, when news
was brought him of the arrival of six Galleyes. The Princess not regarding
him any more, when once she heard the trumpets sound, returned with the
Countess back to the window, whence perceiving Metaneones saluting her all
armed as he was, she answered him by doing the like in a manner, expressing her
gratitude as courteously as possibly she could; by which favor he thought his
courage so multiplied, as he would to do her any service, have resolutely
fought against all the world. The Countess with signs made known unto him
the best she could the state they were in. But the Prince assailing the
Galleyes (which were left almost unmann'd, because of every ones running to the
sack) took them without any great ado, and understanding whose they were,
thanked the gods that he came time enough to thwart those his mischievous
designs.

Don Peplasos giving over his late intention of throwing down the gate, ran
with his whole squadron down toward the seashore, confused in mind to
think of what he were best to do, and astonished at the suddenesse of the
enemies arrival, without being described on the maine sea, being that not
only his Centrees, but even he himself might have easily discovered him
thirty miles off. At last he resolved to stay in the Fort, and there to make
good his ground against the enemy, for that he thought himself too weak to
keep from landing.

Metaneone, who no whit regarded the hazard of his own person, grown now
furious with love, but more enraged with anger, hotly assaulted the ruins of
the wall, not so well defended as assailed, till seeing he therein spent too
much time, having placed an hundred soldiers to the Ram, he made them give
against that part of the wall that lay next the breach, which being already
much shaken with the former battery, with fifty stiff blows fell to utter
ruin; so as the squadron that stood ready to mount the breach, entered it,
maugre all the enemy could do, who now discouraged, were forced to retire as
Perseno had done before them. When Metaneone knowing the Catalan Prince, thus
bespake him; And is this ( Don Peplasos) the recompense, wherewith thou
requitest the King of Maiorica's courtesy and mine, when we freely gave thee
both thy life and liberty? Are these the exploits of a Prince, or of a thief?
Well, I now promise to do thee Justice, which thou deservest as a thief,
seeing thou abusest the undeserved courtesy which I did thee as a Prince.

Don Peplasos, (finding himself disadvantaged, as well in reason as power,
both the generositie of his mind, and vigor of his spirits, failing him
together, whether by reason of his wounds, or otherwise) sunk down to the
ground in a swound and senseless: Metancone, causing him to be carried by a
strong guard into his Galley, gave order, that he should be carefully looked
unto, whilst the most part of the rest, who had the happiness to die with their
arms in their hands, made (by their death) an easiee way to their fellows
captivity, who were not long detained prisoners, but as common thieves hanged
up, without any pity, about the walls of the Rock. Catascopo had also run
the same fortune, had not Metaneone remembered to ask for him, and caused him
to be apart by himself, put in irons, to the end that the deferring of his
present punishment might serve him for interest of a greater.

The victory once gotten, the first thing that Metaneone did, was to ask how
Perseno fared; When understanding the ill plight he was in, he was much
grieved thereat; yet being unwilling to make any stay in the Fort, for fear of
displeasing the Princess, he sent a Knight to the Countess of Palomera, with
order, that having on his behalf saluted her, he should pray her (in his
name) to kiss the hands of her Lady the Princess, and to tell her, that
seeing the gods had now freed her from her enemies, he waited only to receive
her commands, whereon depended both his stay and departure, wishing that in the
mean time some course were taken for the re-edifying the walls, whereto he
would cause his Ghing put their helping hands, especially on the outside which
had most need of, being assured against the Ram-engines, and that if she
needed soldiers, he would leave with her as many of them as she pleased. He
enjoined him further, to go and visit Perseno, and to tell him that he had
come himself to see him, but that he doubted to-incurre the Lady Princess her
displeasure; with this Knight sent he him his own Physicians and Chirurgians,
with diverse soveraigne-good things for wounded and sick men, causing all his
to return to the galleys, without suffering them to pillage or touch any thing
within the compass of the walls, although it were the spoil of the enemies
selves.

Now the Countess (as soon as she saw Metaneone run in the Port, and the
Princess, out of her agonies) had begun anew to persuade her to change her
resolution, showing her, how she alone was the only cause of the death of so
many Princes, whose fathers (in case they went about to avenge them as they had
reason) would reduce her to such a straight, as she could not be able to
defend her self long; telling her withal, that her vows tied her only to
possibilities, but not to what could possibly not be accomplished. Besides,
that she had already showed her self to the Prince of Mauritania, whose whole
Fleet had seen her, as well as he. The Princess answered her, that she
would follow her Counsel, and that she would for the execution thereof write
to her father, to send to fetch her thence. And what will it boot you to do
so? (said the Countess) seeing that ere your messenger can arrive in Maiorica,
we shall be here besieged by all the King of Tingitana's, forces, whose aim
will tend, not so much to the revenge of his sons, as to the gaining of this
Rock, now that experience has taught him (what he saw not before) the
importance of such a Fort; which for good reasons was not fit to be left in
the possession of a strange Prince. But how can I help it (answered the
Princess) seeing I have no shipping. What have you not? (replied the
Countess) whose then are the Prince of Mauritania's Galleyes? They are his
own (answered the Princess smiling:) but I know them to be yours (said the
Countess.) And here unmasking the whole state of the business she related
unto her the great love that the Prince of Mauritania bore her, and how at the
request of the King his father, she was by her father promised him in
marriage; with the History of Don Peplas^^, and all other passages to that
purpose, except his secret coming by stealth into that house, which the
Countess thought not good to make known unto her as yet, whilst her mind
were so agitated with passions for the deceased Prince his death; which in that
it could not be remedied, she should (as the Countess told her) strive to
forget, and endeavor to restore her self to her father, kingdom, and (above
all others) to a husband and posterity, to satisfy the world with reason, as
she had before without any reason, justly incurred its censure.

At these words the Princess stood mute, thinking it a strange matter for her
to be changed in an instant, and being obstinately resolved to live without any
husband, now should, or possibly could dispose her self to take one; but
knowing that she could not but do so, her resolutions till then to the
contrary, being neither good nor laudable, and that it was a lesser evil to
cconfesse an error (being that there is no wise man but erres sometimes) than
to make it the more unexcusable by defending it, she quite changed, or at
least most resolute to change her intention, told her, that she marvelled she
had not acquainted her with those things sooner, howbeit the reason (why she
did not) gave her (in that behalf) sufficient satisfaction; her servants being
afterward come to certify her of Metaneone's conquest, and Don Peplasos his
imprisonment, she having caused the Tower to be opened, made them carry Perseno
near to the Countess her withdrawing^chamber, for whose wounds she grew so
compassionate as they drew pearle-like tears from her fair crystal eyes.
And understanding now that there was a Knight there sent from Metaneone, she
sent to him the Countess, who having received the embassage, came and
acquainted her therewith; whereunto Eromilia (after a short pawse) returned
this answer;

Go and pray him to kiss his Lord the Princes hand on my behalf, and to tell
him that for the rest, I intend to answer to none but himself, for seeing that
I am constrained to break my vow, I mean he shall be the man that shall
break it, by seeing me first of any other, desiring him therefore to vouchsafe
(so it be not troublesome unto him) to come hither himself. The exceeding joy
the Countess hereat conceived cannot be expressed, who went her self to
conduct the Knight with the Physicians and Chirurgians to Perseno, whose wounds
not being mortal, were with all diligence by them carefully looked unto; but
the sovereign balm that cured him indeed was his Mistress her resolution
told him by the Countess; so as having answered the Knight, as he was in
respective duty obliged, he licensed him to return to his Master.

Metaneone as soon as he understood this unexpected answer, would needs
suddenly run up, but considering it to be then dinnertime, he thought best to
defer it a little, when lifting up his eyes by chance, he saw the Countess,
that beckned to him to come up; whereupon (accompanied with a few, leaving all
the rest below) he ascended the rock.

The Princess made a show of believing that he coming from as far off as
Sardegna (without touching land any where) was unfurnished of provision; and
therefore seeing that he came not, had willed the Countess to call him; albeit
she was by reason of the ruins and losses occasioned by the last great
bickering deprived of the means of entertaining him any thing sumptuously. But
that was not indeed the white her intentions aimed at, for the truth is, that
the desire she had to see him was so great, as she had not the patience to stay
till he came, she being now (upon the Countess her persuasions) totally
changed from what she was before. Nor might this be said to proceed from
inconstancy, seeing that she in all her actions manifested the contrary; than
which it should rather be believed, that she being by nature endued with a
constant inclination to whom she was to be married, loved Perosfilo,
believing him to be the man, and in the error it self followed her natural
inclination; but come in the end to see and know the vanity of her amisse-shed
tears, the real blame she thereby justly incurred, the more than great evils
and inconveniences that thereupon ensued, and withal how this Prince had
served her, deserved her, and obtained her ere ever she knew him, she could now
do no less than follow the instinct of her generous nature, which was to love
him whom the heavens had appointed for her.

Metaneone being come up, the Countess came to the gate to meet him, where
she would have kneeled unto him, but that he permitted her not; howsoever she
rapt with an extremity of joy, said unto him; A great good fortune was it to
us (valorous Prince) to meet with your Highness, sithence thereon depended
the safety of us all, who had else been twice lost ere this time. Nay rather,
right fortunate was I (answered the Prince) in having been favored with the
occasion of serving my Lady the Princess in your person, who deserve to be
served for your own sake. Whereto she with a respective obeisance replied;
Your Highness knows well how to oblige too much; although I cannot have
too-much time to acknowledge your Princely favors. Vouchsafe (I beseech your
Highness) to come in, and be joyful, for you shall find my Lady the
Princess an altered woman, so as I am induced to believe that your Highness
is the true Perosfilo: and here related she unto him succinctly, how she had
acquainted her Lady the Princess of her being promised unto him in marriage.
Mean while the Princess stood expecting him at her chamber-doore, where come,
he kneeled down before her, and with a reverent force taking her hand, kissed
it with an observant affection; so as I know not whether his presence or
carriage liked her best.

Now Metaneone was (next Polimero) the best accomplished Cavalier of those
times; and whereas he at first hated such courtesies as were peerless in
Polimero, in whom he also disliked all other perfections; So now hatred being
chased away, and love brought in, in its stead, there came running in with it
(headlong as it were) all his brother's virtues (at least much resembling, if
not of equal weight with them) as though they had been formerly violently and
unnaturally excluded.

The Princess offended with her self that she was not able to hinder him from
doing such courtesies, would not heat him a word whilst he continued in that
kneeling posture; but seeing his courage sufficed him not to utter one sole
word (so wrapped was he with the he joy conceived in seeing himself in presence
of her, who was the rich Cabinet, wherein lay stored all his best of
happiness;) she, perceiving the cause of this silence, said thus unto him;

Right excellent Prince, Let it not (I pray you) seem any wonder unto you,
that I after so much time brake off now that deliberation which I once purposed
constantly to observe during the remnant of my life. I beseech you not think
me such, as being first illcounselled by my self, am now at the persuasions of
others, removed by reason of any natural levity; for if it so were, I would
rather choose to continue unhappie (as I was before) than to re-acquire my
former being, by running the hazard of an opinion somewhat what sinister as you
in that behalf might conceive of me. I will pass over with silence all those
reasons, (which as both your self and any one else may easily judge) persuaded
me to alter my course of life; but of one only (seen by none) will I make
mention. And with this rising up to make him a low congey, she proceeded; This
is the obligation and tie of duty I owe you, to conform my self thus to your
will, which if my father has thought fit for me to do, for greater reason have
I to judge it so, and will do while life shall last. I thank you not, either
for your past or present favors; sithence that you have now recovered that
which the heavens had prescribed you, which being yours, and by you (as you
manifest) beloved, the thanks you therefore owe, is to your self. And with
this (my Lord) I thought good to acquaint you, not so much for declaration of
my obedience to the King my father, and expression of my gratefulness to you
my benefactor, as that you might henceforwards (as sole Lord) dispose of our
stay or departure, professing before all the world, that I will for ever
hereafter, depend wholly on that honest, courteous, and discreet will of yours,
that knew so well how to oblige me.

The chamber was full of people, that thronged thither to see how their
Mistress would behave her self, among whom were also the Knights that came
with Metaneone, and she spoke somewhat loud of purpose that all might hear her.

The Countess, with the other Ladies, when they heard her, burst out a weeping
so tenderly, that Metaneone had much ado to hold from doing the like, so
strangely was he surprised with an unexpected content, but very few were they,
who shed not some tears for company with the women; whilst he offering to
kneel down, but by her not permitted, returned her this answer;

My ever-onely Lady, Nature that was so careful to create your Highness
singular, above all things else, should by its singularities assure you, that
there is no judgment so clouded, as (considering your ways) can choose but
knwo your actions to be completely perfect: and though it were possible that
any such could be, yet should it be constrained to confess, that in you the
very errors themselves are perfections; which steali^ gwife accompanied you,
and being ambitious of honor, and coverous of fame, changed both name and
nature, being not (for all that) grafted, but only fastened to the boughs of
the goodliest and perfectest tree, that ever the gods of husbandry for
celestial deliciousness planted among the terrene ones of humane Paradise:
For who could have known how to leave father, countery and Realm, without any
blot of error, except your unparalleled self, who have even in erring abounded
in a singular constancy, and incomparable worth of love, far surpassing all
the constancies and merits of the world? Your Highness then should not doubt,
but rather confidently believe, that you shall thereby reap the more praise,
in that so praiseworthy an error cannot sufficiently be prized, which I
repute to be more perfect, because its sole perfections having invited me, it
of it self so ravished me, as I being really transformed into a sweet error,
cannot (without error) call my self more mine own. Now for that it pleases
your Highness to make me happy, by seconding the Will of the King your
father, I have not words to express my thankfulness, nor effects to serve you
comformable to your merit, only there remain in me a desire and a will to
both. And because your Highness merits all that is good, too too blame were I,
if after having given, what else was mine; I detained from you these that are
yet left me. Accept them then I beseech you to make me will and desire, if it
be your will that I may wish; and your desire that I may desire; who account
my self no other than the obedient executor of your commands, and in that
right happy, since fortune has raised me to so high a pitch, as to be
thought worthy to serve you.

The Princess, who had now converted her widdowly moan into fresh tears of
conjugall affection, joyful of having acquired so courteous a Prince, would
not leave him unreplied unto with a gentle correspondence of courteous
thankes-yeelding; which ended, and the hour of dinner a good while passed,
they sat them down with better content, and more consolation in the
straightness of that Rock, than others of their rank and eminency would
have done among the superfluous variety of royal Palaces.

Needs would the Prince (as soon as he had dined) go see Perseno, whom the
Princess also favored with the same honor, where after some grateful
passages, they had no time to discourse of ought else than of their departure,
which somewhat troubled Eromilia's mind, for not knowing how to dispose of the
Rock. But the Prince (who well knew the Tingitanan Kings ambition, and how that
such a place well fortified, might curb him at any time) resolved not to
abandon it at any hand; so as their departure was deferred for no other cause,
than for the refabricking of its ruins, and hewing the rock in such a
contrived manner, as no engines might approach it, which in few days was
dispatched, by the helping hand of the Galleyslaves, who labored thereabout
every one his share. The Princess would have him leave some of his to govern
it, whereto he would by no means condescend (deeming it as yet unbeseeming him
so to do;) but prayed her to leave there for Commander Perseno, the rather,
because he being grievously wounded, could not choose but grow to be in worse
plight with the motion and rolling of the sea: the Prince himself sending to
Orano (a frontier city of his state) for all things requisite for him to
assure that hold against a long siege, promising him withal (in private) that
in case it pleased him not to stay there, he himself would procure his father
in law, to send him a successor, gratifying him in the mean time with large
rewards of honors and revenewes from Mauritania of his own things pertaining
to his principality. Things reduced to this head, he embarked himself with
the Princess and all her family, steering on a direct course for Maiorica.

Now Eromilia had by Metaneone's counsel (ere she parted) caused the
Brother-Princes to be fished up, whose bodies she sent embalmed in two
coffers, to the Lord of Velez with the two remaining Galleyes, together with
the full relation of the fact, (whereof he was before sufficiently informed)
praying him to send them to the King of Tingitana their father, not without
expressing her being sensible of the violence done her in their Dominions, and
in a place purchased of the Governor himself; whereto he dissemblingly
answered, That the Princes came to no other end, than to defend and rescue her,
having understood by their spies the designs of the Princes of Andaluzia and
Granada. And that if one of them endeavored to force the Rock, it was for the
discourteous language given him by the Captain of her Garrison.

In the same manner were the bodies of the other two Princes, together with
their Galleyes, consigned to such of their men as remained alive; thereby to
take away all pretext of grievances; advertizing thereof, besides the Courts of
sundry Princes by particular letter, expressing the manner of the fact, to the
end that the truth might be every where known. Only Don Peplasos was reserved
to his wives determination, being deemed unworthy to enjoy the prerogative of a
Prince, or honor due to a Knight, for being culpable of two faults, and in
each of them two several times guilty, after having for his first offense in
the one and the other, obtained pardon; offenses of a base mind, an impious
heart, and mischievous affect; and against that sex, which nature made pious,
that it might even of cruelty it self obtain pity; yet he, more cruel
than any cruelty, moved with a barbarous avarice of Tyrannical ambition, had
twice attempted the death of chaste Eleina, to deprive her, both of life and
honor, and to make her twice miserable, with the rape of the gentle Eromilia;
besides, his ingratitude toward the King of Maiorica, and Prince of
Mauritania, who albeit they knew his ill intention, yet (because they thought
it impossible for him to fall into relapse of so foul and enormous a fault)
had both set him at liberty, and honored him. In such a fashion was his
Indictment framed, not by notaries, upon the testimony of two or three; nor
written in fragile papers, but in his own conscience, approved by the deed it
self, made notorious by the attestation of all that part of the world, and
registered in the most tenacious memories to be conserved for a perpetual
tradition to posterity, to the horror, not so much of the good, as of the
mischievous; that, as fame is the reward of the well-doer, so infamy might be a
punishment to the ignominious liver.

The Prince (as we have said already) had six Galleyes of his own, besides
those four of Catalogna, which he assured from running away, by intermingling
the Ghing together, so as they being first well armed, and then assured with
the exchange of Galley-slaves, he assured them yet better with soldiers, and
the family of the Princess; whom with her Ladies, he lodged in his Galley
Royal, serving her by day, with the greatest respect that could be, and at
night retiring himself into the Admiral of Catalogna, for commodiousnesse and
burden little inferior to his.

More joyful was Eromilia at this her parting, than at her coming, telling
the Countess that she now found it by experience to be true, that violent
infirmities cannot be otherwise cured but by conformable remedies; confessing
that but for the continuance of those dangers that gave her a true feeling of
her then being, it had been impossible to free her self of her melancholy,
and to be persuaded to return whom: but now by seeing, with admiration every
day more than other, the Prince's discreet manners and behavior, the love of
him living, served as a wedge to knock out of her mind the memory of the
other deceased.

Their Navigation was short, and favored with gentle winds, yet to them
seemed it far shorter than indeed it was, for that the joy which their
hearts conceived of their amorous conversation, made the hours and days run
faster, all things appearing unto them, with an aspect more grateful. And
indeed darkness it self lets happy men see its shadow more pleasant, if
not less darkesome, and the heavens that seem to threaten troubled hearts,
do sport and play with the contented.

Before Eromilia was assailed of any one, there was muttered a certain murmur
in Maiorica, that she was assieged and in danger to be lost. Great inquiry
was made to find out the Author thereof, who could not for all that by any
possible means be known; there being not any vessel or shipping, arrived
from any where, so as the King (who was wise) thought it could not choose but be
true, deeming it some natural effect of the number of those, for which no
reason can be given; remembering he had read, that a great King being slain,
the fame of his death fore-ranne the fact, a full moneths-time; which albeit it
had its reason, that there were many in sundry places, that were privy to the
conspiracy, which being to be effected from moment to moment, and yet not
executed, made such as were farthest off, think it done indeed; whereon
ensued the fame of giving out that for done, which was to be done;
nevertheless he wanted not other examples free from this opposition, whereby
he came to know, that there be invisible channels of reciprocal
correspondencie between minds separated by place, but conjoined by natural
sympathy, by means whereof the one comes to receive light from the other.
Hence proceed the buzzing of the ears, the palpitation of the heart, dreams,
apparitions of seeming spirits, sudden melancholy in evil, and sudden joys in
good, whereof we know no reason at all; but howsoever it be, the King
believing the common rumor to be the effect of an effect to it conformable, in
a short time set in order a Fleet of ten Galleyes, and of many of such
ships, as he found riding in the ports of his kingdom; whereof he leaving the
government to the Queen his wife, embarked himself, resolved to free his
daughter from danger (if she were in any) and if in none, to free her from any
further suspicion thereof, by conducting her home again; but seeing he lost
time, by encountering for the most part with contrary winds, he resolved
(leaving the ships behind) to make onwards with the Galleyes; nor was he
gotten ten miles wide off them, when he descryed ten Galleyes, steering
aright course toward him, whose they might be, whether friends or foes, he
could not imagine; but his prudence inclining to suspect the worst, made him
prepare to fight.

This King was somewhat stricken in years, but yet a lusty old man, with a
body enured to suffer, and nerves hardened with the continual exercise of the
sling, (a weapon more used in those Islands, than in any other part in the
world;) wherefore he (armed at all pieces) with a courageous and joyful
countenance heartned and cheered up his men to behave themselves valiantly.

Neither of the Fleetes shrunk back, but held on their courses in a right
direct line, the one against the other.

Metaneone thinking them to be enemies in that he took them for some Catalans,
that went with these new forces to find out their Prince, set out his Standard
of war, resolved to use them as barbarous savages.

The Princess, who till now (to her passingcontent) stood beholding the
pleasantness of the calm sea, and listening to the music, which the waves
(like a second quire) made at the stroke of the oars, finding now her pleasure
corrupted with the fear of the Fleet that came toward her; and beseeching the
Prince to retire himself, could not choose but grieve thereat, her heart
telling her, that to fight then, was a resolution taken contrary to all reason.

Both Fleets were now come somewhat near, without knowing one another, when
having fitted their hatches, they manned their Frigates from either Fleet to
discover each other; come to know the banners, and to hail one the other; it
cannot be credited with what an extraordinary fleetnesse they speeded each
back to his Lord.

When Metaneone heard of the King of Maiorica's being there, he ran to the
chamber to acquaint therewith Eromilia, who abounding in tenderness of
affection, returned up again to see her father. The Prince, intending to
conduct her to him, caused a Frigate to be covered to shade her from the Sun,
which then was most violent and scorching hot. But the King mounting on the
selfsame vessel, which brought him the news, that his daughter was a
convoying homewards by the Prince of Mauritania (not standing on any terms of
ceremony) went on all alone toward the Royal. Whilst Metaneone (on the
other side) boording his Frigate, launched out to meet him, saluting him with
such a respective reverence as he could not have used greater toward the king
his father, go in to kiss his hands he would not for doubt of interrupting his
content of seeing his daughter, but followed him near at hand. Before the King
arrived at Eromilia, he saw her oftentimes saluting him with submissive
inclinings; but come to embrace her, he had not the power to sever himself
from her, his royal gravitie not being sufficiently powerable to withstand the
motives of his spirits, in such an encounter. Eromilia wept, nor did he less,
and if the respective consideration of seeing the Prince stand on side of him,
had not somewhat enlightened him, he was not likely to be soon disenveloped out
of the passions of his fatherly affection: whereupon leaving her, without
having had the power to speak one word unto her, he ran with his, as yet
bedewed eyes, to embrace Metaneone; who kneeled to him to kiss his hand; but
he obstinately striving to get him to stand up, debard them of the time to
express each to other, otherwise than superficially, the joys they conceived
for the happiness of this encounter, for retiring to Eromilia, and causing her
to sit on one side of him, and Metaneone on the other, (after he had received
the Countess with the other Ladies that kissed his hand) he lifting up his
eyes, thanked the gods that had granted him this joy, relating unto them the
occasion of his coming. The Princess (marvelling thereat) told him, that his
opinion was not false, acquainting him with all that had happened, and how that,
but for Metaneone's coming, she had remained a prey to Don Peplasos. Then Don
Peplasos (said he) came to steal you away again? He came indeed (answered
Eromilia) and we have him prisoner in that Galley there. The King somewhat
musing thereat (turning toward Metaneone) said unto him; And you (my noble
son) how hap'd you to arrive so opportunely to rescue Eromilia? On this
Metaneone related unto him all that befell him sleeping, whereof though he had
already informed Eromilia, yet forbore she not to marvel thereat anew. He
told them how the vision was reiterated; himself being not deceived in having
seen, talked, and walked; that being parted without staying till day came, it
pleased the gods to favor him, in conserving unto him by their piety, what
his Majesty had out of his Royal courtesy bestowed on him; for which he now
kissed his hand, being not permitted to do it before. The King embracing him,
and glancing a look on Eromilia (who though she blushed, yet meant not to
deny her consent) thus replied;

Sithence then the heavens will, that she be yours, who have now two several
times acquired her, so as I am (for that sole respect) obliged to give her you,
I beseech you to believe, that if I had not already bestowed her on you, I
would most willingly give her you, only for your merits sake. For which he,
kissing his hand again, and discoursing with him a good while about the
dream, desirous at length to leave him all-alone with his daughter, rose up
with an excuse to go salute the Barons of Maiorica.

Glad was the King to see the alteration of his daughter, and the humility
wherewith she craved his pardon for her past disobedience, delighting to know
of her more particularly all past successes, together with the manner of the
fortification of the Rock. Arrived afterward to his ships he might see them
turn stern; so confused were they to see so many Galleyes fall toward them
so suddenly and unexpected, but come to know what they were, they tacked about
to accompany them, arriving with the others all together in Maiorica with as
much joy to the Queen, and all the kingdom, as may be imagined at a return
so unexpected.

There were arrived also in Maiorica the two Galleyes that came from the Pegno,
who were not so fortunate as to meet the King, in that they happened to pass
one night a good distance wide off him, and now (having provided themselves of
such men as they wanted) they rode prepared to return to the Pegno, when the
Fleet arrived.

Metaneone would not defer the nuptials of his Eromilia, albeit he desired to
have them solemnized in the presence of Polimero and his fathers Ambassadors;
but considering how he stood employed in an enterprise, which he could not so
soon rid his hands off, he thought it sufficient to advertise him thereof,
sending him back again the six Galleyes, and those four of Catalogna, with
four others, that the King would needs send Eromena, writing unto her that he
would have sent her more, but that he doubted of some accident, because of Don
Peplasos, who was directed to Eleina to be by her disposed of, as she thought
good. Metaneone sent also to Mauritania to his father the news of his
adventures, and also of his marriage, to receive from him order of his stay in
Maiorica, or coming with his wife to Rirsa, who in the mean while staid there
to consolate her parents and kingdom with her presence.

The Galleyes (being once departed) sailed on with a smart gale to
Sardigna-wards with Don Peplasos by this time fully cured of his wounds, who
observing himself excluded from the sight of the King of Maiorica, where he
had been, and of Metaneone, who had taken him prisoner, and sent him to his
wife (by him so unworthily and inhumanely used) he well perceived there was no
account made of his quality, and therefore oftentimes proffered to kill
himself; but being prevented of his purpose by the diligent custody of such
as guarded him, he bethought himself of a way of deceiving them, by changing
apparences, and showing himself less altered, and with a more quiet mind,
taking on him to desire what he most abhorred, which was the sight of Eleina.
Whilst then the Galleyes (one morning ere Sunne-rising, by the favor of a
strong Western gale) glided on a maine speed, there discovered it self
within kenning the Island of Sardegna, whereat the Ghing gave a joyful shout,
crying, (Land, land) which as soon as Don Peplasos heard, he called for his
clothes, and having put on a chamber-weede, made a show of being desirous to
take the air, and to refresh himself with the sight of the shore, after his
being over-tired with his long sojourning at sea; come up on the hatches, he
stood still awhile beholding the Island, then walking a turn or two, seriously
muzing, and standing with his face toward the ladder of the Galley, he
suddenly let fall off his gown, and leaving therewithal his slippers, leapt
down into the sea, with such an unexpected suddenness, that he was plunged
therein, ere any one was aware of his intention: whereupon the sails were
stricken down with great fury, but to little purpose; for the Galley being
run onwards above two miles, ere the sails could be taken in, or the
long-boate hoist out; (the Frigate of the Royal happening then to be sailing
before the Fleet.) The lewd-lifed Prince was drowned ere he could be succored:
his body was found floating on the sea, and swollen with water, which brought
a-boord, was laid under hatches, to the great discontent of the Admiral, who
was very sorry that he could not deliver him to Eleina in the same state as he
received him. But now (seeing the accident remediless) they having placed him
with his head downwards, to empty his body of the water, afterward covered
it with a beere-cloath of black velvet, bearing that respect to his life-lesse
corpse, for having been those of a Prince, which he deserved not living,
having lead a life unworthy of a Prince.

Arrived in Porto Torre, they found not the Fleet there, and understanding how
that it was passed into Corsica, they also with favorable winds crossed over,
bathing their anchors (by the waxing brown of the evening) in Portoficari.

The End of the Fifth Book.
CAVALIER GIO: FRANCESCO BIONDI HIS EROMENA
The Sixth Book.
SOmewhat pensive remained Polimero after his brothers departure, not well
approving of such resolutions as are built on the slipperie foundation of
dreams; but seeing that it lay not in his power to remedy it, he with the rest
of his company, returned to Sassari; whilst Eromena, growing more and more
ardent in her love, and buring with its violent flames, solicited the Corsan
expedition, thereby to rid her self the sooner of the time interposed between
her and the conclusion of her desires. The King desirous to consolate himself
with her presence, oftentimes importuned her return, but she resolved to bring
first the wars to a period, comforted him with her letters, acquainting him
with the Council necessarily concluded on for the establishing, by the
conquest of the Corsan kingdom, a perpetual peace in Sardegna, assuring him
that the war could not long last, the enemies wanting a head to guide them, now
whilst the infeebled body was not able to support it self; which indeed even
just so succeeded, for she (embarking her forces, and crossing the sea) brought
down in less than four months time, the innate pride of the high-soring
Corsan spirits, which (for all Polimero's great exploits) she could not have so
performed, if they had either had a Captain, or not wanted those that remained
dead in Sardegna.

Now Eromena was at Tolmido's arrival in Sagona, accompanied with the
Princess Eleina, who could not be dissuaded from following her, both of them
delighting every day more and more each in the others conversation; and in
Eleina were every day more than other new wonders of alteration discovered, for
that her studies having given her a perfect knowledge (as much as imperfect
disciplines can give to true perfection) made her capeable of taking delight in
every thing.

Passing joyful was Polimero of Tolmido's coming, who having read his
letters ran to the Princess to present her with hers, whence they went both
together to Eleina; who (good Lady) understanding the miserable case of her
husband, stood somewhile mute thereat, whilst her waterie eyes were not
sufficient to retain her tears, for so much as a generous heart cannot choose
but grieve for another's misery, especially for that of such, with whom it
formerly held any communion of amity; see his body she would not, nor the
place where it lay, but besought Eromena to be pleased (for her sake) to send
it to his father in Catalogna, which was accordingly performed in a Galley
painted all-over with brown, with sails and tacklings of the same color. But
Catascopo would she at any hand retain for the manifestation of her innocence
before her father in Arelate; whom Polimero (curious to hear the rest of this
story, requested also thereto by Eromena, and Eleina her self) caused to be
brought in before them, where he (despairing of being saved, now that he
understood of his Masters end) thus said unto him; Most valorous Prince, I now
see in my self what I have a thousand time observed in others, that of things
not good the end was ever the worst; wherein Princes themselves are not
privileged, since that mine, for falsely accusing his wife the first time,
reaped naught else from it but shame; and for endeavoring to make her away the
second time, was by his own conscience pricked on to make away himself; the
gods having miraculously saved her, to save together with her life her never
blemished honor. And I (well may I say, most wretched I) drawn on with the
sweetly alluring bait of vain ambition, (after having betrayed a Master, than
whom I could not have desired a better) see my self now likely to end
deservedly my days, with some kind of unusual and ignominious death. Now
touching what your Highness commands me concerning the entire Story of the
Lady Princess Eleina, I will willingly obey you, without either concealing
what may serve for the clearing of her innocence, or excusing my self in any
thing that might lighten or extenuate my fault. Here related he all that Eleina
her self had told them before, till the instant of her swooning, continuing
the narration of the rest, with these words;

The Prince before his departure, gave me order to go my ways before him, to
spy out a fit place to kill and bury in the Princess; to the end that when
her body could not be found by any, we might boldly give out, she was run
away with Calaplo; I went, but because the places near the Temple were
indifferently frequented with Priests and Pilgrims, I was feign to go a good
distance wide off it, ere I could find a place for the purpose. I had with me
two (I know not whether I should term them soldiers or executioners) sure
cards to the Prince; whom he was wont to make use of for the taking away of the
lives of many. Wherefore he thought he might well trust those, who charged with
the burden of a thousand offenses, had no other stay on earth than his
countenance, nor could he indeed choose but make use of them, being that he
would not himself, nor saw me willing to strike that bloody blow; I then, and
those fellows with disguised clothes and false beards followed the Prince
a-farre off (being by me first informed of the place) when she fell in a
swoond, whither he called us, and would needs have her slain in that very
place; but there being not so much as a handful of earth to cover her body
withal, he knew not what to do; yet because it behoved him to resolve of some
course, he made us continue to carry her toward the place appointed, looking
always round about him, to see if he could epsy any other fit for that
purpose. But we, going on a slow pace, by reason of our burden and difficulty
of the stones; he both weary and vexed with impatience told us, he was not able
to follow us any further, and therefore would (lest his absence might give
cause of suspicion) return back again, leaving to our charge the execution
of the business. Which said (I know not whether it was to necessitate us not
to let her live or otherwise) he himself cut off her clothes from under her
gown, stripping her of them all, without leaving her as much as stockings or
shoes; telling us that he did it, lest there remained any token to know her
by, in case the body were by any means discovered. But the very act of seeing
so naked a Princess of so great merit (innocently condemned to lose both life
and honor,) stamped such a compassion in the cruel minds of those two
murderers, that as soon as the Prince was gone, they so gazed one the other
in the face, as if their new affect had been written in their foreheads, each
of them with halfe-pronounced interrogations, expecting when his fellow would
speak.

We held on our way a good while without losing sight of the Prince, in that we
descended, and he ascended, making many a stand, to behold the progress of our
journey, of us diligently continued; but the two (not able to dissemble any
longer) told me flatly, that they would not imbrue their hands in the blood of
that Innocent Princess. The same, my friends (said I) is also my desire; but
what shall we do then? If we leave her in the plight she is in, she will die
of her self, if she be not dead already; which if she be not, how shall we
do to save our selves? That thought troubles not us (answered they;) If we
return, we are sure to come to some ill end or other, for the Prince will
never think himself safe whilst we live partakers of a business of such
importance, and will therefore cause us to be slain, when we think least of
it; do you therefore what you please with the Princess, and tell the Prince
what you list of us, for we are most resolute never to return more to
Catalogna: at which word they would have laid down their burden; but I
beseeching them not to leave me so alone, they were contented to listen unto
me, having in former times received of the Prince (through my hands) rich
presents and great sums of money, which made them think themselves therefore
somewhat obliged unto me. I cannot (said I to them) but commend your
resolution, seeing it opens me the way to satisfy the compassion. I have of
this Princess. What I desire is, that (she and you being safe) I may also
without danger return to the Prince, being that I have not with me means to
live elsewhere, as ye have. Whereupon many things were proposed, but none
resolved of; when espying four mountain Swains or hillie-men, coming with a
chair made of light wood, wherewith they had carried down some one, we thought
best to lay therein the Princess; but they, seeing a woman in such a plight,
and so clothed in such a place, and among such men, refused to obey us; till at
length constrained, partly by menaces, and partly by fair promises, they took
her up, and carried her between them so maine a pace, that we (though
disburdened) had much ado to follow them; who asking us afterward whither we
would go? Forth of all habitation, said we. By that time it grew to be night,
found we our selves a great way distant from whence we parted from the Prince;
having with us (being men for such a piece of service well provided, for having
no need of an Inn) bread, wine, and other good things, wherewith we kept our
men in breath, who come to the ^oote of a great mountain among other lesser
ones; we thought it best to lay down our burden in a solitary place, and
there to murder them for their pains: then made we as thought we meant to pay
these country fellows, yet (being unwilling, I know not wherefore) to kill
them in that place; the presence of the Princess (by us reputed for dead,
there having not appeared in her any sign of life all that day long) carrying
with it a strange unthought of reverence, we walked on with them, one of us
taking on him to open his purse, and I, asking the name of that mountain, and
the way to the next place of habitation, till come a good way off, we killed
three of them, every one of us his man, which booted us not much, for that the
fourth escaped, making us to follow running after him a great way thence, nor
could we have possibly overtaken him, if his ill fortune had not (by causing
him to stumble at a great stone) made him burst one of his legs, whereby we
came easily to dispatch him away. This cruelty could not we (especially my
self) by any means forbear to execute, because our apparent qualities, and
habits, with a woman so stripped half naked, and taken for dead, were
sufficient motives to stir up curiosity in any one, to pry into our
actions, learn them out, and report them. Returning backwards, it was not
possible for us to find out our first path; so as weary with the tediousness
of our long days journey, we sought out for a place to hide and repose our
selves in, that night in the thickest of the mountain, with order, that
whilst two of us slept, the third man should watch; but so far were every of
us from taking any rest that night, that even that reposing our selves
tormented and wearied us more than all the former days toil; whereby I came
to know it to be true, that mischievous deeds are of themselves both
executioners and tortures; so as I that never knew what testimony of
conscience meant, when I betrayed Don Eleimos, began to have now a feeling of
it. For of that (because there followed it no danger of life, and that I
thereby obtained the benefit of the Prince's favor) I made small reckoning;
judging that as a wicked Prince makes slight account of any inconvenience that
stands between him and a Scepter, so ought also a Courtier to arrive to the
height of favor, esteem dissimulation, fraud and mischief, as prudence and
good counsel. But the comparison in this case was too too different, in
respect of the quality of the person, the project not treating of, nor tending
to the precipitating of a man down from the top of his fortune, for the
settling of my self in his place, but to the murdering of an Innocent
Princess; from whose death I was like to gain naught else than perpetual
suspicions, assuring my self (considering the nature of the Prince) that I
could by no means long shun my fatal ruin; and that he would never rest
till he had freed himself of such as were privy to this so important a secret,
which made me grieve that I had not with me my Jewels, or so much money as
might suffice me to accompany the resolution of the other two. But now the day
appearing, there was not one amongst us, that knew whether to go, since that
to return to the Princess was but lost labor, so as the thought thereof was
of us already abandoned; for their parts, they were resolved never to come,
where any news might be heard of them; but I (whom avarice and ambition had
deprived of all good counsel) was exceeding sorry that I knew not how to
return back to the Prince, and doubting lest some mischief would befall me,
if it should be known that the Princess were not dead; I resolved at length
to return back again howsoever, and to affirm for certain that she was
slain, and then to take away with me such coin and Jewels as I had gotten and
stored together, partly of the Prince, and partly of others for procuring them
his favor; wherewith I made account to live the remnant of my days
commodiously, if not richly without being beholding to any man. Which plot of
mine communicated unto the others, and by them approved of; we parted thence,
toiling our selves to find out some kind of path, which we had never lighted
on, had we not descried afar off one a foot, who descending the mountain, and
coming toward us was without spying us, discovered by us. When I, straight
knowing him to be Calaplo, was thereof exceeding joyful, deeming it the
happiest encounter that could possibly betide me; for I (knowing the cause of
his going away, being my self the man that hatched the invention of sending
him packing in that manner) hoped to bring the Prince good news of his being
slain, (for we having at first concluded to deal so with him, did not execute
it, for not multiplying of too many Ministers in the fact, and by consequence
of dangers in discovering him, the rather in that we hoped, that he would for
fear have kept himself secret.) Imparting the business unto my companions,
they resolved to murder him, not so much to serve and please thereby the
Prince; as for love of the Jewels and coin which I told them he had about
him. Wherefore as soon as we got to the path, we dogged him without being able
to overtake him almost all the day long; In the end passing down a deep
steepy bottom, and getting up another mountain, he held not on his way one
hours space, till he stood still, so as we might at our pleasure overtake him;
and (coming stealingwise upon him for fear of being espied) we might
perceived him talk with some body afar off, and in his speech hear him say
( Your Highness) which gave us cause to imagine it was the Princess he spoke
to; there we set upon him unawares, but found him so valiant, that (what by
retiring, and defending himself) were could never come once to fasten a blow
on him, the difficulty of the mountains steepinesse, serving him for a great
advantange. And I, in the mean while, seeing how he had with a maine
downeright blow cloven the head of one of my two companions, thought it my best
course to leave him hand to hand with the other: their death little importing
my ends, which was the life of the Princess, or rather my own, which without
her death could not subsist: it grieving me too much to leave in an instant the
fortunes of the Court, by me only assayed, but not fully tasked. Thus was I
flattered by ambition, which prevails more in an upstart, than in one (that
being borne there) has it hereditarie from his ancestors, and from the
nobleness of blood.

Being freed then from that pity which was instilled in me by my companions,
I got me to the place where I had before seen Calaplo, to assure my self
whether the same was indeed the Princess, or that I was deceived; where I saw
it was she indeed, and she also might well have seen me, if hindered by her
weeping, she had not in drying her eyes covered them with the sleeve of her
gown, her good husband not having left her any thing else to dry them
withal. The seeing her then in such a plight bred in me such a compassion, as
made me (quite contrary to my intended resolution) desire to comfort her; but
remembering how she would never have either believed or trusted me; and that it
was better to go and find her out, crave her pardon, bring her back to her
father in safety, and there leave her; I descended the hill; but could by no
means possible (for all my rambling about) ever find her out; so as at length
(having also sought her the day following to no purpose) I resolved to set my
self on the way of my return.

The Prince in the mean time had in this tragedy played his part with
exceeding great artifice; for returning to the Temple dropping wet with sweat,
making a show of being (as he was indeed, though for a different cause)
profoundly afflicted, sent folks to search all there about, for his wise;
taking on him to fear, that she (losing her way) were devoured of some wild
beast; he sent first of all to the Inn to know if she were retired thither.
But the Knight that was left there with the sick woman coming thereupon up to
the Temple, and acquainting him how that Calaplo had bin there to fetch away
the waller, he began to display and ground on that act of his, some token of
suspicion; but when such as were sent aboade returned without any news of her;
then told he them openly that he could believe no less, than that she were
run away with Calaplo, which he knew how to represent so feelingly, with such
natural affects both of grief and disdain, that the Knight (whose
imagination never dived to the depth of so foul a treason) could not otherwise
choose than be of the same opinion; nor could it indeed be otherwise conceived
of any, except of such as lighted pat on the very truth; seeing that neither
blood, nor any relic of any limb of hers could possibly be found any where;
albeit the mountain was (for three days continuance) searched all over with
most exquisite diligence. Besides that (in that part so well frequented) was
never seen any savage beast, much less was it ever heard that any one was
ever slain or hur there. The Prince with this occasion came to be discovered
(for so would he have it,) to the end that the fame of the accident might
forerunne his arrival in Barcelona, and so for being afterward conformably
confirmed by him, be the better credited; whcih indeed succeeded him every way
answerable to his expectation.

The King well deeming that his heavy-hearted son had need of comfort, sent
of the gravest and wisest of the Realm to meet him; when he taking on him to
be incapable of any comfort, spoke and did things with such an extreme
compassion-meriting passion, as there was not any that grieved not for his
grief. For albeit by the qualities of the Princess, there was no reason to
believe, that any such a resolution could ever be fostered in her, yet could he
so cunningly dissemble, that for some while he blinded the best sighted and
most penetrating eyes. My return was near about the same time as his, though
a little sooner, for so had we before agreed on. When I, in taking on me at
Court to have never heard any thing of these passages, in wondering at such an
accident, in making as though I could not believe it, and in such other
circumstances, wanted little of going beyond my Master himself, yet to him
told I that we had buried her a pikes depth under ground, satisfying withal
the rest of his demands at full, I having studied by the way how to make answer
to all whatsoever he could ask me: but he that now could find no more in his
heart to fix his eyes on me (my very presence upbrayding him of the foulness
of his fault) never spoke to me more one word thereof.

Soon went I about preparing my self for my flight, when he faining to have
heard some inckling of the Princess, went suddenly a-boord a Galley, so as I
was feign to do the same; where we were scarce settled a-boord her, whenamong
the Knights and Ghing was spread a rumor, that we were bound for Affrique to
steal away the Princess of Maiorica. Of this good plot knew I nothing, for
the Prince beginning to grow cold in his favors to me-wards, favored another
(perhaps) worse yet than my self, at least in that behalf, that he could not
conceal a secret, wherewithal his Lord trusted him; which he telling in
confidence to a friend of his, and that friend again to another, soon
occasioned our almost utter ruin.

We incountred (as it pleased the gods) by the way the Prince of Mauritania
(your Highness brother) with whom the matter past ill for us. In that fight
remained I wounded, endeavoring either to die or regaine the Princes favor;
not with an intention to enjoy it long, but only to assure my self thereof,
till such time as opportunity presented me occasion and place to run away; it
grieved me exceeding that I say so wounded as I was not able to help my self,
now that I might have made use of so fit an occasion for my purpose.

The King of Maiorica (after the departure of the Prince of Mauritania)
considering how little it stead him to detain in that sort Don Peplasos, and
too withal that sithence he was to set him at liberty, his fairer course was
to do it, with giving him as little disgust as possibly he could, (after he had
given his daughter notice of it, thereby freeing her from danger, in case Don
Peplasos resolved to return thither again) he went himself in person to
visit him, referring it to his own choice whether he would go or stay.
Whereupon he as soon as he had dispatched himself thence having by making by
the way enquiry, easily found out the Author of the rumor spread a-broad,
caused him (in his own presence) to be hanged up by the maine yard. Arrived at
home, scarce were his wounds cicatrized or begun to close up, when he (on the
same pretext as before, with an excuse that his wife was retired to Pegno della
morte,) embarked himself; taking with him four Galleyes, whereon it behoved me
to mount aboard too, (wounded as I was) resolved to run away (at any hand) as
soon as we should be landed in Afrique. Where what afterward befell us, is
already known unto your Highness: whom I humbly beseech to intercede some
remission for me, since that it better beseemes the Lady Princess Eleina's
royal breast to pardon, than it ill befitted my base heart to offend;
protesting before the Immortal gods, that in all these evils, my offenses
shall never grow so high, that they left not rooted in my mind a feeling sorrow
for having committed them, neither did I (as I hope for mercy) commit them out
of any despite or malice, but merely for that ambitions sake, that has in
every man such power, in causing him to desire to engrosse to himself his
Prince his favor, wherein we have no example left us of any man, that could
ever yet (in that kind of avarice) content or temper himself.

To these last words of his, Polimero could not without disdainefull anger
listen, and beholding him earnestly he excused Don Eleimo's judgment, for that
Catascopo's countenance and demeanor was able to deceive the most penetrating
and subtilest understanding. Once was he about to make him no answer at all,
his person not meriting any, but observing to be there present, many of the
principal Courtiers, he (desirous that this example might serve them for a
document) thus said unto him;

Catascopo, the History I hear of thee makes thee known to be unworthy of
what thou cravest, especially those arguments aggravating thy fault wherewith
thou pretendest to qualify it. Thou would have the Princess Eleina pardon
thee out of her ggreatnesse, what thou have offended out of thy baseness; not
considering how that Princes are obliged to punish malefactors, not to do
sacrifice to their particular revenge, but for the public weale's sake, the
people being much better bridled by example, than swayed by laws. Nor indeed
can she, as a Princess justly pardon thee; for though that all her miseries
had ended with her death, yet the mischiefs and miseries that had thereon
ensued, or that may yet proceed therefrom between the Arelatan and
Catalognian kingdoms, might or yet may be perpetual, with the death of
thousands of innocents that might, or yet may perish by thy means. Moreover,
thy being in the act it self sorry for having offended her, makes thee the
more unworthy of favor; for it is no marvel if the blind fall that has no
body to lead him; or that a frantic man under the conduct of his corrupt
imagination, throw himself down headlong from any precipie, but for one of a
perfect sight to fall and refall so foulely, and for one that has a reflux of
knowledge, and been admonished by conscience, to precipitate thy self so
dangerously and wilfully as thou have done, is a thing altogether prodigious;
nor can a man judge otherwise of thee than that thou intendest whenever thou
did any mischief to do it irrevocably without the consent either of reason
or conscience, an evident figne of an accomplished malice, never to be repealed
with any kind of good inspiration whatsoever; nor am I ever a whit induced to
believe, that it was repentance which made thee, (when from on high thou saw
her drying her eyes with the sleeves of her poor gown) to think of
succouring her, and of bringing her home to her father, for that was not an
effect of a repentant spirit, but of a mind already vilified in the
consideration of its proper danger that thou incurredst with thy Master, for
the life thou could not deprive her of. And this made thee (thinking on thy
own miseries) capable of that pity which thou had not whilst thou wast void
of such impressions.

Men of a shallow judgment, looking no farther than the apparances, take those
to be virtues that are not, whereas the wiser sort examine the actions,
distinguishing that which really is from that which seems to be. Which that it
is so, thou may see by thy self, for thou betrayed'st not thy Master first
but with premeditation; nor the Princess afterward, but with deliberation,
and yet passed there between these two treason plots, days and months;
wherein thou had time to kindle the coals of charity toward the one and the
other, if there had been remaining in thee any spark of virtue; but thou
did it not till thy foreseen misery joined with the danger, engendered in
thee this adulterate pity, if it may be termed pity, and not rather
baseness and diffidence of being able to save thy self any other way. Nay, I
believe what is yet worse (nor can I believe otherwise of such an one as thou
art) that thou (seeing thy self undone) thought with a new invention of
malice to win her to be thine, after thou had lost her to her self, and to
make the instrument of thy life and good fortune, her, whose death thou had
complotted, and whose misery thou mean'dst to accomplish by taking from her
her honor, to no other end than to oblige her unto thee with a strange kind of
benefit directed wholly to thy own sole ends, which also might have accordingly
succeeded thee, considering the noble inclinations of so excellent a Princess.
But the gods permitted thee not to put that project in practice having destined
for her safety other means than thy malicious pity, which because they in
thee abhorred, they blinded thy eyes and clouded thy understanding, for finding
her any more; nor does thy last alleged excuse (that the ambition of the
Prince his favor was cause of thy offense) decline any whit from thy other
reasons; for if we ought not to do evil that good may come thereof, how can
we excuse that evil whence springs another evil by many degrees greater?

The impossibility thou inferrest of the never being of any man that could in
such like ambitions contain himself, is most false; whereof though I yet
granted thee that there were not any, yet will I never concede that there
cannot be any such. A Prince his favor is acquired either by merits, or else
by reason of the inclination of the Prince himself; and where merits are,
there is seldom any great fortune, for they proceeding from virtue, those
virtues cannot brook fortune, but disdain her means, and she again seeing her
self so despised, scorns and contemns them; where inclination is, there
resides fortune also, but diversely; for many Princes are good, and have good
inclinations, but with them have they also their affects, which they will have
humored; yet should they not be therefore abhorred, seeing they are but men,
nor should they be condemned or much blamed for choosing persons to their fancy
and liking, so that the State suffer not thereby. True it is, that such as
these shall be by so much the nearer a fortune, by how much the farther off
they are from integrity, except when the Prince his mere liberality inricheth
them out of his own, without prejudicing any other. But such as are called to
favor to be instruments of the wicked to the ruin of the good (as thou wast)
are not of this number, but of a third degree as detestable, for being in the
extremity of evil, as is that of the good desirable, that marches in the
fore-ranke of goodness; so as I believe that (among all men in the world) thou
only art in that degree, and as such an one unworthy of either excuse or
pardon.

Much amazed remained Catascopo at this so rigorous though just judgment of
Polimero, which ended, he was reconducted to prison where along time he
continued without any hope of pardon or releasement.

Eromena having passed over into Corsica and taken Bonifacio, marched on to
Sagona which yielded it self to her mercy; with the same felicity tamed she
the Talsines, acquired Telisano, the valley of Vasina, Giovellino with
whatsoever other places are contained in CapoCorso. Nebbio that was then the
city and seat Royal made her some resistance, the Rebels being reduced
thither, and most resolute to defend themselves till death; which they had
performed, if the inhabitants had thereunto consented: which later weying with
themselves the loss they sustained by Polimero's valor, and considering
withal how scant their provision was grown, yielded on reservation of the
safeguard of their lives and goods: whilst the Rebels seeing the people so
inclined, saved themselves by timely flight in Balagnia.

In the mean time had Polimero (long before) sent the Count of Bona to the
King his father, that he might (when he had given an account of his embassage
in Maiorica) obtain an other for Sardegna, to demand in marriage for him
Eromena, wherein he was with such expedition dispatched as Nebbio was scarce
rendered up, when the Princess received letters from her father, with news of
the arrival of an Ambassador from the King of Mauritania, about a business
of so great importance as it necessarily required her personal presence,
wishing her therefore to leave good order for the enterprise, and to hie her
self thither with all possible speed.

Upon this Eromena, well knowing what the business was, though loath to part
from her lover, posted away, leaving all the troops in his charge, taking
along with her the Marquess with the principal Commanders of the Camp, to
the end that the whole honor of the conquest of Corsica might rest entirely
his alone. Nor was she therein deceived, for Polimero (desirous to bring his
enterprise to an end, and above all to get into his hands the Rebels) came
before Balagnia so suddenly and unexpected, as they had no time to get out, as
they made account to have done, any tentative of theirs serving them to no
purpose, for that the city was walled round about, so as it was soon given
up, and the Rebels consigned him alive. This done, he took Calui with all its
territory, nor remained there now other than Genarca, which because of its
being seated on the sea, had not so easily been forced, if he, by bringing
thither the Fleet, had not constrained it to follow the fortune of the others.
Afterward having embarked the Rebels on the Mauritanian Galleys he commanded
the Admiral to deliver them from him to the King. As soon as Eromena was come
the King told her, the occasion for which he sent for her, was, for that the
King of Mauritania had sent to demand her in marriage for his son Polimero.
She (making as though the matter were strange to her) answered, that she would
do what should be by the State thought fitting, referring her self wholly to
the Council. Now those of the Council come with her from the Camp were fewer
than those others of the Court, and approved of the marriage, acknowledging for
chief of their side the Marquess of Oristagnio. But the Marquess of Bossa
(being uncle to the Count of Montevero) endeavored by all means to cross
those nuptials, making with the kinsmen of the Rebels so strong a voice, as
that but for the others authority, he had easily hindered it. His reasons were,
the disparitie of their years, his being without any patrimony, his having
made many principal houses in the kingdom his enemies, with the imprisonment,
and consequently the torture and death of so many Barons, which though it were
done on a just ground, yet was not justice able to give every one satisfaction.
And though that prudent Princes ought to aim their level at reason only when
they reap no prejudice therefrom, yet if they see any likelihood of the
contrary, then ought they to second the passions of their subjects, who being
potent in a state might otherwise trouble it, they presupposing the justice
done to the faulty, to be a general injury to their blood, whereof in respect
of the number of such as were innocent, there should be a special care taken,
not to contaminate the honor of some, in the punishing of some others. Nor can
the government be supportable of a Prince brought in with the blood of so
many, who for for being necessitated to lead a life full of jealous
suspicions) cannot be beheld otherwise than with an evil eye by the kinsmen of
such as were by him delivered up to the hangmau: that his Majeestie should
consider not so much whether what was proposed were reasonable, as whether the
same were profitable or no. And on the contrary; if the sole reason were for
its being prejudicial to him; true it were that just Princes should desire the
execution of justice, though the whole world came thereby to perish; but that
this case required no such justice, for in denying Polimero the Princess, we
(said he) neither wrong him, nor take from him ought that is his, whereas by
giving her him, we should wrong the Realm by endangering it, and take from it
what it its own by depriving it of its peace, there being many spirits that
cannot brook the government of this Prince, though (I confess) in all other
respects worthy.

The Marquess of Oristagnio could not without indignation hear out this
Oration, wherein he discovered many heads of great consequence. Rising up
therefore on his feet, and concealing to himself what he conceived of it, he
answered to his objections. That the disproportion of years was not a
disadvantage to be calculated between Princes, it bringing no prejudice to the
maine principal; which also if it were to be calculated should be rather
objected on Polimero's side; that his being without patrimony was that which
was of them to be sought after, to the end that his affection might not incline
to any other state or country than that of Sardegna (here gave he the^ by the
way a touch of his supplying the want of a patrimony by the conquest of
Corsica, and of the obligation that the crown owed him therefore.) That the
enmity he incurred with the Barons should serve and much avail for the
amplifying of his deserts, so as he much wondered at their inducing for an
exclusive argument, that which above all thing else expressed his worthiness;
that the rebels kinsmen were known for Cavaliers of conditions so noble, as
would not without any cause hate Polimero's person; and though they were such
as would wish him ill, howsoever, yet had they no reason for his sake to hate
the state, and so prefer their particular enmity before the public benefit;
which if it so were not, and that therefore those nuptials carried with them some
appearance of danger, yet should there not be thereof any reckoning made, seeing
that Princes ought in every state to maintain the privileges of their
dignity; which they do not when they lend an ear to all manner of privy
whisperings, by listening whereto they come at length to be drawn to condescend
to any thing, even to the putting down of the crown, and renouncing the
government; or to bear the scepter, and govern, not as a King, but as a
subordinate magistrate depending on the will of others. True it was that the
people ought to be hearkened unto, and that in matters of law and justice, the
Prince ought to part from his own opinions and cleave to better judgments; for
which purpose were counselors and councels ordained, which were otherwise
superfluous and vain; but yet that in matters absurd and unjust he ought to
let them see, that he knows how both to conceive and punish offenses; making
it thereby appear to every one, that his taking of counsel sprang not from
defect, but from excellency of judgment, which is to the nature of a Prince
more particularly adherent, than any other condition whatsoever, that the
punishing of the guilty was to be imputed no more to Polimero, than to justice
it self; which if it should be therefore hated, then might we in such a case
grant, that he might also with reason be stomacked; that his coming to the
principality could not prove insupportable to other than ill-minded men; his
steps of ascending thereto being grounded, not on the blood of any of the
nobilitiey and their demerits, but upon his own blood and well-known deserts;
nor was it to be doubted that he would become suspicious, and so by consequence
cruel, seeing that the rebels kindred either approved, or not approved of
their misdeeds, which if they approved, they then made themselves accessaries
to the same fault; if disapproved, they could not choose then but approve of
their punishment; nor was it less strange to say that their honor remained
blemished by the others punishment, as if we would beseech love not to let the
Sun shine on any unclean thing, for fear of polluting it self therewith; but
if they still insist, that their honor is thereby contaminated, let them then
tell me what is in their judgment fit to be done, and whether the murdering
of ones Prince, and betraying of ones country, merit impunity and reward?
Furthermore he denied that the rule of just and profitable had the supposed
distinctions, which though they had, yet could not that any way stead them for
the present purpose. In fine, he concluded, that none but traitors could either
refuse or oppose this match being both just and lawful, which he offered
(besides arguments) to make good with the sword. Much amazement in the audience
bred this resolute speech of Oristagnio; and little wanted the Marquess of
Bossa of being seconded, when he excusing his speeches with much humility, and
the King being unwilling to be entangled with new garboiles (fear occasioning
such effects in him, as it uses to do in such as think by suffocating evils
to make them sheere away) the matter was whosht up with the conclusion of the
marriage.

Well perceived the Princess how her father erred with too much facility, but
seeing it could not be remedied; she with Oristagnio's counsel resolved to
call the prisoners to be put to death before the publication of the marriage,
and return of Polimero, thereby to free him (as much as in her lay) from the
imminent hatred of the Barons. That which in this design of hers troubled her
most, was the person of Epicamedo; she balanced all those reasons that made
him become worthy of death, with that one sole regal quality of his, which
gave the scales such a shake, as it was impossible to find means or
counter-reasons to condemn him. Most inconvenient seemed it also to proceed
against him by a judicious way, as against private persons, by nature, law, and
oath subject to the state. In deciding this point were many days consumed,
with no few arguments of both sides. After which was resolved, that for one
borne free, a King and a Sovereign, to live a prisoner, deprived of a kingdom,
and subjected to the charge of a Iavlor, was no small punishment: howsoever
that his Realance was well gotten from him by the common rule of nature, which
teaches us to repel force by force, not so much by a title of war, as because
it was a war begun by him, who became a refuge to traitors, an entertainer of
rebels, and a fosterer of the murderers of Princes; with an example
tyrannical and prejudicial to himself, if it had fortuned him to have
continued in his royal estate: nor were all those dangers that were proposed to
be likely to spring from the keeping of him alive, able to remove Eromena from
her innate clemency; who only kept him secure under the charge of a faithful
guarde, whereof there was no great need; for he having understood of the loss
of his kingdom, and of the resolution taken touching his person, grown
furiously mad thereat, and wanting wherewithal to kill himself, ran his
head at the wall with such a horrible force as he therewith dashed out his
brains; for the others were prepared new ways of torture, as pinsers,
sheares, hot irons, and fires: but the Princess thereto consented not, leaving
such inventions for hellish furies, contenting her self that they (though
worthy of all torments) paid the law its due, and satisfied by example the
necessity and public desire of justice, which was executed with so great a
concourse of spectators as that the field was not capable to contain so great
a throng. The Traitors dying all of them penitent of the offense, except the
obstinate Admiral. In the mean time was the Count of Bona held in suspense
(almost two montehs space) without receiving any public answer; being
nevertheless well informed of its occasion, and sumptuously entertained. The
news being afterward come of the total possession of Corsica, and Polimero
desiring there should be sent thither a Viceroy to govern it; a general
assembling of the states of the kingdom, was resolved of, to which end came
together the feodatories and deputies of every one of the Cities and Provinces.
The first thing in that Parliament decreed, was the Prince's funeral exequies,
which were celebrated with such an orderly pomp, as that they might with more
reason be termed triumphs; there not appearing other lugubrous object, than
the habit and affection to the deceased Prince. There were to be seen the
representations and modells of sacked cities, battles won, people tamed and
vanquished, of Kings and Giants taken and led captives, of wild beasts
trampled down, and monsters slain, the liberality used toward the
vanquished; the giving of cities and whole kingdoms, not for avaritious but
for honorable ends; the Virgins preserved and the women cared for: the dangers
of the land and sea, voyages and discovering of new regions. In sum all
whatsoever could in such a subject be imagined for the expression of his a
thousand-fold happiness, if there had not (among so many ornaments of glory)
violently been inserted in the minds of the beholders the occasion of his
death.

At the second sitting was in solemn form established the incorporation of
Corsica to the kingdom of Sardegna, with a law of never alienating it more for
any occasion whatsoever. Some there were that would have their laws and
privileges quite abolished, but thereto would not the Princess abosolutely
consent, thinking it best to see first how they demeaned themselves, who though
conquered by force, should not be for that respect worse used than before;
being fallen not through their own, but through their Prince's faultiness,
whose remembrance should be defaced out of the peoples hearts by good usage and
continuation of favors; rather than by harsh usage, and withdrawing of favors
to give them cause of endeavoring to regaine their former freedom. As for the
laws, she well knew their abolishing to be necessary, being that a body
cannot be formed of two souls, and those different; and would therefore have
the Sardan laws serve for, and be common to both kingdoms; nominating the
Marquess of Oristagnio Viceroy of Corsica with general applause of the
universal assembly.

There being propounded afterward at the third sitting the demand of
Mauritania (not for obtaining of consent thereto, but to have it confirmed by
counsel) upon recital of Polimero's merits, and of the conquest of Corsica
there was not so much as one that gainesaid it.

The Marquess of Oristagnio parted suddely, to the end Polimero might come to
celebrate the marriage. Now he had received daily intelligence from his
Eromena, the Marquess, and the Count of Bona, of all that was done in
Sardegna, wherefore though he were desirous to dispatch himself thence, yet
waited he with all patience, the orderly proceeding of his affairs,
conformable to the necessity of the times, settling in the mean time the
places he had gotten in such order, as they might be easily conserved;
fortifying every place, whose site or necessity required it, having a special
eye to the assuring of the ports, but chiefly to the remotest from Sardegna in
the face of Liguria. So as when the Marquess came, and found all things so
well settled, he said, that Corsica might well be kept without his government;
it being so well ordered, as it was impossible for it for a long time to fall
into any disorder. Arrived in Sardegna, and as its Prince reverenced of every
one, he came to Caleri, met with great pomp and extraordinary applause; where
having kissed the Kings hands, he would needs do no less to Eromena's also,
the presence of the multitude prohibiting them to embrace one another according
to their internal amorous affects, so as they greeted each other with outward
apparances, according to the style of convenient ceremonies.

The King for all these rejoycings never once joyed at all, but the more he
observed his sonne-in-law in his actions resemble his son, the more he felt
his heart rent with the memory thereof, which he so loved, as for it he
disloved every thing else not excepting himself.

Polimero's first resolution was to license the Mauritanian forces, wherewith
he well pleased the whole kingdom; he re-sent them enriched with the pillage
or Corsica, and therefore passing well contented, sending back also with them
all the Fleet, except the Galleyes, which he sent for Metaneone to come to his
marriage; and he by entreatie of his father and mother-in-law, got leave to
bring also along with him Eromilia. Having then shipped themselves (after they
had by a Fleet-Galley sent their brother word of their coming) they sailed the
two first days with prosperous winds; but were the two following greatly
troubled with Southerly winds, so as they had much ado to keep in the maine,
from crossing over to the Gaulan cost. But the wind increasing and blowing
with extraordinary fury, they having lost their direct course, were driven
into the Lygustike sea, without being able to touch the Island of Corsica. The
sweet Eromilia found her self heart-sicke, being unable to taste any
sustenance; sore was she troubled with vomiting, so as having nothing in her
stomach, she cast up the very pure blood, to the extreme grief of her husband,
who would willingly have died rather than have seen her so languish. He had
once hoped to come by some means or other to strike on the Corsan shore, but
seeing himself transported beyond Capo-Corso, he commanded to take the wind
in poop, and to run ashore on the nearest place of landing.

Northward from that Cape stood a little disinhabited Isolet, where having
with much ado cast anchor, they presently set ashore the Princess, who no
sooner touched land, than that there came to meet her a white fawn, which
gently licking her hands, seemed to kiss them for her welcome thither. No
small delight took Eromilia to see so timorous a creature grown so
domesticke, so as forgetting her passed fears, she called for something to
feed her withal; whilst she (gentle thing) taking the bread (as it were for
good manners sake) out of her fair hand, and then letting it wantonly fall (as
needing it not,) continued in cherishing her, and (as far as could be
comprehended) in inviting her to go along with her, for having walked eight or
ten steps she would look back, and seeing her self not followed would
return again, doing oftentimes the selfsame thing.

Metaneone, who was passing glad to see his Lady take pleasure in a beast, that
seemed to participate of reason, imagined that this Island might be one of
those, wherein was believed to be by authentical relations the transmutation
of men into beasts; but yet keeping his thoughts to himself for fear of
instilling of new fears into the mind of the Princess, he prayed her to give
him leave to follow that Dear, sithence that she so evidently thereto invited
him; which the Princess would not assent unto, as well because she was loath to
be without his company, as also for that she believed not, that these actions
of the silly beast contained in them other mystery, than the content of her
own nature. But observing her continue them, and too withal groan, as if she
grieved to be disobeyed, she permitted him to go.

The Dear seeing her self now followed, went on a little further, but no
sooner perceived she her self not followed by Eromilia, than she came running
back to her amain. Whereat she (marvelling, and desirous to know the issue
thereof) caused her self to be carried after her. The gentle beast led on a
round pace, making sometimes an observant stand as if she meant to give time to
be overtaken. And gotten out of the sight of the sea, she entered into a little,
but very pleasant valley; where (ere she had gone two bowshoots on) she stood
still before a poor cottage, lying at the foot of a rock, rustically built
of earth and fagots; at the door whereof stood playing with little sticks the
best featured and fairst child that ever humane eye beheld; his age was about
three years, his body covered with a rich habit, and his countenance clothed
with a no less commanding than majesticall physignomy. This sweet boy seeing
so many folks, stood looking on them awhile, and then suddenly neglecting
them, and turning to the fawne-wards (that played skipping and hopping round
about him) he stroaking her, made very much of her, and she of him.

Whilst thus Eromilia (having forgotten all past discommodities) stood with
her looks fixed on them, there came suddenly to them a Knight with a crossebow
in his hand, and many birds in his fowling-bagge, who (having espied the
Galleyes) had left off his fowling, to come running to his lodging; his clothes
(though not very good for being much torn) were all of silk, garnished and
curiously embrodered over with gold; he seemed to be about five and and forty
years of age, and had an aspect noble and courteous; his followers were no
more than one servant not very young, with a bow and a hare on his neck. Both
of them changed their colors seeing Metaneone with so many folks; and looking
one upon the other, seemed with their eyes to express some great matter. The
fashion of their habits was very strange, quite differing from those of
neighbor regions, which descried them to be of some remote country.

Eromilia impatient to stay till they would speak, seeing them so in a maze,
said unto them; My friends, I believe that this unexpected sight of us, breeds
in you no less astonishment, than the seeing you in so solitary a place has
stirred up wonder in us; but if your taciturnitie spring from none other root
than from that of admiration, in that you expected no such guests; then I pray
you to forgo it wholly, for we are not persons to do you any injury, but
rather to pleasure you and do you all the courtesies that lie in our power.
Please you but tell us who you are, and whether this babe be your son, or
that love (fearing his jealous wife) has given him you to keep, to the end
that he, being so reserved, may in time do such exploits, as might be expected
from such as are descended from celestial Deiries.

The Knight, who at first sight had not placed his eyes on other than Metaneone
and his Knights, (because Eromilia exceedingly delighted in the babe was gotten
to sit down by him) now observing her, and contemplating the appearances which
denoted her greatness, he with a more settled countenance, said unto her;
Madame, I cannot deny but that your coming into this strange and disinhabited
place, strikes in us some admiration, this little Island not being inhabited of
other than us alone, nor frequented but of such as are winde-driven hither,
whether they will or no. Here see we never any other than Mariners and
Fishermen, poor creatures, I will not say guided by fortune, but going to
seek their fortune. Your quality seems to us much different, so as by reason
of the diversity of ours, we cannot (in seeing you) tell what to judge
thereof; when therefore it shall please you to let us know who you are, we will
not fail to obey you, in what you command us, nor would we without great
reason request that favor of you.

Sir Knight (answered him the Princess) if that can satisfy you, there shall
be no let in us to work your satisfaction. This whom you here see, is the
Prince of Mauritania my Lord and husband, the other our knights; my name is
Eromilia the King of Maiorica's only daughter, borne with a natural instinct
to help men of merit, as you seem to be; hither are we come driven with the
violence of the winds and for no other reason.

The Knight (having already understood their cases by some poor folks that
had been there, casting a-side his crossebow) would have kissed their hands;
but not being permitted so to do, especially by Metaneone, he besought them to
enter in with him into his poor Caban, where he promised them a part (in
private) to satisfy their desire. Already moved they themselves onwards to
follow him, when there appeared from the Fleet in seemly order a great number
of servants with diverse dishes of meat and delicate cates of all sorts; which
the knight perceiving, and comprehending by the tempest of the sea, that yet
continued, what the matter was, he (laying aside all suspicion, which the
sudden apparition of such a number had bred in him) said unto them; May it
please you (excellent Princes) to give your bodies some comfort, ere you
content your minds with the curiosity of our fortunes, the deferring whereof
cannot so much trouble you, as the delaying of recreating and restoring your
bodies after your past sufferings must needs prejudice you.

Whereupon the Princess (more for the desire she had to rid her self of the
company, than for any appetite) took some refection; the Prince doing also the
same; entertained with the sweet demeanor of the noble babe; who neither
caring for, nor yet despising the cates they gave him (though most delicate,)
expressed a Royal gravitie in the poverty of the place, far from such
pettish wantonness as is usually in that age common to all children; he
disdained not Eromilia's affectionate kisses, but being well pleased with them,
would with a kind of a sweet willingness meet them as they were coming; her
he contemplated, examining with a suspense of spirit, all her parts, her speech
and gesture; observing her with admiration, not as a thing strange unto him,
but out of a judgment mature enough to know her merits. Impossible it was to
persuade the Knight to taste of any thing, who notwithstanding wanted not
discreet manners and humble language, to defend himself from their enforcing
courtesies; something he accepted of, which were only such as he saw liked by
the child, of him respected not as a son, but as his Lord.

By this time had the Prince's servants pitched some tents in the selfsame
valley far from the sight and roaring of the sea (for such was the command of
the Princess;) in one of them dined they, passing away the time there, till
the Knight having dined with the others, and the tables taken away, they
licensing for awhile their train walking ontowards the Caban; where entered in,
they marvelled at its no less strange than rare architecture, for that which
seemed to be but a cottage, was in appearance no other, but in effect served
but to limit a secret and hidden dwelling. And to make no show of what was
therein, there stood placed in it two poor beds of green leaves and boughs of
trees, with a poor hearth and a homely chimney, which made such as came in,
believe there was nothing else. But opening a door (that seemed to be a wall
closed fast to the rock, built to keep off its moisture) there was an entry
that led into a hollow vault of a soft mouldrie stone, under the superficies of
a rock, which was divided into two partitions of lodgings; in the principal
of them stood a square Hall with two fair lodging chambers and one back
chamber: In the other lodgings were servants beds, sellers, wardrobes, and
other^places and storehouses for necessary provisions, which might there be
seen, not only copious, but also singular in their several kinds; and to
illuminate the one and the other, stood placed in the midst of them,
(compassing it in form of a Crown) a little court formed by nature in the
very rock, which by degrees opened it self to its very top with such a
well-observed proportion, as art seemed to have lent a hand thereto. And
because the rain trickled by several channels down to the bottom, there was
formed an ample cisterne to receive it, the place being in its superior part
inaccessible, and therefore unknown to any.

The Hall (we speak of) was all hung with silk hangings of texture not seen
before in Europe, being rich, strong, of various colors, incapable of spot or
stain; and withal so lively as the reflection of the air from them, made the
place more lightsome. The chambers adorned with cloth of tissue, had placed in
one of them two beds of the same suit and fashion, in one whereof lay the
child, in the other the Knight: their furniture were all precious, no side
thereof wanting either rich curiosities, or riches, worthy (without curiosity)
of the greatest Monarch; the tables were of silver of finest workmanship; the
livery cupbords of gold inlaid with rich precious stones, with houre-glasses of
the same, but that the gold was brought to be of an inestimable value by the
quality of the gems and oriental pearls inlaid therein; that which made up
this wonder of rare curiosities, was, when between the two lodgings divisions,
was opened a door covered with arras, where-through was an entrance leading
into an odoriferous Chapel dedicated to the gods, whose Images were little,
but all of massive gold, and so resplendent with the abundance of so many
Jewels that served for fringe to the rich tapestrie wherewith it was hung, as
there is not any King in the world that can boast of a treasure equal
thereunto. In the midst of this Chapel in six fair lamps of most pure gold,
burned a precious liquor, whence issued an odor so pleasingly sweet and
delicate, as passed all fragrancy, dispersing it self over all the house to
the great restoring and ravishing delight of the senses.

So astonished were the Princes to see such an excellency of rarities, as they
could never have their fill of beholding them; which to observe well would
require a great deal of time, whereas that little time was taken up with
variety, the variety with curiosity, the curiosity with art, and the art
(being inimitable in all his parts) with its own excellency, so as the
intellect (fixing it self, while on one, and while on another wonder of matter
and workmanship) was carried about with a perpetual motion, from one to the
other, remaining aggreeved for his being unperfect to judge of them. The
hangings of the Hall (though but of silk simply) possessed (perhaps) some
parts more worthy of contemplation than all the other riches, not so much for
that they contained the maps of some countries done with all those exact
proportions as are possible in art, as because they were fringed about with
purple, its silk being died in the blood of beasts to us unknown,
representing the natural colors with such vivacitie, as there was not any
money that could counter-value them. No other thing had bin able to have
removed the eyes of the Princes from beholding of these such eye-ravishing
objects, the like whereof they had never seen before, than the longing desire
(increased also by these circumstances) which they had to know the story of the
babe; whom Eromilia having taken on her lap, and affectionatly cherishing with
a motherly tenderness, praid the Knight to acquit himself of his promise,
whereunto he showing himself obedient (as soon as they were sitten down) spoke
in this form.

Some eight years may be expired, sithence there chanced to come to the
kingdom of Arabia the happy, the Prince of Artacana the youngest amongst the
sons of the King of Parthia, who for his noble conditions was grown so
famous, as there was not any Princess or Queen, that hearing of him desired
not to see him, and seeing him, desired not to have and enjoy him; so that he
whilst he lived a Knight Errant, had more ado with his love to satisfy women
in their affections, than to succor them with his valor, which in him was
more than ordinary. There reigned then in Arabia a right noble Queen, that
had been some two years a widow, a woman of exquisite beauty and extolled
modesty; no sons had she, but in their stead seven daughters, the elder
whereof bred up with hope of s^ccession she had then newly married to the
Prince of Susiana, which marriage occasioned the coming thither of the
Artacanan Prince, who borne to the exercise of arms and in them bred up (upon
the bridegromes invitation) came thither to honor his friend, and to make his
fame by exercising of his person grow still more famous in the world, the
affect of honor being somewhat a^kin to that of gold, whereof the more one
has the more he covets. It were too long to relate unto you the feats of
arms he there performed, only I must tell you that valor, beauty, and bodily
feature (qualities without paragon in him) held very ones mind in suspense, to
judge whether they overcame or were overcome of courtesy and other virtues
scated in the mind, which (though internal) twinkled forth sparkles that
argued great flames of excellencies, not to be extinguished by any other humor
whatsoever. The Queen who was then young (being not passing four and thirty
years of age) grew to be so ardently enamored of him, as no one place could
long hold her; nor were the considerations of her being mother to so many
daughters, and Lady of so many people, sufficient to extinguish this ordor of
hers; but (like some combustible matter sprinkled over with oil) she burned
more vigorously when she lighted on any reasons contrary to her desire. This o!
this was it which made her neglect even her sleep and food; dragd by amorous
furies a different way, she strove to defend her self from being conquered,
and in the victory the excessive pains she took to obtain it, weakened her
forces against the succeeding battle. She shunned the sight of him, and yet
was sick to see them, and being so sick, would willingly have died, for not
living sick perpetually, in that her modesty permitted her not to sue to him.
In the mean time he (both honored and beloved) held correspondencie with all,
which he well knew how to do; nay, it had gotten in him such a habit, as that
he could not choose but do it. When he saw in himself any quality that he
perceived to be in the Queen, he would joy thereat. It grieved him much to see
her retired, judging the feasts and sports obscured by the privation of her
presence, and that her grief alone was an universal contagion to the
Universe. He went to see her, and grieved so to see her. Their language was not
common (such having no place in persons of singular virtue) but accompanied
with an internal affect of pity, followed with a sweet faintness of the
heart, and waited on with manners Royal, and an expression able to captivate
the most obdurate mind; forcible enough it was not to batter (for the breach
thereof was made already) but to raze to the ground her constrained resolution,
her loss making her know she was too weak to resist so many engines and so
potent an enemy. At length because her modesty consented not to the giving up
of that Fort unto any, which ever till then she had conserved, she deemed it
her best course rather than to lose it, to yield it up upon honorable
conditions; wherefore retiring her self into her self, and summoning her
thoughts before the privy Council of her consideration, she came to see, that
it ill-befitted not her age and beauty to take to her a husband, and too with
all that the Prince of Artacana (being her equal though not his fathers heir)
was no inconvenient march for her. With this comforted, and resolved, (leaving
her bed) she appeared at the solemnities with an excellent beauty, waited on
with so rare perfections as engendered envy in her sex, but reverence and love,
or rather a reverent love in any lover of beauty, luckily borne under an
amorous influence.

The Prince at that time exceeded not the age of four and twenty years, too
young for the practice of the world, but not for the experience of love, that
grew so fixed by affection (which by little and little was a building in him)
in all the gestures of the Queen; as it was no difficult matter for him to
perceive the fire that the fuel of his love maintained in her; but yet doubted
he of being beguiled, for albeit he might assuredly have builded on the
foundation of his own merits; yet modesty (one of the virtues that
embellished him) made him charie in judging the best of himself, and much more
in censuring the worst of others; being that such inclinations could not
without some declination of honesty be presupposed to be (as he conceived in
any woman whatsoever. An opinion sometimes false, but ever discourteous; which
argument of his was far from the thought of marriage, knowing himself much
younger than her, and she not only a mother of a numerous offspring, but also
likely to be shortly a grandmother; wherein although he thought not himself
deceived, yet determined he not to give himself over for all that as a prey to
desire ere he knew that he were certain of his hope.

The days of those feasts were for the most part spent in feats of Chivalry,
masqueradoes, shows, dances, and huntings; and the residue in journeying: for
seeing that the whole kingdom, would needs partake thereof, it was the Queens
pleasure, that the four months destined to that end, should be stored amongst
the four royal cities, which were Omano the Metropolitan city placed in the
midst of the Kingdom; Zabra situate (as it were) under our Tropicke; Saba in
the extremity of the Arabian creek, and Carma beyond the Sudmaritan
mountains; nor was the time spent in iourneying reckoned in this account,
because every of them would needs feast their Queen their full month out,
lodging and entertaining her Court with all its followers, without any charge
at all to the Exchequer. By which occasion also all such strangers as were
flocked thither, saw all that part of the kingdom, where grew the aromaticall
and sweet smelling spices, which is in the Sabeian, Mineian and Scalal^tan
quarters, to such passing recreation of the senses, that such of them as had
been professed travelers, protested, that they never gusted the pleasantness
of any journey with such a ravishing content, as humane sense might imagine it
held conformity with the divine essence, excepting this only, the odors of
Myrrh, Incense, and Balsome, (in the place where they grow, and where every
one may with his hands gather them) far supassing the odors of the same
simples transported any where else. the very air there, being also situate
under so fortunate a clime, as it breathes naught else but sweet odors, nor
distills other than right precious balmes; nay more, the impartiall-seeming Sun
which in the same parallel in other places melts and kills, there vivifies and
recreates. And the hew of the inhabitants countenances which in Arabia the
desert, (though many degrees more northerly) are gloomie and swarffee, are here
nevertheless clear and lively. If then among the pleasures of so delightful
a climate, among the commodities of a terrene Paradise, amongst the allurements
of feasts and revellings, and occasion of journeyings love had not commodity,
passage, and place to lodge it self in, we must needs believe him to be
rather deprived of judgment, than hoodwinked.

The marriage was celebrated in Carma, a palce for all the neighboring parts
most commodious; there ended the Queen her month, and there also shook she
off her sickness.

The Prince of Artacana grew to be extraordinarily altered from what he was
wont to be, to the no small grief of the Prince of Susiana, who for having
invited him thither, thought himself obliged to entertain him in such manner,
as melancholy might get no seat in him, he oftentimes would ask him what ailed
him, when the other putting on a merry countenance, strove to conceal with its
occasion the effect thereof. The Prince of Susiana sought every way to procure
his content, and thinking that the conversation of Ladies might delight him, he
had no great a-doe to frame a College (as I may say) of the fairest of them,
whereof some in stead of recreating and curing of him grew by him to be
infected.

The Queen (having with an amorous prudence examined all things with her
self) aimed rightly at the occasion of his alteration; so as she glad thereof,
began to hope for some good issue to her desires; but yet (desirous that the
matter might be first broken, either by him, or by some other accident) she had
the patience to expect the occasion of parting thence.

Now to go to Omano, they were to pass the mountain in a chair, at the
foot whereof were to stand ready their coaches. Descended then from the
mountain, the Queen (under pretext of the great heat) would have none in hers
but the two younger girls; whereupon the Prince of Susiana (who desired to be
alone with his bride) came to her and told her, that there was no coach for the
Prince of Artacana, nor was there any provided for him, because it was thought
her Majesty would have honored him with a place in hers. She excusing her
self for not having thought of it, taking him by the hand made him come and
sit by her of one side, causing the two little Princesses to pass over to the
other.

This Queen bare in her countenance (placed there by nature) an awing
Majesty, whereby though she had not been borne a Queen, she would have been
reputed for such, for that she seemed with it to teach reverence and respect.
The Prince (docible in such like disciplines) learned them in an instant but
unlearned himself; for losing his color and speech (as a man suddenly
oppressed with a great fit of ^icknesse) he remained deprived of all motion.
The Queen (intending to enquire of him how he like her country, seeing him
now in so profound a maze, laying aside the fair colors which she carried in
her countenance, and borowing of his pale and bloudlesse hew) said hastily unto
him; What is this I see, My Lord? Are you sick, and yet conceal your malady?
Do you take me (perhaps) to be so discourteous as not to deferte my journey
for your good, if your health so required it? Upon which words she intending to
bid the coach return; the Prince (revived with the sound of that voice with
his eyes big with child of a captivated pity, a weeping discoverer of his
amorous disease) returned her this answer.

Madame, I beseech you by the same courtesy, by whose means my imagination is
by you made innocently guilty, not to break off for me your intended
progress; I cannot deny my self to be sick, though my disease be of such a
nature that the more rest it has, the more it increases: there is no other
way for me to overcome it but by suffering, which although it cannot be cured,
yet should a Knight being not able to chase it away, endure it the best he may.
For this occasion then, and not for any diffidence of your royal courtesy,
have I concealed it, howbeit it was never so presumptuous a blab (though for
all that mute) as now it is. True it is, that I must excuse it because it
seeing no possibility of being cured otherwise than by the hand of a goddess,
believing (and that peradventure rightly) that you are that deity, has made
bold to invoke you. The Queen made no present answer, but after a short pause
said thus unto him;

I never yet heard (My Lord) of a disease of that nature; and though I believe
that the gods can (when they will) cure all diseases, yet am I somewhat dubious
in believing, that such a cure be reserved, either more to the one than to the
other, or to a goddess rather than to a god; but though it were granted that
it could so be, yet how can your disease wanting the discourse of reason
believe me to be a goddess; or how can you say (that perhaps it believed
rightly) knowing me for a woman?

That the gods ( Madam) have divided their offices and government (replied the
Prince) cannot (I believe) be doubted of: and this perceive we plainly in the
visible gods; the one meddles not with the others business, be it either to
help or hurt the things created; only they may because of their benign
nature, with their aspects mitigate the evil effects of such, which being of a
diverse nature think but of harming us. That a disease has understanding
though it want discourse cannot be denied, unless the natural relation among
creatures be denied also; for how does blood gush out of the wound of a dead
corpse in its murderers presence, wanting discourse, nay (which is more) not
having as much as sense? It must be then needs granted me, that all things
either by power of an internal sympathy, or by relation (as we may say) of
another thing to the same (in some manner) correspondent may without
understanding, understand, and without will, will. In that I therefore believe
that my malady perhaps mistakes not it self in thinking you to be a goddess I
can say nothing, because I know not what to say. But the Queen soliciting him
to make particular answer to this point, as he had done to the rest, (not by
any means allowing of his excuses) got him at length to confess unto her, that
indeed his desease was love; but that the quality of his Lady was so divine,
as that it deprived him not only of all hope that his service would ever be
accepted of, but also of all courage of presuming to make it known unto her,
which he durst not attempt for fear of the thunder of her disdain, and that
that accident had then befallen him, because his heart seeing her hold so great
a conformity in all things with the Lady of his life, and taking her for the
same indeed, was moved to implore her gracious assistance; nor thought it
itself deceived, as well because his Lady was a goddnesse, as also because it
could perceive no essential difference between the one and the other. The
Queen, perceiving well what he meant, and yet resolved to get it plainly out
of him, told him there was no Lady free, and at her own dispose that had cause
to refuse the service of so noble and virtuous a Knight as he was, unless she
were a married wife, such a one having indeed a good cause of excuse; whereto
he answering her, that she was a widow; she replied, that widows might
lawfully re-marry. In fine, the end of their discourse was the reciprocal
discovery of their affection, with the appointment of their marriage to be
managed with such means as might best befit her modesty and credit; a
conclusion that wrought in their hearts extreme content not to be changed for
the possession of the whole world.

The overjoyed Queen now assured of the affection of her beloved Prince, grew
fairer every day than other, and come to Omano, passed there right happily her
destinated month. Feign would the Prince have written unto his father to send
him thither forthwith Ambassadors to demand her; whereunto she (with whom love
prevailed not so much, but that modesty prevailed yet more) would by no means
consent; to the Prince his so great torment, as he thought himself unable to
support it. Whereas she founding the fact with more maturitie, considered that
the world (omitting the considerations of her being both a woman and young
withal, and therefore subject (as others were) to common passions) would have
said that she married only to spite her daughter.

The feasts ended, she licenced him with all the rest: he having all that time
so behaved himself, that though he were enamored, young, and full of fire,
yet was there not any that could take notice of his pretentions; and although
he served her with extraordinary diligence and that in tournies he carried her
Impresa and favors, and that she did him besides the public favor to term
him her Knight; nevertheless the opinion of modesty in her, and discretion in
him being great, suffered (...) those his demeanors to be deemed other than
(...) of Chivalrie, and of service due rather to a Lady than to love.

Come home, he communicated his design to the King his father and to the
Parthian Prince his brother, who as soon as they had understood of the Prince
of Susiana's return home with his bride, were not slack to send to the Queen
a noble embassage, which they willed to be expressed in presence of the
Council. The obstacles in this business were three; all of them of moment,
whereof the least was the quantity of daughters; of the other two the less
important was the jealousy and by consequence the enmity of the Prince of
Susiana; the last and greatest of all was the danger of stirring up rebellion
in Arabia the desert, whereof her late husband (the father of the girls)
having been natural King, it was to be doubted whether that people would
ever obey a new King in prejudice of the Princess of Sasiana their legitimate
Queen, as her, who of the daughters was the eldest.

To the first was answered, that a male being more convenient and necessary to
the Realm than a female, and a natural home-borne native more fit than a
stranger; the marriage of the Queen was approved to be, not only laudable, but
necessary.

To the second, that the Prince of Susiana (being the Artacan Prince his
friend) had no reason to dislike of this alliance; and though he were more
wedded to the hope of that kingdom, than to its Princess till then presumed
to be heiresse; nevertheless there was not by this match any thing of his
taken from him, because there having been neither promise nor mention made of
giving him the kingdom for a Dower, he was not berest of the hope of having
it, in case there sprung not from these nuptials any heirs male; and if he
would not be thus satisfied with reason, yet was there no cause to fear him,
considering the greatness of the kingdom, the valor of the Prince of
Artacana, and the force of the Parthians apt upon any occasion to invade
Susiana.

To the third, finding neither reason nor pretext, was said, that it lay not in
the Queens power either to give her new husband the title of King of the other
Arabia, nor yet (in case she married) to retain it her self, it being not
hers, but her daughters; adding, that as they besought her to marry, that so
she might give them a lawful Lord; so desired they her to be also pleased in
the self same time to cede that kingdom, to whom it of right descended.

With this the marriage was concluded on, and the kingdom of Arabia the desert
granted to the Prince of Susiana (who, for all the inviting that he and his
wife had to come to the celebration of the marriage would by no means come;)
and Artacana proclaimed and crowned King of that Realm with general applause
and public satisfaction; but little could she or the kingdom enjoy him, for
within four years time death took him away in the fairest flower of his
years, and in the greatest expectation of prowess that might be hoped for of
any Prince of that age. Grievous then above all griefs was the grief of the
more than grievously grieved Queen, insomuch as no persuasions could prevail
to take out of her arms the dead corpse, her often swounding kept her alive by
making her become unsensible of the sharpness of the pain which she felt,
without which she had irrevocably accompanied him. But (alas)' it was not here
that her misfortunes ended; for having left her by her husband two babes, the
one a boy (which is this here) and the other a girl; there was stirred up (a
little after the Kings death) an insurrection in the Realm, in the favor of
the clder Princess. In that time were the Parthians troubled by the Medes, and
our King (when he sickned) was about to go in person to the aid of his father,
who has by this time (I believe) made an end of losing his state and whole
Dominions. Susiana seeing himself therefore assured of his, on that part, and
withal rid of a competitor; having with gifts and promises made up a strong
faction in his mother-in-laws kingdom, thought by laying hold on this occasion
to become absolute Lord thereof. Of his first motion the Queen was not much
afraid, either because, she having by the loss of her husband been
accustomed and used to the supremest of evils had no feeling of lesser; or for
that she relying upon the having of a male-legitimate heir, cared little
therefore, but gave her General commission to go pacify the insurrection.

These Rebels with the greatest part of the other Barons who (whether it were
that they scorned to serve a babe in his swathing bands, or for any hopes of
better advancement, under a King great of State, and well stricken in years)
accorded to receive him; whilst he with a great army quartered on the cofines
of the two Arabiaes, resolved he would be declared apparent heir (after the
Queen) of that kingdom, excluding by name Coralbo (for so is this unfortunate
child called) in spite of all such as opposed him. Very few were those that
stuck to the Queens side, all following the fortune of the sonne-in-law, with
the pretext of the Princess, by this time fruitful of three sons; so as the
poor distressed Queen counseled by necessity, was feign to forgo his
sons title; but perceiving though too late, that this could not make up her
good sonne-in-lawes content, and that Coralbos life was that which he aimed at,
she sent him to the strong castle of Cardamina; when he waxen wroth to see him
so repriv'd from his barbarous cruelty, unmasking himself now, and promising
his sisters-in-law with great Dowries to many Princes, had the heart to deprive
his mother-in-law of her kingdom; the death of his wife giving him occasion so
to do, who whilst she lived would never consent either to the deposing of her
mother, or the death of her brother. Established then with the title of his
sons; the deposed Queen (of every one pitied too late) considering how that
Cardamina (whither she was retired) could not be long able to withstand the
Tyrants force, calling me unto her.

Sotiro my beloved Cozen (said she) I know you conceive the miserable estate
whereto fortune has reduced me, I am now without either husband or kingdom,
and am also like enough to be shortly without a son too. In such losses as
these (for which I should have died) I have conserved my self alive, to the
end that at every new breathing I might lively feel them all: my kindred and
servants have all forsaken me, you only (dear Cozen) have left and lost all
to accompany and comfort me, so that it is not the least among my griefs to
know the disproportion that is between your fidelity and my present state,
for not being able to reward you, yet will I nevertheless give you so
efficacious a token of my gratitude (though the receiving of it can be to you
but a great trouble) that you will confess it lies not in my power to give you
more, in the case I am in at this present. With that, taking the child, and
laying it in my arms, she stood a good while without opening her mouth,
plunged in a sea of tears, till at last she said unto me, This is that, which
I promised you, the sole Relic of my felicities and only comfort of all my
losses and miseries, which I must lose to my self that it be not lost to the
world; here is no place for him (poor Infant) no King or Prince, to whose
trust I may commit him; you only dare I boldly trust him with. Upon this
(rising off her seat, and I following her with the babe in my arms) she led
me into a great tower, where we found so much riches, Jewels and coin, as I
remained thereat astonished, opening unto me afterward the places shut up, and
my wonder thereat increasing; Cozen (said she) I would bid you take all that
you here see, if the carriage of it would not endanger you; take therefore all
that you think may stead and serve you, yet must you make account that what
you take, must (without any more) be the patrimony of my poor son, and the
stay of your loyalty, my self not knowing either what shall become of me, or
whether I shall ever find any means of sending you any more. And as she was
about to tell me somewhat touching the education she would have me give him,
she was seized on by so great a flood of tears, as her unfinished conceits
were by her sobbings limited with this only, Do you.

Whereupon I (transformed into her grief, though most unapt to comfort her)
strove (the best I could) to speak something to her; but she soliciting me to
depart with such speedy earnestness, as if the Tyrant had been at the gates,
I went and chused out of the treasure what liked me best, and taking up the
babe got me to Arsinoe; where landing in a Merchants habit, having with me the
riches signed up in diverse packs with merchants marks, I passed to the Nile
desending on it at my leisure to the sea, where boording a good shop, I sought
for a settling place over all the Mediterranean Islands, but being winde-driven
hither, and finding here a great heard of goats with this Dear amongst them, I
wondered to see her so gently fawn upon me without any fear at all; so as I
judging this a fit place for my purpose, called it (because of the goats)
Capraia; and finding this mouldrie stone easy to be wrought, I sent for
workmen from Liguria, who in a short time made me the house you here see,
wherein I will do my best to conceal this disinherited Prince. I brought
along with me three right faithful servants, one my own, the others given me
by the Queen; but because I never wrote unto her more than once from Arsinoe,
I sent her (some three months sithence) one of them to bring her news of us,
not so much for discharge of my duty as to know what state she now is in, and
to see, if there be any likelihood of any hope of our return; wherein if there
appear an impossibility, I intend to continue here, till such time as the
child grow to be able to exercise horse and arms; by that time, suspicions
ceased, my self grown aged, he well grown up, and both of us altogether
unkend and quite forgotten, I will endeavor to bring him elsewhere, that
fortune may not together with his kingdom deprive him of those fruits the
world is like to reap from his (truly Royal) inclinations. And this
(excellent Princes) is all that you desired to know, which I beseech you to
account as not spoken; nor had your Royal dignities been sufficient to have
made me become thereof confident enough, if your aspects carried not engraven
in them the merits of your virtues worthy to be the cabinet of so great a
secret.

Eromilia hugging the babe close to her fair breast, with kissing it a
thousand times, could not contain her self from weeping; feign would she have
prayed Sotiro to go along with her to have him bred up in her Court, if she
had thought to have obtained him; which proffer she and Metaneone both made
him, with expression how desirous they were thereof, but he humbly thanking
her, told her, that he would find a time to come with him to see and serve
her. The three days that the tempest lasted, passed the Princess pleasantly
on this Rock, with the sweet-pleasing company of Coralbo; which expired, she
(commending him to the gods) departed with her husband.

In a short time arrived they at Caleri met by Polimero, and wellcomed by
Eromena, conformable to the dignity of their estates and community of their
affections; whence they could not part for many days after the marriage,
although the King of Mauritania had by often messages solicited their return;
till at length Polimero also, (desirous to pay the tribute of the duty that he
owed his father) having gotten leave of his father-in-law to take along with
him Eromena, they (accompanied with Eleina) went on their intended voyage for
Mauritania, where being arrived, they were received with such pomp and joy, as
greater can not be described.

The old King seeing his sons thus well matched, and Polimero so well
provided for and settled, joyed for the hope he had to see issue from them a
fair posterity, which he was so fortunate, as to see spring from both of
them: for Eromilia about four months then after was brought to bed of a boy.
Whilst Eromena knowing her self to be with child, thought to return home,
being sent for by her father; but the entreaties of her parents and
brothers-in-law were so importunate as it was not possible for her to return,
and the Ambassadors sent thence to Sardegna got (with much difficulty) leave
for her to stay there somewhat longer; her time being come, she was brought to
bed of a daughter, whose features were both so fair and manly, that the sight
of her bred no less delight than wonder in the hearts of all that saw her. And
too withal nature it self (which in ingendring amazement proceeds with
unaccustomed means) now in her operations exceeded her ordinary bounds; for
two or three nights before her birth were heard all over the Palace and through
the streets of the city a pleasing murmur, as that of voices and instruments,
that carried to the ear an unusual sweetness of harmony; beguiling many,
(who went through the lodgings to seek for it) with others who went out of
their houses, thinking to find it abroad.

The day she was borne on, there was no man that minded his own business,
but every man (drawn by an unknown affect) forsook his shop, whilst the
sacred temples shone with sacrifices and devout worshipping. Never was there
seen over all Afrique a more temperate day, or a more sweetly-warming Sun
than was then; Orange, Lemon, and Cedar-trees that never budded before, now
blossomed abundantly, yielding at that birth their fruit in all maturitie and
perfection. The gentle Dolphins ran sporting themselves nimbly in the sea,
chasing to the land whole armies of fish, which the inhabitants took with no
less joy than amazement: an old well or deep wintch (that at first was sunk
in the castle of Birsa for the commodity of the Garrison, and was (for being
found afterward with salt water in it) dedicated to Neptune) boild all the
night long, becoming in the following morning so sweet, as it excelled in
goodness the best waters in that Country.

Full glad was Eromena to hear of such things, acknowledging her thanks to
heaven for doing them in the favor of her girl. Congratulations she received
not as a woman in childbed, but as a Captain vanquissant of a battle. Many
times and often kissed she her sweet babe, who without either crying or
weeping, beheld steadfastly the fair light of the world; by no means possible
would the sweet little one endure the swathing bands, but would with a lovely
fierceness push them off her. No other dugs would she touch, saving those of
her mothers; wherein though they thought to beguile her (by Eromena's holding
her in her arms, and others reaching her a dug,) yet she informed by the
instinct of nature would shut up close her pretty mouth, choosing rather to die
for hunger than to be nursed with other milk than her mothers. She would (by
all means) be obeyed in all things, and feign were they (whether they would
or not) to let her have her will, to the passing content of her grand-parents,
leaving at her parting so great a longing after her, as the expectations from
her exceeded that of all the girls that ever were borne in Afric.

Polimero with his Eromena departed thence, leaving every one sad for their
privation; who arrived in Sardegna, settled themselves to the ordering of the
Relame-affaires. Whose strange adventures and rare feats of chivalrie,
together with other things in this Book unfinished, shall be writ in the Story
of Donzella-desterrada, or the Exiled Virgin.

FINIS.

