Donzella Desterrada, OR, The Banished Virgin.

Written originally in ITALIAN: By Cavalier Gio. Francesco Biondi, Gentleman
Extraordinary of his Majesty's Privy Chamber.

Divided into three Books: And Englished by I. H. of Graies Inn, Gent.

Printed at London, by T. Cotes, for Humphrey Mosley, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the three Kings in Paul's Church yard. 1635.

illustrated border

TO The Right Noble and most Excellent PRINCESS, the Lady Katherine,
Duchess, Marchioness and Countess of Buckingham and Coventry, Viscountesse
Villiers, Baroness Rosse of Hamelake, and of Whaddon.
Most Illustrious Madam,
WHen first I read the hard fate of this distressed Virgin in the native
Language where she and her sorrows had their birth; I confess my self so
uncharitable, that I took delight in the strangeness of her misfortunes; But
since returning to a more considerate apprehension of her being exild by
braine-sicke envy, merely for her virtues (as were sometime by Ostracisme
from Athens the more eminent Citizens for their famed integrity) I then began
so feelingly to compassionate her case, as to conceive my self (in penance
that I so had sollaced me with her sorrows) charged in conscience, (at least
in humane civility and obliged respectivenesse due to her sex, plight and
quality) to either succor or bear a share with her in her sad pilgrimage: In
accomplishment whereof, having conducted her out of her native Country into a
foreign clime, I there did her the further service of assisting her in the
Language to relate her own disasterous story; which I assure my self will
beget so much compassion in the nobler breasts, that she shall find among them
a free and hospitable entertainment. Now Madam, for her better encouragement I
have presented her unto your Excellency, whom, out of mine own long
observation as-well as out of the mouth of fame (too narrow for so high an
expression) I knew to be one of the rarest presidents of virtues that our age
could boast of. Banished then though she be, yet will she not think her
condition hard, so she be but received into your Princely Patronage. Her Tale
(Renowned Madam) may prove pretty company to your grave retirement, which when
your Grace shall but vouchsafe so to conceive of, you will highly honor the
slender endeavors of

Your Graces Humblest Admirer and Honorer JAMES HAYVVARD.

THE Translator to the observantly-Iudicious Reader.
IF (as our-as-yet-unparallel'd Sydney by enucleated if not Irrefuteable
arguments has sufficiently proved) The Art (or rather
divinely-inspired-giftby-art-to-perfection-reduced-skill) of Poesy (for being
of all the most availeable means for enriching of memory, purifying of wit,
enabling of judgment, and enlarging of Conceit, which we call learning, the
easiest, best and more exquisite; and withal most efficacious and conducible,
both for raising us to the highest pitch of perfection that our degenerate
souls made worse by their claylodgings can be capable of, and also for
hatching and bringing forth of virtuous actions the final aim and ending-end
of all earthly learning) be by manymany degrees incomparably more prize-worthy
than any other Art or science whatsoever: And if also (as is
excellently-manifest by his inimitable example, since such a Phoenix would
never (thou may be assured) have strow'd his nest with other than the most
precious and choicest Aromaticall spices) This by him worthily-selected
Helidoran strain, be in all respects the most excelling note of that
Spheare-resembling kind of heart-ravishing harmony, which he (as appears by
the form and being by him given to his posthume brainebabe) most affected, and
therefore most worthy to be generally so affected since he so affected it: And
if further the throughly-civiliz'd European for
naturallby-art-neerest-perfection-refin'd qualities be no less deservedly than
generally held to surpass both the Tawnie selfe-conceited Asian and swarfie
scienceslighting African (For, as for the savage American I quite exclude him
from all favor of Competitorship, for having by reason of his being yet more
naked of civill-by-science-rectified endowments than Raiment, a touch too too
rude for so delicate a string:) and lastly, if likewise among the
more-that-way-excelling Europeans, the deepe-conceited-subtilly-grave- Italian
be as deservedly by general approbation marshalled as Leader of one of the
worthiest files in the first rank of elevated spirits breathing forth the by
skill-more-rarefied conceits; Then, (I say) Then; sithence I dare as
confidently (because howsoever in that sole respect knowingly) aver, as-well
Biondies Poems (no matter though compiled in prose, since rimeing being but an
ornament and no cause to Poetry no more makes a Poet than does a long Gown a
Lawyer) to be of all Thuscan works of that kind the
in-every-regard-best-pen'd, and in Italy (when I some 5 years sithence there
resided of the more Judicious generally-best-esteemed of all as then published;
As also this (by him entitled the first tome of his Donzella Desterrada) to be
the masterpeice of all the volumes as yet sprung from the fertile ground-plot
of his gravely-mature brain: Albeit I will not (as perhaps I yet with modesty
might) from the grantable (because undeniable) beforeinfer'd premises
conclude, that, for reducing thine inclinations to an accomplished habit of the
more generous virtues, or continuing them such being already so reduced, thou
can not use a more easily-availing mean than in familiarizing thy memory
with Poems of this nature, and so with this by consequence; yet at least wise I
hope (and have I hope satisfactorily here displaid the ground of my so hoping)
That any well-tempered (if impartial) Judgment will (although he never mean
to make use of its Original (as inferior to none for loftiness of style and
elegancie of phrase) for attaining unto the knowledge of the slately-grave-
Thuscan tongue) concede, that he may worse spend some few of his more spare
hours than in running over this (indeed a) Translation, of which kind all
(says one more guessingly perhaps than knowingly) are in respect of their
originalls like the knotty In-sides of Arras; which though admitted for such, I
have yet in this endeavored by close-shearing off and burling those, to dress
and slicke this as much as I could without loosing the ground-knots and altering
the whole form of the work, considering how little the English liking
simpathizeth with that of the Italian, which later naturally more affects
variety of matter compendiously expressed or rather straightned in the narrow
content of fewest words, than prolixly delivered for being beautified with
interlaced-obvious conceits enriched by connected linckes of pleasing Epithets,
and Rhetorical flourishes sweetened with various delightsomely-interposing
parentheses, as best relish the palates of our fluent-tongu'd English: A mean
path how soever between both which, may (by whosoever judiciously please to
confer this with its original) be here discerned to have been trodden-out
by me, and that I have too withal stretched the string of the Thuscan Idiom
for adapting it to the bow of the English phrase as far as I durst for
bursting either the one or other. Now to divulge (as thou may happily expect
by a key as we call it) the true names of the personages, in this
true-fain'd'story under aptly-devised ones represented, the author will not as
yet assent; In respect many of them (though most in Italy) are to this day
survivant. How-be-it thou may (in the mean time) of thy self (if thou have
in any measure observantly stowed up in the storehouse of thy memory any
quantity of forreine-state-passages happened within the periferie of these last
thrise-seven years) by the particular occurrences herein related come lightly
to discover the persons intimated, by such and such peculiar and
their-onely-resembling actions and adventures palpably denoted: From
experimenting whereof least I detain thee overlong and for not
disproportioning the gate to the In-buildings (as did whilome the Citizens of
Myndus;) with first praying thee (sithence error is an inseparable accident to
humanity) benignely to pass by any either oversight of mine, or escapes of the
press, whose grosser (though too-many) particularized in the Errata thou
may do well to correct, I wish heartily and bid thee happily:

Farewell.
THE Authors Epistle Dedicatory.
To the most Renowned and truly Heroike Prince, Thomas of Savoy.
Right Excellent Prince,
I Promised your Highness in France the translation of the two first books of
that famous Knight Sir Phillip Sydney's Arcadia, with an intention soon after
my return into England to send it you with all convenient expedition. But then
I found my self so far incapable of performing it, that I choosed rather to
fall short of my word to so excellent a Prince as your Highness, than to
deforme a work so excellent sprung from the brains of a more excellent
Author. The traduction that I made cannot be said mine; Because, for not
understanding the tongue my self, I was driven to make use of many persons,
some whereof either conceived not the elevated conceits of that delicate wit,
Or at leastwise knew not how to express them; So as not translating but rather
paraphrazing it, I made him speak what he never meant, he alone having the
talent of both, conceiving and expressing himself. Failing in this, and
resolved, since I could not satisfy the debt, to show that I desired to do
it, I bethought me of dedicating unto your Highness this present work of
mine; which, though far short of the promised, will nevertheless prove (I
hope) to be such as no man shall have just cause too complain of it is defects:
The mettle being my own, dig'd out of mine own Mine, coined in mine own
mint, and though of base alloy, yet neither uncurrant, cried down, or subject
to the punishment due to such as counterfeite that which is another man's. If I
resolve to finish the work, it shall be in the lesse-displeasing style; If
not; And that another pen undergo the charge thereof, he cannot use that way
that shall not well please me. In the mean time I beseech your Highness to
accept (with a benign eye) this in discharge of the Arcadia; though there be
not any acquittance that can absolve me from the obligations I have to serve
you. The Lord our God felicitate your Highness in all your Noble designs,
whilst I with all submissive reverence humbly kiss your hands.

From London the fourth of July 1626. Your Highness most humble and most
devoted servant Gio: Francesco Biondi.

In Authorem.
BIondi, qual meta have 'l tuo moto? e quale
termine 'l tuo volar tra le figure?
la, dou' e ghiaccio estremo, estrema arsura,
la tua gran fama ha nel girar grand ale.
Piu non ti resta oue passar, ch' eguale,
l'Vniverso, e'l tuo nome han' la misura:
S' altri con alia e perigliosa cura
ignoto clima a discoprir non vale.
Che se piu sono i mondi; esca homai fuore
verace oggetto, e non fallace aborto,
del prisco dir, che non e spento ancora.
Si dira poi, gia che l'occaso, e l'orto
te, fatto Nume, entro gli scritti adora,
ad un still novo un novo Mondo e forto.
Francesco Belbi.

On his worthy friend Mr. James Haward his Translation of the Banished Virgin,
out of the Italian.
SOme hold Translations not unlike to be
The wrong side of a Turkey Tapestry,
Or wines drawn off the lees, which filled in flaske,
Lose somewhat of the strength they had in Caske.
It Is true, each Language has an Idiome,
Which in another coucht, comes not so home:
Yet I never saw a piece from Venice come,
Had fewer thrummes, set on this Country loome.
This wine is still one-ear'd, and brisk, though put
Out of Italian caske, in English Butt.
Sopra l'istessa traduttione.
LA Donzella di Biondo e fatta Inglese,
contal destrezza, e notabil feed;
Che l'alma di Biondo, cangiando sede,
al petto d'Hawardo un volo prese.
Di Biondo dunque sia ella chiamata,
Figlia, and d'Hawardo l'Inamorata.
Ia. Howell Arm.

To his much honored friend Mr. James Haward, upon his, Translation of Donzella
Desterrada out of Italian.
LEt none mistake my purpose, some will guess,
I have committed these few lines to the Press
To honor thee (dear friend) in commendation
Of thy so learned, so well penned Translation:
But they err much: my duller Muse never durst
Aspire so high; since who will commend, must first
Assume a power to judge; or else declare
His praise (since groundless) vain as the idle air.
But this is not my aim; I but desire
TO express my service, that when all admire
(As needs they must) thy worth; and justest fame
Shall loud resound the Banished Virgins name,
And thee her Tutor, I may humbly then,
Wait on the triumph of thy matchless pen.
Al mesmo.
Haward, el gran valor, y hermosura
De la Donzella Desterrada serive,
Con gentileza tanta, y dulcura,
Que mas ser Destierrada no parece:
Pues aqui es por ella fabricada
Vna eterna y muy bel'morada.
Wi. Br. ex hospitio Graiensi Genesis

To his much endeer'd friend Mr. James Haward upon his Translation of Donzella
Desterrada.
COmmerce enricheth, Conversation
Does civilize the ruder Nation;
If both be rich, Commerce ads yet more store,
If both be civil, The Other yet does more
Refine men's minds and manners: There is none
So furnished with all knowledge; as alone
Can say He Is skild in all things: my proof for it
Is that, the Arts are long, and man's life short.
Digesting many Nations skills in one
Compendious way, comes near perfection;
I mean in Learning, whereof the best kind
Is Poetry, 'cause that does move the mind
To Virtue more, yea and does teach it too
More winningly than any else can do.
Precepts are burthen-some; Philosophy
Must therefore cede the bays to Poesy;
This by example teaches, paints of man
But what he should be; Where the Historian
Tells what he was, And reckons sometimes store
Of horrid vices, never perhaps before
Heard of by the Pupil, whence it comes he longs
TO offend, merely to try conclusions:
These two ore-throwne, all other Arts must down
And homage do to'th' Poets Laurel Crown.
The ware then (Honored friend) by thee in-brought
To this Monarchall I Will cannot be bought,
Nor valued too dear; since it (the flower
Of all the modern Poems that this hour
In Thuscan language extant are) so well
Is cultived by thee (who do excel
In this Transplanting Art) That smelling it
(Beside its virtue of refining wit)
With looking but on the earth whereout it sprung,
May make one Master of the Thuscan tongue;
I then deserv'dly first commend the worth
Of thy discreet resolves, for vent'ring forth
To fetch us in such rare plants; Next my voice
I Will pass thy Iudgement's side on, for the choice
It made among the sciences; And then
I praise the election of the tongue and pen
Thy Muse made so good use of; Lastly I
(If the short reach of my capacity
May have a voice allowed) in approbation
Of this thy Choice-exactly-pen'd Translation,
Aver, it betters, or at least in all
Respects coequalls its original.
Sopra l'istessa Traduttione.
ESser esperto nel'l'arte di Guerra
Ed in Ragione non manco di stato,
Saper misurar cos' ogni sul terra,
E l'altezz', e'l profund, e larghezza d'ogni lato;
Esser' ancora benissime visto
In questa e quella lingua straniera,
Son' qualitadi, de'i quali provisto
Ben' dourebb' esser' quel ch'alla fiera
Dest'rrada per Maestro sareb' accettato:
Eccelo che l' Hawardo e desso bramato.
Ma. Ard.

To his Noble friend Mr. James Haward upon his Banished Virgin.
MY ruder Muse trained up in martial field
Writes not, presuming she can furth'rance yield
To beautify this work; but rather she
Does hope by it she should eternized be,
These lines being its attendants; some may guess
That you affect the Mathematickes less
Than you were wont, 'cause you have spared some hours
To guide this banished Lady to our shoares,
And her accoutring in so rich attire,
That her own Natives seeing her, admire
Her grace should be the same sans alteration
As well in the English as the Italian fashion:
But they mistake; those Arts are still the game
Your fancy flies at, this bears but the name.
Will. Stand.

To his selected friend Mr. James Haward upon his Translation of the Banished
Virgin.
SVch is the envy of the present age,
No book (though dressed in the best equipage
Art can invent) shall pass the censure of
Some Critic, who will forge wrong cause to scoff
At never so good a piece, rather than he
Would be thought guiltless of sufficiency:
I loathe his carping humor, and if I
Had power to inflict a penalty
On him; before judicious audients he
Should be forced comment on this history,
Where, in discov'ring with his own vile breath
His Idiotisme, he would be jeered to death.
Critics thus punished, what should I expect,
That mean to chide thee for thy disrespect
Unto the Mathematickes (arts esteemed
Worthy a Princes study, where it seemed
To me thy Genius was so enthralled
That, if the Turkish Emperor had called
Thee to be King of Cyprus, thou would not be
Debarred of them to sway a Monarchy.)
Perchance thou wilt counter check my checkes, and say
My Iudgement's blind, I not discern the way
Thou treadest, my conceit is wrong, because
I judge, thou, having given a breathing pause
Unto those studies, have perpetually
Relinquish't them: Imagine not I Will die
In such an error; No; I much approove
In thee thy Noble courtesy, thy love
To the Exiled Virgin, pitying whose state,
Thy goodness moov'd thee to extenuate
Her griefs, by her conducting from her home
To sojourne here in courteous Albion;
The guerdon thou do merit's sure, for she
Whom thou so honoured'st will rehonour thee.
Al'lettore, dell'tradottore.
RAdo l'essempio l'original'eccede,
Auchor'ch'Appelle istesso dipingesse;
Matal'accuratezza l' Hawardo possiede,
Che ne'i colori piu vivi, che potesse
Art truovar', l'ha messo: pero non sprezzi
Lettor' di darlo de'isuoi mer't'i prezzi.
Tho. Revell ex Hospitio Graij.

Errata.
IN p^^^ 18 lineaque 30. for were, read was. pa. 41. li. 8. for so, read too.
ibid. l. 43. r. deerer. p. 71. l. 2. for wind r. join. p. 72. l. 46. r. least.
p. 75. l. 47. r. hers p 76. l. 26. and p. 121. l. 46. r. strong. p. 79 l. 46.
r. site. p. 84. l 40. r. whose. p. 85. l. 44 r. plo^. p. 90 l. 37. r. enuring.
p. 100. l. 25. dele: many. p. 101. l. 21. r. which could. p. 107. l. 17. r. su
npious. ib l. 41. r. sender. p. 119. l. 41. r. compartiments p. 120. l. 6. r.
envious. ib. l, 33 r. supportable. p. 127. l 24. r. a-foote. ibid. l. 45. r.
lovely. p. 128. l. 11. r. insured. p. 130. l. 15. r. great. p. 136. l. 39. r.
experimentist. p. 141. l. l. 10. r. me. p. 142 l. 30. r. ran. p. 144 l. 21.
r. raccounted. p. 146. l. 8. r. wrought. p 159 l 6. r. they found. p. 162 l. 4.
r. rod. p. 163 l. 8. r. loves ib. l. 48. r. suffer. p. 172. l. 34. r. tacke. p.
188. l. 18. and. p. 199 l. 33. r. meant p. 188 l. 2^. r. nor. p. 192. l. 37.
and. p. 208. l. 16. for the, r. her. p. 194 l. 1. r. choler. p. 201 l. 17. r.
direst. p 202. l 22. r. was then p. 203 l. 13. r unbowelling. ib. l. 19 for
own r. over. p. 207. l. 29. r. her wonted p. 229 l 35. for know r. knew.

Cavalier Gio. Francesco Biondi HIS DONZELLA DESTERRADA. THE FIRST BOOK.
THE obscuresable night, leaving behind her the shady twilight to make good the
rear against the hot approach of the fire-breathing Sun, surrendered up the
field unto a gloomy morning; when the Mariners discovering land, changed the
fear of their continuing wrack-threatning fortune, into another far greater
both in esteem and effect. The ship through her long working and continual
repercussions was all over riven and quite spoild, so as the ordinary
instruments sufficed not to empty the water, which gushing in through the
chinkes of her sides above, and leakes sprung about her keele beneath, still
more and more overcharged the Pumpe.

The very day before, and the self same night too, they (by sounding the Seas
depth) knew they were not far off the land, though they yet saw no possible
means of reaching to it without imminent peril of shipwreck; But now that
danger (although indeed still the same) seemed in their eyes somewhat lesser,
considering that which the opposite shore menaced their crazie vessel. The
blustering winds incessantly whistled on all sides; But to hold more on the one
hand than on the other lay not in the power of such as endeavored it, the ship
riding right under the Island, whose capes were so far distant that there
appeared no hopes to wade thither with any assurance of safety. Thus then being
certain of naufrage, every one endeavored to fit himself with some small
plancke or other, it being lawful for any such as had none, to tear one off
the ship and make it the means of his deliverance. Their confused cries (in
the mean while) mounting up to the skies equalized the rustling noise of the
loud-roaring Sea, which grew to be so boldly domesticke, that it came and went
familiarly in and out without asking any leave.

The now-despairing Pilot, who with the furtherance of three assistants, and
help of his strongest Cables was not able to command the helm, having now
abandoned it, and eased him of the burden of his clothes, sought out for some
thing serviceable for the conveying his body from the tyranny of the devouring
Ocean; whilst the night to the Suns shame (which being totally eclipsed by
the interposition of the terrestrial Globe continued its course in the
opposite horizon) recovering the possession of her hereditary darkness
imparted to these distressed caitives a glimpse of dusky light, to the end the
sight of their misery might increase its sensibility.

The Ship (like a Sea-bird among the surging waves) held on her course, diving
under the foaming surface of the raging maine, whilst the boiling billows grew
still more and more swelling and violent, by how much the nearer they
approached the shore, till by buldgeing on an occult rock, it wanted little of
being quite overturned, so forcibly was it hurried along the dissembling
smoothness of the water by the fury of an unresistable wind; fear so
increasing their outcries, as they seemed to be persuaded, that they could
with their vows force the heavens to do what they would have them.

Among other passengers there aboard was an aged Gentleman, whose gray hairs
and grave countenance spoke him worthy of a respective reverence, he alone
among all these clamours had the power to contain himself all this while
within the bounds of silence; Till now casting his eyes on the shore and
sails, at the very instant that with the benefit of a favorable wave they had
surmounted the rock (though with their Ship shrewdly bruised and well near
split) he loudly pronounced this speech.

And is this (my masters) a time to be spent in lamentations, and lazily
invoking the heavenly assistance, without using the necessary means of your
deliverance? Peradventure you believe it should by some strangely-miraculous
way be pressed upon you, whilst it being already proffered you, you have neither
the judgment to conceive it, nor the will to make use of it: To what end (I
pray you) were your hands made, and the reach of reason conferred upon you? you
call out for instruments as though you wanted them, and knowing that the gods
ab horre idleness would yet have them be propitious to your sloathfull
oraisons. The danger is not yet such altogether as you conceive it to be,
though indeed it will doubtless grow to be such, if you use not the remedy to
prevent it; Seeing we have yet a good way to the land, our Ship being almost
all over leaky and battered; the shore abounding in sandy shelves, and all our
Sails stricken down. True it is, that whilst the night lasted, it was our
safest course to strike all save a small Trinket Sail, the violence of the
winds and the darkness then requiring it; But now (alas) our state is far
different, For I tell you, that if you put not in practice all the means you
can imagine to run us ashore with all expedition possible, it will be
unpossible for us to escape drowning.

This speech of his was so efficacious, as it seemed to infuse new courage into
their drooping spirits, so as hoissing up all their Sails, the Ship receiving
(as it were) a new liveliness from the forwardness of their resolutions,
merrily ran aground in a Channel not far remote off the land, whence after
a short space, at the ebbing of the Sea, they had the convenienceie of
conveying themselves at their leisure, to the much desired shore.

The old Gentleman (with a servant he had with him) having landed, took his
way toward a wood, where lighting on a small path, he followed it so far,
that at last it led him to the mouth of a cave. But by then the death-menacing
disquietnesse he had endured in the night, the drowsinesse of his spirits for
want of sleep, the tedious toilsomnesse of the uncouth way he was come, but
above all, the irksome heaviness of his old age had so overtired him, as he
found himself unable to go on any farther, until he had first refresht
himself with a little rest. But here, as he thought to lay him down, he
heard an odd kind of murmr in the cave hard by him, and more attentively
listening, might distinctly hear two faintly-lamenting voices, which with a
pitiful accent enterchanged some few but weak words, as though in sighs and
sobbings they had been two doleful corrivals. Whereupon, entering into the
cave (its mouth being freed of a large slate-stone wherewith it was used to be
closed up) he passed along through a narrow entry so far, that he came to
find out its door; through which (although it was covered with a sumptuous
piece of hangings embroydered with gold, and adorned with a rich coat of Arms
under a royal Crown) he might yet epsy a noble matron, who having taken up
in her arms a babe borne but that very instant, laid him aside on a bed, to
go and lend her assistance unto his mother, who lay grovelling on a mattresse
with her face in such a posture, as it could not from where he stood be seen;
continuing a pretty while in that plight, with her spirits so retired from
executing their peculiar offices, as they seemed to have quite forsaken her.
But the matron (assisted by an other Damsel) by wetting and chafing her pulses
with sovereign waters, brought her again to her self; when upon their
lifting her to lay her in a more easy posture, was discovered such a shape of
a face, as (in despite of all palenesse) was one of the fairest and best
featured that ever was painted with celestial pensill, distended upon an
youthful tablet of some eighteen years of age; her hair hung down all
disheveled about her seemly shoulders, (the only fit dressing to ravish
amorous hearts) her apparel too was costly, and all things else in her
promised no less eminency than excellency; only the place and her present
condition wore the badges of a distressed state. A long while continued she
deprived of the ability to make use of the Organs of her speech, left alone of
her women, who were gone down to the bottom of the cave to look to the
newborn babe; only her sighs kept her company by turns, now and then
interrupted by a weeping groan (I might well say) loving, if a lugubrous and
desperate love could be capable of so sweet an epithete.

The Matron returned more cheerfully than she went (so much pleased her a
male child, but much more a manly beauty) and making her a low reverence, she
thus bespake her.

Most excellent and dearest Madame, be of good comfort, (I beseech your
Highness) for behold here the fairest and best proportioned creature that ever
was borne: Oh what a beautiful and goodly progeny would the world produce if
really affectionate love were always sole agent in himencall unions! I have
always heard say, that stolen embraces and furtive births proved to be ever
the best, goodliest, and most beautiful; all the spirits concurring, and being
with an affectionate will strongly united together, and wholly intentive to the
performance of that only office. The heavens be praised, for having now at
length out of the mass of our diasters extracted us this dragme of comfort.

The young Lady raising her self upon her elbow, took at one look a full
survey of her child; but being reduced to such weakness as she was not
longable to rest on the feeble support of her arm, causing him (wrapped in a
rich mantle) to be laid by her on the bed, she tenderly kissing him thus
answered.

Ah Paralette: And good reason have you to say, he is a goodly fair child,
for so indeed he is (unfortunate infant!) Peradventure he pretends to make the
deformity of his destiny seem less ugly through the veil of these his goodly
beautifulness and comely making; these (alas) look not as if they were for
their birthplace beholding to homely caves seated among desolate groves, where
the necessity of shunning the daylight, presents their owner for his first
object with darkness and horror. But with this returned to weeping and then
again to kissing him, she proceeded, saying.

And seems it unto you (Mother) that an effect so beautiful ought to be a
just ease to my calamities? and that the Gods have, out of my misdeeds,
extracted that for my good, which is likely to prove to me a perpetual
occasion both of griefs and miseries? No, no, the heavens not fully satisfied
in having made me in the highest degree miserable in my own person only, are
pleased to manifest their infinite power in an endless misery; for in
extending it to another they multiply my agonies with the multiplication of the
causes of my fortunes; she was notable to utter another word, for being fallen
into a swound, more through the extremity of her grief, than the agony of her
sickness, continuing a good while in this deadly trance, whilst her women
carefully employed the best of their endeavors for the recovery of her senses.

The old Gentleman, full of noble pity, would willingly have added an helping
hand to assist her, but that he considered, that extreme afflictions admit not
of any other relief, than little-availing compassion. Besides, that the
quality of her infirmity prohibiting the presence of men, would have made his
courtesy been construed for an unexcusable point of incivility. Taking
afterward more observant notice of the place, he discovered in its poverty an
object of discorrespondent furnitures, the bed and arras hangings being all of
silk and gold. But whilst he thus stood observing what they were a doing,
Carildo a Squire appeared at the call of the Matron, which caused him to retire
from the cave, but not to part away thence, in that he conceived she was
sending him forth, nor was he indeed therein mistaken; for as this Squire would
have put himself on his way out, he came to meet him full butt; at which
unexpected sight the Squire (carried by the violence of a just judgment to an
unjust suspicion) was no less dismayed than afrighted: till the Gentleman
courteously saluting him, enquired the way to some neighboring village, where
he might provide himself of a ship, seeing that the vessel that had brought
him thither had been (through the discourtesie of the sea and tempest) wracked
on that shore; To which the Squire (perceiving now by his language that he had
entertained a wrong suspicion of him) made answer; That howbeit to find
shipping in that Island would be somewhat difficult, yet that he could not
lightly miss of fitting himself in Feacia. But in the mean time, where may I
(replied the Gentleman) provide me some victuals? In a very good place
(answered the other) for on the way that I am now going, we shall pass by the
house of a reverend Druide, who entertaines very kindly all strangers, but more
especially Gentlemen of merit as you seem to be; who also will out of his
ordinary goodness see you provided of shipping, and supplied of all other
necessaries; Being then by the Gentleman asked the name of that Island: It is
properly called (said he) Ericusa, but more commonly the Island of Adventures,
for here arrives not any Cavalier, that in a short time lights not on diverse
strange and unexpected accidents; Certainly (replied the old Gentleman) I
believe that to be most true, since my shipwreck may very well be accounted in
the number of these accidents, but much rather that which I chanced to see
within your cave: Here observing the Squire grow pale at his pronouncing of
these later words he proceeded.

Be not dismayed (my kind friend) for it was neither curiosity nor any ill
intention that brought me to pry into your secrets; only I would to God it
lay within the reach of my power to do this noble Princess any service, you
should then soon see, that I would willingly effect it even to the effusion of
my blood.

[Now the Gentleman knew not as yet, that the Lady delivered of the child was
a Princess, yet did he boldly style her so, for that he ghessed her to be
such, as well by the title given her by the Matron, as by the Crown he had
discovered above her Arms, persuading himself, that by boldly giving her that
eminent title, he might easily work out of the Squire the secrets of her being
and quality, which indeed fell out accordingly] for the Squire hearing him
relate the passages of the cave, which induced him to conceive that she was
already known unto him, had not the power to be longer silent; and the subtle
old Gentleman perceiving him come to the point he wished for, praid him to
disclose how her former fortunes had guided her to the state of her present
being: To the which he willingly condescending, said: (Sir) There is not any
body here that knows her otherwise, than by mere conjectures, so as what you
might have been casually informed of, cannot choose but be far wide off the
truth.

Corianna my Lady and Sovereign Mistress became enamoured of Lucano Duke of
Lucania, a Gentleman in all excelling qualities, the most accomplished that was,
(I will not say of all her Fathers Subjects, but) of all the Princes that are
this day in the world; For in nobility and estate there was not one that
equalled him in the whole Kingdom of Parthenope, nor elsewhere any that
exceeded him in comeliness of personage, hardiness or knightly valor, yet
were these (though rare) endowments but handmaides to others far more
prize-worthy; at leastwise to those wherewith he captivated men's minds, as his
bounty and modesty, and above all, his discretion, the moderatresse of all
other virtues, and of her self too. So that to love then the Duke of Lucania
was so far from being a fault, that he was not held for a gentle spirit that
did not both honor and (in a manner) adore him.

Corrianna then (casting both her eyes and heart, I know not whether more upon
the comely and well-featured personage or sweet disposition, and other
excelling qualities of Lucano) grew to be so affectionate both to the one and
the other, that her becoming blind thereat, so dimmed his eyes, that they
stumbled, or rather tumbled down both together over the precipice of
inconsiderate resolution, into the bottomless gulf of despairing misery.

The King her Father had solemnly promised her to the King of Sicily, for the
Prince his Son; and she very readily had assented thereunto: for, being (at
that time) a free woman, she wholly rendered her self obedient to the
disposition of her parents: But after that love (the infringer of wholesome
laws, and destroyer of good orders) had violated her modesty and corrupted her
mind, she then gave liberty to her licentious will, which afterward
occasioned his fatal end, and her utter ruin.

The Princes and Lords of that Kingdom are (for the most part) used to resort
to the Court but few months in the year; for, it being their humor to make a
glorious show, the great expenses they make therein do so far exceed their
abilities, that for not being able to maintain themselves there (any long
time) in their accustomed pomp, they are constrained (for fear of their utter
undoing) to retire themselves to their own home and means.

The Father of Lucano by thus overrunning his courses, left at his death his
estate so encumbered, as it was judged a happiness that he died (although for
other occasions he was well worthy of life) and his Mother being his guardian,
assigning an honorable allowance toward her housekeeping, and toward the
maintenance and nobly breeding up of her son (who at that time passed not
nine years of age) employed the residue toward the discharging of debts; so
that at his going out of his minority, he was so rich, that without prejudice
to his estate, he could liberally spend conformable to the unbounded greathesse
of his mind, and eminent degree of his nobility. This was the reason that
Lucano never frequented the Court but (in his Fathers time) when he was very
young, making his abode during the residue of his blooming years in foreign
countries, it being discreetly considered of his prudent mother, that ones
natural climate and air (how temperate and pure soever) is subject to the
imperfection of being incapable of it self to make any man complete; study
and instruction being of themselves dead things without Travel and Experience,
the only means to pollish the rudeness, and imbellish the deformity both of
minds and manners.

At the publishing of these nuptials, the Court was enriched with Princes,
Lords, and Knights, and pompously adorned with magnificent and glorious shows,
in so much, as Parthenope (though always gentile) seemed now exeedingly to
exceed her self, so as such as beheld her, wondered what wit could invent, or
purse minister and supply the excellency and abundance of the Artifice, and
stately curiosities that were there seen.

The walls seen (...) but (...) such (...) expressible varieties of delightsome
objects: In the morning the temples refounded with the harmonious noise of
care-ravishing Mufick, and odoriferously smelled of sense-recreating and
fragrant savours: In the afternoon their fair large streets strowed all
over with rich Caroches and proud Coursers, made a most glorious show in the
distinct medley of such a number of Nobility, who toward the setting of the
sun, retired themselves under the jetting-out windows, and fair balcones of
the Kings Palace, enriched with a comely aspect of most beautiful Ladies, a
sight which wrought in the Cavaliers an ardent desire to deserve the being eyed
and gazed upon.

The Sun (taken with the delightsomnesse of these heroical exercises) was
loath to withdraw himself to his accustomed rest, until he had seen broken
by two hundred lances (that there were burst in shivers) two hundred of his
more resplendent rays; the vapors of the earth, at that hour, serving for
sticklers to devide it equally among the tilters.

From the lists they betook themselves to the dancing hall, the first place of
admittance granted novice-lovers in Cupids Academy, and best affected solace of
rosiall and love-adoring years.

In this happy time came Lucano to the Court, entertained by the King with
particular favors, his worth speaking him the prime Peer of the Realm, but
much more his graceful aspect and Princely presence, qualities forwardly
recommended by Nature unto other men's favors. And having with all ceremonious
reverence performed his duty to the Queen, he with a
sweetly-respective-humblenesse kissed the hand of the Princess. But while they
interchangeably beheld one another, their eyes were at first sight so
constantly fixed on each others countenance, as though their objects had been
long before familiar to them, and seen elsewhere; for clearing themselves of
which ambiguity, their rays as faithful Heralds by peering while here while
there, question either the other about it. What the particular answers of
either side returned were, is unknown; only most certain it is, that the
scope of it was love, for to love they concluded.

Now the daily news of the future bridegroom began to sound harsh in
Corrianna's ear, all his rich presents were prized but as mere dross in her
esteem, nor could she endure to give the Ambassadors as much as a look,
that might any way promise them that she bare the least good liking to their
embassy, her thoughts, affection, and will were in a moment quite altered, and
if the fayning of her self sick had not deprived her of the sight of Lucano,
she from fayning had become sick in good earnest, her body being already
disposed to follow the indisposition of its mind, which was discovered by the
evident signs of the alteration of her countenance, were it for the relation
that is between it and the mind, or through her want of sleep, or rather
because from that time her heart began to make an ominous presage of her
ensuing disasters.

The sports and revellings were reduced all into one place, where in dancing
were by them laid the ruinous foundation of their utter ruin. It never came
within the reach of my knowledge, to discern which of them both was the first
that made the motion of love, but I am persuaded that (their wounds being
equal) both at the self same time sought for the proper salve to cure them
with: yet I have heard the Princess her self often say, that she alone was
in all the fault, and that the unfortunate Duke (foreseeing the future
misfortunes) resolved to go on, rather because he would not have her believe
that he little esteemed her, than because he was either inconsiderate, or any
way incapable of performing the office of a prudent and discreet Gentleman;
Nature having foreripened his bosom, because the Destinies had over-forwarded
his death. But where fortune prevails (it is most certain) that little
availes there any humane Judgment.

Their flames then being thus reciprocally revealed, there wanted nothing now
save the means and opportunity of attaining to the remedy; but because that
place was inconvenient to treat thereof, and their conference often
interrupted, (not without danger also of being observed) they resolved to talk
further thereof in her chamber; yet dancing almost every evening, and holding
on sometimes till the break of day, it behooved her to counterfeite her self
sick whenever she desired to enjoy his company.

Paralette Duchess of Magnagrecia, a principal Lady and near kinswoman to
Lucano, was her governesse, her it behoved the Princess to win of her party,
being she always lay in her chamber, and almost never departed out of her
presence; yet was it a difficult thing (I will not say) to persuade her to be a
furtherer of their desires (that being a thing impossible to be accomplished)
but to prevail with her so far, as to procure her silence, she often
menacing to reveal all to the King: Corianna for all that (certain of the
contrary for the affectionate respect she bore her, and being howsoever
resolved to go on, although the King himself had been already acquainted
with it) little regarded her threats of discovering all; yet, finding her so
averse to her desires, was enforced to disclose the whole tenor of her
secrecies unto one of her women, of whose faithfulness she boldly presumed to
be confident.

At the hour appointed Lucano came, but then the Duchess slipped away, and the
Gentlewoman, by casting a small coard out of the window, drew up a scaling
lader, and fastened it to two iron hooks, by which means he clim'd up into
her chamber, where, after their complementall salutes, she thus bespake him.

My Lord Lucano, I know not what opinion you may entertain of me, who being
already promised to a husband, have yet been the occasion of your coming into
this place; I therefore beseech you (Sir) if such boldness be otherwise
unexcuseable, that you (out of your nobleness) would yet be pleased to
extenuate it, by giving it some other name; and by so much the rather, that it
proceeds from my over-loving you, an extremity which constraines me to make you
a participant of my dangers, as I am conforted with the hope of your being a
reciprocal partaker of my love: The truth (in brief) is, that I desire to be
yours, though I cannot (in that manner as I pretend to be) without a world of
dangers, yet if the affection which you bear me be of such a carract, as that
it weighs them not, I shall then think on the means that shall work our full
content, and that is, to go with you whithersoever your discreet resolutions
shall be pleased to guide us. But if in such a degree I possess not a room in
your noble bosom, then do, I beseech you, but disclose it unto me, that I
may then resolve of some means of weaning me from the thought of it.

Much amazed remained Lucano at this so unlooked for a proposition, for that
he a little before believed, he should safely arrive at the harbor of his
desires without hazarding the vessel of his content and fortunes among the
dangerous rocks of inconsiderate and desperate resolutions; love her he did
very ardently, but yet not in such a way; nor imagined he, that she (who was
already as good as married) had any such thought in her, persuading himself
that one woman might very well be interessed in two men, under the distinct
titles of law and love; and although such a thing in it self be indeed ill,
yet thought he its badnesse much extenuated by its commonnesse, accidents of
that quality happening every day unto thousands. But what could a generous heart,
and a heart overflowne with a deluge of love (upon such a sudden pinch) resolve
of? Having therefore kissed her hand, he returned her this answer.

Right noble Madame, I beseech your Highness not to conceive me to be either
so discourteous in opinion, or so free from the engagements of affection, that
I can pass any other judgment on you, than such as obliged duty and love (my
only directors) address me unto, without either of which I have no power to
judge at all: the one shows me, that I have neither state nor life to make
account of, where I have the honor of, but simply serving you; much less the
happiness of being blessed with the enjoying you, as out of the inexhaustable
treasure of your goodness, you have (beyond all my merits) benignely offered
me; the other is such, as I cannot properly term it extreme, for, the
greatest extremes have their limits; whereas my love, being in me infinite,
produces its infinite effects; so as your Highness has no reason to doubt,
that I most loyally affect you, whom I have so great reason to love and honor.
But as for that which concerns the accomplishment of our desires, I confess
there appears no means of effecting it without evident danger both of life
and honor, not in regard of my self (for my acquist has no hazard
equivalent, nor peril that can equal it) but in respect of your royal
person. For, alas, me thinks I already see in it toilesomnesse, travels,
sufferings, a private life, a sparing, and peradventure a poor one too, being
all of them conditions contrary to your birth and quality; hard, yea and
impossible for the greatness of your mind to undergo and endure.

The Princess well pleased with this his answer, (with a countenance that
seemed to have expelled all clouds of mistrust from her till then-uncertaine
thoughts) thus cheerfully replied.

My choysest and dearest-best of truest friends, I have now of you what I most
desired, that is, the assuredness of your inclination, which facilitates unto
me all the difficulties that you in any thing propose, such (how great soever)
having no equality with my affection, which is sufficiently powerful to
dispose of impossibility it self. That which compels me to tell you this, is,
that in respect of my being already promised to a husband, it is expected I
should go home to him; but then alas! to live so deprived of you will be
impossible for me; and again to entertain you for my secret friend, honesty
forbids me; besides, my resolution of choosing rather to dye than enjoy you in
such a way. The sole inconvenience then, that will follow my determination, is,
that I, for being promised unto an other, shall disobey my Father; but those
that will follow the contrary will be many, as to dye, if either I enjoy you
not at all, or but only for a short time, (for long I am sure you could not
make your abode in Sicily) and that short time too, to the dishonor of my
self, my father and husband; such a determination carries with it, I know, an
appearance of no small mischiefs, which cannot indeed choose but prove such in
effect. What then is our best course? to resolve of nothing? Shall we take
instruction from those who perceiving imminent dangers to environ them on all
sides, dare not, for mere fear of them, use the means to prevent or shun
them, whilst their irresolution brings them on to encounter them to their far
greater ruin? The faint-hearted man cannot suffer his wound to be touched,
because he has not the patience to brook the sense of the pain, until it
grow to be so festered, that (in despite of his froward will) he must (at
last) endure both searing and lancing-irons, yea and oftentimes the loss of
the diseased member, and his life to boot. Matters of great consequence are
never unattended on by dangers of all sides. There is no man that in a
dangerous affair can make other than a dangerous resolution, but the less
dangerous is (indeed) the better resolution, and the best the most sudden.
Our case has no resolution without danger, if we retrune not to our former
state of freedom, and unlove again; But with what heart, I wonder, can you
return to what you profess to have utterly relinquisht? For my part I am
certain, that I shall never be able to unsettle my affection; if then
necessity require that you be mine, it will surely prove a lesser evil, that I
enjoy you in certainty by flying away with you hence (it being so but one sole
evil) than, being married to an other, to enjoy you in uncertainty with
evident dangers of both life and honor.

Lucano could have wished to have been at that instant rather amidst an army
of enemies, than in the straight he was in, being well assured, that if once
she grew to be obstinate, they could resolve of nothing but their utter ruin,
nevertheless he thus courteously replies.

Incomparable Lady! it lies not in the power of me, your devoted creature, to
be otherwise than altogether obsequious unto your Highness will and pleasure;
since that two wills are incompatible in one only soul; much less fitting is
it for me to advise you in an affair that tends to my own good and interest,
which altogether debilitates my judgment, and clouds it with passion; yet, so
you be but pleased to grant me leave to suspend our peculiar wills for the
better accomplishing of our mutual desires, I trust I shall be then able in
some sort to advise you, my interesses being surmounted by the feeling
consideration I have of your utter undoing. To come to particulars were
superfluous, for I am sure your Highness comprehends them better, than I know
how to display them; or if I thought that you resolved of the contrary, for
some reasons by me unconceived, I would then humbly beseech you not to demand
my counsel in it, but to command me its execution, wherein I shall ever be
most ready to obey you.

At this the Princess, surprised with a skarlet blush, thus interrupted him.

Ah Lncano, I see now you are not in love, for love is neither fcrupulous nor
forecasting; nay it hazards all, and is incapable of other consideration than
of it self. In which point she so enlarged her self, as Lncano would have
had much ado to raze out of her conceit the wrong impression of his love; if
(laying aside all persuasive reasons) he had not expressed his willingness of
flying away with her; but how to effect it they knew not, doubting whether it
were their better course to convey themselves privily away from Parthenope, or
to stay till they went for Sicily, and so steal away by the way; judging the
later to be the less dangerous, they agreed to cause to be packed up in a
little fardell all their Jewels and gold Coin, that so they might be ready for
their embarking and flight.

That night was employed in no other occasions, she pretending to extenuate
her errors with the title of matrimony, besides their minds troubled with
stinging considerations made them incapable of delight: and though he thought
to make authentic their resolved ruin with the sweetness of some momentary
pleasure, yet would she by no means yet permit him, but promised him, that
another night she would (as a loving wife) be conformable in all things to his
discretion and will.

Lovers most commonly at their parting from the objects of their loves have
their hearts swollen with content, only Lucano parted from his with a mind
overcharged with sad and heavy thoughts, yet were they so supported by the
vigor of his youth, and repulsed by the power of his desires, that he made no
great account of them, preferring the value of the reward before the greatness
of the danger; it being the more confirmed, since the Princess, constant in
her promise, was contented in the presence only of her Gentlewoman to receive
the wedding-ring, not daring as then to acquaint therewith the Duchess as
afterward she did; which was the occasion that she (good Lady) kept her bed,
deprived of the ability of stirring thence for a great while after.

Fridone Duke of Daunia was then Lord high Constable of that kingdom, a Peer
(next Lucano) the chief of the Realm, and this office of great authority,
seconded by the greenness of his blooming years, made him become both rash
and arrogant. It Is true, that he was Lucano's own Cozen, but it is not the
vicinity of blood that forms the unanimity of friends; for their Fathers
having long contended in law, left an hereditary ill will rooted in the hearts
of the sons. Also Fridone, besides this hereditary evil inclination, was of
his own nature worse affected toward Lucano, whom he envied at the heart,
because he saw him surpass all others in deserts, and excelling qualities. It
happened as he passed one day by a shop, where were a making certain tassels
for his horses, that he entered into it (not so much for any necessity or desire
that he had to see them, as that he idly loytering, sought for any occasion
to pass away the time with) where at first sight, he espied (lying upon a
shelfe) a bundle of silk, which he having snatched out of the hands of the
shopkeeper that endeavored to hide it from him, perceived to be a ladder
wrought with marveilous curiosity; and imagining it was made of purpose for
amorous thefts, he so earnestly solicited him both by fair words and
meances, that he got him at length to confess, it was the Duke of Lucania's,
brought him the day before to be mended, where it was a little worn out by the
edge of a window, Parted thence, he began to bethink himself, where Lucano
could in so short a time have gotten him a Mistress; but finding no
probability for his imagination to pitch on, he resolved to watch him narrowly
at the next show at Court, being assured, that there he should discover what
game his fancy flew at; yet found he himself (when he had in that behalf
used all the best means he could) as far to seek as at first, Lucano
showing himself still indifferent in his carriage to all, which so madded this
other Lord, as he bit his lips for mere anger, accusing himself for an
inapprehensive and simple fellow; yet still nevertheless persevering in
observing him, the heedlesse Princess gave him occasion to build a great
suspicion on the foundation of her carriage; for, being allured by the sweet
bait of his love, and by their secret matrimonial knot, she might be easily
perceived (by one that were a curious observer) to entertain Lucano with
terms both of love and respect; whereupon the other's envy increasing, and
his jelousie ingendring an indelible hatred, (himself having had the boldness
to love her too in private, and not enduring that another man should possess
what he durst not so much as aspire to) he resolved to sound the depth of his
designs, by his nightly frequenting the walls of the Palace; which he had not
done the second time, ere the Princess (under pretense of enjoying the
prospect of the water, and of going privately to take the benefit of the fresh
sea-aire in a Barge) was retired into a Castle situated on the seashore, the
more conveniently to fly away from thence; having altered her first resolution
upon the feeling of her self to be quick with child, and upon the coming of
her pretended Bridegroom from Sicily in person to fetch her away.

Lucano (in the mean time) had (unknown to his Mother) secretly mortgaged so
much of his lands, as had raised him a great sum of money, wherewith, with
the addition of his Jewels and those of the Princess (over and besides some
other few but precious houshold-furniture) he made account to lead a
contented life, which may, perhaps, be lighted on by such, who depending on the
supply of their own means, and living free from the tyranny of affections
(especially of those two disquieting ones, Covetize and Ambition) have the
fortune to live either alone, or in company conformable to their proper humor
and ways. But alas! we see it but too frequently fall out, that humane
designs prove altogether deceitful, when the execution of them wholly relies
on the favor of content-thwarting fortune.

The Duchess (who was Corrianna's governesse) seeing her thus precipitate her
self (the love she bare her having by this time wrought an alteration in her
mind) determined, now that she saw no other remedy, to participate both of
her weal and woe, especially seeing her to be with child, little (for her
own particular) regarding how the world would censure her; yet repenting,
though now too late, that she had not in time revealed all to the King, not
without fearing the being punished for them all, in case she stayed behind
them.

Lucano glad of this company so necessary and acceptable to the Princess, by
the means of a most faithful servant of his, provided himself of a pinnace,
that by chance then anchored in the haven, ready to way anchor and hoise up
sails for the East, and causing him to go and stow their baggage aboard her;
he gave order that she should ride at anchor, just but so wide off the Castle,
as she might well hear the signal that should be given, which was the
throwing of a stone into the sea, in a direct line toward her.

The Princess (immediately after midnight) came forth at a private door where
Lucano stood all alone expecting her coming, and on her waited only the
Duchess, her Gentlewoman and I laden with a burden of apparel; scarce were
we come to the door which stood to the sea-ward, when the Gentlewoman opening
it, and looking out at it, all afrighted, skreech'd out to the Duke; Look to
your self my Lord! I see people approaching: And true it was indeed, for
three men came making hastily toward us; upon this the Duke having made all of
us to get speedily aboard (the pinnace being by this time already come without
any signal at the noise of the unbolting of the door) knew one and the
foremost of them to be Fridone.

Now he (by virtue of his Constables office) might come and go any where
unquestioned, yet not without special occasion into that Castle, reserved then
(being a time free from all suspicion of hostile invasion) to the sole use of
the Princess, so as Lucano's coming thither was always by stealth, even so
was he also feign to use the like means for his entrance, and now come near
Lucano was by him thus greeted.

What Is, I pray you, the best news Cozen? And (if it may without offense be
known) whither away wend you so late? To chastize thee for thy treachery
(answered the other.) With that word their swords were suddenly drawn out, and
Lucano set upon by three at once, made short work to rid himself of two of
them, whose so unmanly assault he with two blows so repulsed, that they lay
prostrate at his feet, without hope of ever rising more to requite the
courtesy he had done them; being left now hand to hand with the Constable, he
thrust at him with his point, wherewith he ran him quite through the body; with
this he (feeling the pangs of death seize on him) advanced on so forwardly with
a desperate passage, that his mortally-wounded breast came to touch his enemies
hilts, and then throwing away his sword, he with his dagger stabbed Lucano, that
he fell to the ground, himself having the precedencie of falling before him.
All this was done in a moment, and I believe there passed not above four
Stoccadoes of a side, but all mortal, for I having hastily laid aside my
burden (accompanied with the Dukes servant) came in as speedily as I could to
his succor, but found him grovelling on the ground with a whole stream of
blood gushing out of his fainting body, yet was he alive, and as yet
unforlorne of either sense or memory: for seeing us busied about him, he said,
Leave off now, oh! leave off Carildo; sithence to employ any care about me is
but labor lost; I am alas! a dead man; with that, laying his hand upon the
wound in his throat, as though he would a little while have kept in his latest
breath, he proceeded.

Carildo, lead away the Princess and that quickly too, it will be easier for
her to obtain her pardon and reconcilement, being a freewoman, than a
prisoner, so shall she avoid the imminent calumny, and be timely delivered
of her burden: Conjure her by virtue of our true immaculate love, to support
with a generous courage this my untimely death: for my part I cannot choose but
joy, that I dye in her service. The supreme powers have been pleased to let
her, by my death, see, that I was not worthy of her: Assure her also, that if
in the other world I shall find any measure of compassion, I will then procure
a license to pass the Acheron, to come and hover about her; peradventure that
favor will not be denied me, my case being but too compassionable, besides the
privilege of lovers to continue after death in the perseverance of their
affections. There is nothing that makes me diffident thereof, but the meannesse
of my deserts, which cannot choose but fall short of the merit of so great a
glory; yet hope I with her merits help to obtain it, beauty being such a
power, as it once forced Pluto to wander out of his infernal dominions. And to
the end she be not affrighted, to see me appear all imbath'd in blood; tell
her I will come transformed into a gentle breath of wind, and will, without
either affrighting or annoying her, softly steal under her veil, and so
solace and sport my self in her beloved bosom, which as often as she feels,
tell her it is I, and pray her to receive me joyfully: Tell her also --. But
here his spirits failing him, his last will remained unexpressed, to my so
great grief, that I had undoubtedly killed my self in the place, had I not
more dearly tendered my Ladies welfare, than my own despised life. But now,
danger not affording us the leisure to vent our grief in tears, I ran to
call away the mariners, with an intention to bear him away with us whatsoever
came on it; when my companion coming running after me hastily, told me he
descried people approaching, and true it was indeed. Wherefore we highed us
aboard, crying out to the mariners to launch out, which they suddenly did,
their pinnace being manned with fourteen good Oars.

The Princess having heard the clashing of the swords, and comprehending (by
our fear, by our being alone, and by our faces all besmeared with the blood
that spowted out of the Dukes throat) the disaster that had befallen us,
incontinently swounded; the wofull-hearted Duchess, in a plight not much
better, used for reviving her the best means she could, which soon after
successefully effected, she, all enraged with passion upon her coming again
to her self, burst out into these speeches.

And what, a Gods name, mean you to do? to contend with the cruelty of
fortune and to overcome it? or to procure me a sensibility, thereby to make me
become more lively sensible of death? Carildo! how left you Lucano? I,
miserable wretch, had not the power to find out on a sudden fit words to
sweeten so great a bitterness; whereupon she seeing me so silent, asked me if
he were dead? But I, weeping afresh, knew not how to express so dolorous an
affirmative; whereat tearing her hair and face, she proceeded.

Have thou then so forsaken me Lucano? No, no, it is indeed I that have
forsaken thee; Pardon me, oh pardon me! I beseech thee my dearest lover, when
once I come again where thou art, I will never leave thee more, but will ever
follow thee, and be anew joined inseparably unto thee; With this she would
have desperately flung her self headlong into the sea, had not her garments,
the tacklings of the Bark, and all we that stood about her, hindered her from
executing her so desperate an intention.

The Duchess supporting her between her arms, comforted her the best she
could; but alas! possibility it self has no possible arguments availeable in
extreme calamities; only this one good effect it wrought, (which was) the
procuring her to be silent; so as the mariners, understanding little or nothing
of our language, could not comprehend our case or being: And although the
suddenness (at first, and afterward the renewing) of our lamentations made
them curious in better observing of both our words and actions, yet did the
ignorance of both the fact and persons keep them afar off from the
conjecture of the truth. She in the mean time never ceased from weeping,
depriving her self of all refreshing and refection, either of sleep or
sustenance, so as her body was reduced to such a weakness, and her throat
waxen so dry, that she was scarceable to speak any more; yet did she, for
all this, pronounce the name of Lucano, with such a compassion-meriting
passion, as was able to enforce even cruelty it self to bear a share in her
sorrows.

Greived to the heart was the good Duchess to see her in so woeful a plight,
yet seeing she could not persuade her to use any restorative means to her body
(already disposed to pine it self away) she bethought her self to assay if
she could any way cheer up her drooping spirits with the more sovereign
medicines of the mind; wherefore with a no less ardent than compassionable
affection she thus bespake her.

Madame! the time now presents you with an occasion to manifest the greatness
of your worth; oh then I beseech you be but pleased to consider, that Nature
having bestowed on you a talent larger than that of any other woman, as you may
therefore jusly esteem your self to be singular among all those of your sex,
so may she as justly accuse you to be above all other women living singularly
ingrate, if you make not an opportune use of her benefits. True it is, that
your crosses exceed those of any one of your sex, nay though all their
several disasters were added together, yet could they not amount to the sum
of yours; for, you have not only lost your husband, but also utterly abandoned
your country, your fortunes, your state and parents: yet (me thinks) that
she that had the resolute boldness to hazard such inestimable losses, should
not want the courage to endure and slight them with a magnanimous patience;
Fortunes game, Madame, is like that of dicing, at which no body should venture
other than such a stake as he cared not whether he won or lost, yours was
(I confess) an unlucky cast; nor is it any marvel that your loss was
multiplied upon the by, since that your hazard was a thousand to one. But will
it not be yet worse, if you, having lost that thousand, should merely, out of
a desperate folly, throw away all the rest of your stock, without reserving any
thing, if not to hazard another time at a more indifferent lay; yet, at least
wise, for settling the foundation of some better advised course of life?
Remember Madame, I beseech you, that the afflictions which the Gods send us
should serve us (and you in particular) for favorable admonitions, since they
are the means of recalling us into their love and favor; which if they seem
so grievous unto you, now that they are but the emblems of their anger; how
terrible will they then appear, when they shall be transformed into the
effects of their unappeaseable fury? It lies, you know, in their power to
reduce you to a more miserable plight than you yet are in. They have not their
hands so shortened as that they cannot lengthen them at their pleasures:
Although we cannot with the weak eyes of humane judgment discover the manner
how, which is the only argument that makes for your comfort. But if for your
corporal crosses you will needs have a corporal comfort, then do but look
into your self, and remember, that you are a bearer of a burden that will
doubtless prove an abortive, if you in time desist not from your grieving,
fasting and watching. Up, up, dear Madame, and be confident, that if worldly
fortune has disfavoured you, the heavenly will not fail to glaunce a
favorable look on your distressed state, presupposed, that you must both
aspire to, and expect it. Lucano, whose soul is, I am sure, ever present with
you, cannot choose but be much agreived at your so little esteeming that dear
pledge of his love he left you. Do him not then (oh do him not) such an
injury; he already pretends to live again to you in another quality; and yet
you, because you cannot enjoy him alive that way that you would, will in
another quality put him to death again in the person of another. This the
Duchess told her in so gentle, and yet feeling a manner of delivery, that the
Princess recollected all her weak powers to return her this answer.

Mother, the reasons of one that comforts are ever the same, though the griefs
of the afflicted be never so different; if I had but one sole loss, and one
only grief, as I have, the Gods know, but too too many of either, I am
persuaded you would still comfort me with the self same arguments; as indeed
the intellect has not conceits proper for all misfortunes, nor can one and the
same salve serve to cure all manner of sores; some afflictions there are, that
admit of no consolation, for want of comfort proper and proportionable to their
peculiar degrees; make trial of it in mine, and you shall see, that every one
is of it self worthy of those reasons you infer for all.

Can there any grief come nearer ones heart, than the loss of ones country?
how many have chosen to die miserably in it, rather than to live any where
else? Our goods and means, are not they numbered among our chiefest felicities?
yet alas! I have lost them all. Now for my state and quality, what woman will
not (for this only respect) deem me the most unfortunate of my sex, that am
from an adored Queen become an ordinary, unknown, yea and disrespected woman?
And to come to my parents, what greater misery can there be imagined, than to
lose the loving care of a provident Father, and the sweet comfort and
charilytender affection of a dear Mother, and to remain an orphant deprived
of the privilege of ever more invoking those endeered names? then for my
husband; it is, I grant, to a disaffecting wife, a happiness to be rid of a bad
husband; but otherwise, where there is true, real, indissoluble, and
reciprocal love, it is a misery that cannot be paralleld. The loss of
country, means, fortunes, state, dignity, and parents, bring with them a
multitude of heart-stinging anguishes, but yet with limits, because time may
wear them all away; but the loss of a loving and a deserving husband (being
withal a man every way most worthy and accomplished) is to an affecting wife
the sum of all misfortunes, in so much as that she is not able to endure the
want of him, without ever leading an ever-dying-life: Moreover yet, if things
in this world be not such as they seem, but such as we imagine them to be,
especially in subjects of extreme affection, then certainly my misfortunes
far surpass those of all others, since for the enjoying of a husband
agreeable to my own hearts desire, I esteemed it an happiness to become
unhappy with the loss of my country, means, dignity, fortunes, state and
parents; nay I would have bin contented to have lost more too, had I but had
more to lose. (Here the Duchess would wilingly have replied, but she
commanding her silence proceeded.) Besides all this, I have lost mine honor,
oh that mine inestimable jewel mine honor! which you have not as yet
reckoned, supposing, perhaps, that for being placed among imaginary things, it
was not at all to be esteemed of; but in my case, my disobedience to my Father,
my breach of a marriage concluded on my own word, and my flight from my native
country, have all relation to the rule of common honor, against which I have
not imaginarily but really offended.

As for the talent you say Nature has bestowed on me, I am full little (God
wot) beholding to her for it: Since privileged spirits have (besides the
acuteness of the understanding) an equal quickness of sensibility, so as
who-so is most apprehensive, is likewise most sensible: Again, to contrast
with crosses and to overcome them, proceeds not from the privilege of Nature,
but from an habit acquired by us; which if I own (as it is not likely, since I
have not been yet much enured to ill fortune) I then have it among so many
thorns, that it is a great marvel, if it be not by this time torn to pieces.

To game with-fortune is the trade of all that live, so to be of the losing
hand is ordinary, but yet not to be quite undone; for that is incident only to
persons extraordinary as I am, Princes seldom lose without being utterly
ruined: yet should I not be (for all that) much blamed for hazarding so much as
I did, for great and right precious was the stake that I hoped to win, which
cannot be valued either by quantity or weight, One precious Jewel is more
prized than many masses of gold.

Now for what concerns the Gods, I know not how to answer you, for I neither
know nor comprehend their ways; no, I have (I confess) but too much straid
besides them, yet if their mercies exceed our offenses, wherefore have they not
then exceeded mine? They will raise me up (you will say) and again restore me
to my former state! In good time; but if I voluntarily forsook it for Lucano's
sake, and they taken him from me, how can they then any way ease my grief,
seeing he is the only thing I want and desire? Is their Omnipotency (can you
tell me) so regulated, as to extend even to contradictories? Can they let me
have him in the same instant both dead and alive? More she would have spoken,
but the good Duchess well knowing that extreme passions minister unwholesome
conceits, interrupted her, by inferring consolative reasons; and she after
patiently listening unto her, finding her self at length convicted with her
discreet arguments, returned to tell her.

Mother, the Gods are not so firmly bound by the unabsolveable oaths they vow
by the infernal Lake, as you have bound me to let him live to me, upon the
interest of the burden I go now with child of. Live then I will, that he may
lead a living, and I an ever-dying life, among perpetual tears in eternal
sorrows. Here she thought to have proceeded further, thereby to have vented
out her grief, but the watery humor abundantly flowing from her eyes, so
suffocated her words as she could not.

In the evening she was persuaded to taste of some restorative conserves,
continuing so to do the other days following, until the mariners touched in
this Island to refresh themselves. But then she leaving us a-boord with the
goods, attended only by her women, would by all means go ashore; where
espying (by chance) the cave you saw, she boldly entered it, and out of the
little esteem she had any more now of her life, a desire took her to settle
her abode there, for that she judged it a place most proper to live concealed
in.

The mariners therefore, after being largely rewarded, were licensed, and my
fellow servants and I (necessity being our crafts-master) hewed out the inside
of the cave, and contrived it into diverse convenient rooms that you yet saw
not; on its backside we erected a wall, covered so artificially with brambles
and briars, as no man would imagine to be there either house or garden. As
soon as we were thus accommodated, the Duchess Lucano's man, clad in a
pilgrims habit, to Parthenope, to learn out what succeeded after our
departure, whilst we with extreme patience endeavored to moderate the
extreme impatience of the Princess, who calling me (one day) unto her, would
needs know of me, if Lucano spoke any thing of her as he lay a-dying; for, all
that while had not I related any of his speeches, for fear of augmenting her
afflictions: But now holding my self obliged in conscience to perform the
will of the dead, I imparted her all he had enjoined me to tell her. A strange
thing it was, to see what a sudden effect it wrought in her. She searched in
every corner of the cave, without finding the least breath of wind, the air
being so calm, as there was not a leaf that stirred; till come to the entry
door, she there felt a gentle blast of air, (occasioned by some subtle
exhalation, that arising there, were kept in by the air, which being issued
from the concavous content of the cave whirled round in that straight; for
being so beaten back as it could not get out, but was forced to turn back
again, converted into a little breath of wind through the door where the
Princess stood) which she with opened arms welcomed, conceiting, that she
embraced Lucano; accompanying this act with tears and words so compassionable,
as none of us could refrain from weeping with her; this imagination nourishing
her so efficaciously, as (I am confidently persuaded) that but for it she had
been dead ere this time.

Moreover, she happening sometimes to dream that Lucano was not dead, we made
a show of believing it, inferring, that the self same visions are never
reiterated but in dreams unquestionably true and certain, the souls of
lovers communicating their plights and beeings one to another by natural
(though unknown) ways, so persuading her upon this uncertainty to suspend the
certainty of her grief, till the return of Olmiro: (for such is the name of
Lucano's servant whom we expect from Parthenope.) True it is, that then
peradventure we shall be in a worse case than now we are in, being he can
bring us no other news, than such as shall augment our griefs; yet shall we
then (maugre the worst that can befall us) remove from hence, which will prove
no little breathing to the suffocation of our so grievous disasters.

Much did the good old Gentleman commiserate the so miserable case of so worthy
a Princess, and feign would have been a furtherer in the employment of
removing her thence, but that he saw no means of effecting it till Olmiro's
return; yet, but that a greater tie of duty called him thence, he had staid
there of purpose to expect the opportunity of serving her: Having therefore
kindly thanked Carildo, he told him, he was sorry at the heart for the
ill-fortunes of so great a Princess, and the more for her being (until the
hearing of more certain news) incapable of resolving how to dispose of her
self; howbeit he hoped that his return would be in a time convenient enough
to dedicate to her his service, which he unfainedly meant to perform, it being
a case that bound any Gentleman to put a helping hand unto; here observing
Carildo become a glad man at his offer, he on and told him, that it behoved him
of necessity to strike over into Greece for a certain affair which would not
detain him above two or three months time, and that if it stood with the
conveniencie of his Ladies service to stay there but for that small while, he
would come and serve her in all things, especially in removing her from that
most noisome habitation so obnoxious to her health, and would wait on her
whithersoever she pleased to go: And (withal) would take on him as though
he came thither accidentally, and also (for giving her no cause of other
suspicion) attend him without the cave, that so gotten out thence they might
confer, and resolve of what should be done.

Full well pleased was Carildo with what they agreed on, conceiting, that the
heavens had sent thither that Gentleman: (for years and gravity fittest of any
man for such an employment) yet for his better assurance thereof (after
yielding him respective thanks) he craved his name; which not being denied
him, and to him by report well known (as it is a thing ordinary to know the
names of great persons eminent in the Courts of Princes) he desired to kiss
his hand.

Continuing reciprocally in courteous language each to other, they walked on
till they entered into a very pleasing site for prospect, where, on the brow of
a little hillock, stood erected an homely house, and close by it a fair
Temple, encircled all about with meadows and a delightsome shady grove; here
it was that the Druide dwelled, and here took Carildo his leave, whose daily
exercise was to go see if any Vessel came thither from the West, to the
satisfaction of the impatient Princess.

Now the way to get up to the hill passed through the wood, on the one side
whereof stood erected under a lofty Siccamore-tree the Image of Jove the
preserver, and on the other one of Venus with her Son; in the shade of the
tree at the foot of the Goddess, the Gent: (who was the good old Count of
Bona) might see, sleeping with his face upwards, a goodly and well-featured
young Knight, by sight under seventeene years of age, his shield painted over
with a violet-browne, besprinkled with tears rested on the footestall of the
statue; and not far thence stood grazing a horse of such perfections, as
nothing that tended to singularity was wanting in him. He was of color bay,
with leg, tail, and mane black, daintily crisped and platted with silk, his
head little and lean, full of veins and nerves, was beautified with a white
star in the forehead, and adorned with short thin pricked up ears, and a
goatish large sparkling eye, his nostrils were flaggy and so puffed out, as there
lay discovered to the beholders eye their fiery colored insides, and withal
wide enough to evaporate the often fumes of his proud lungs; his mouth ragged,
full of thick foame ever champing on the Bitt, his neck short, and eminently
hooked in the bent of its crest; broad and ample was his breast, his back short
and dented down to his very tail, his crupper large and fleshy, his legs
straight and lean with one white foot, a short pasterne with a hard, high
concavous, and round huffe.

The sight of the horse, and the well-promising demeanor of the Squire that
stood near him, bred in the Count a curiosity of knowing his Masters name,
which after saluting him he demanded. I am sorry Sir, (answered him the Squire)
that I may not obey you, but hope the command imposed on me to conceal it,
will free me from the censure of behaving my self unmanerly to-you-wards, with
this much only I can acquaint you, that he is of a remote country, and travels
abroad guided by a desperate mellancholy; something more he would have said,
but stopped his speech, when he saw the Count observe the Druide descending with
a Gentleman in his company, who seemed to contend as they came, the Druide with
grave gestures, the Gentleman with vehement but humble ones. The Count thought
it unfitting to intrude (as then) into their company, seeing them so serious in
a discourse (to his ghessing) very important; but retiring behind a fir-bush,
caused the Squires to do the like.

Being come before the Image, they adored it, where afterward espying the
young Knight that lay asleep, and observing him a while to their wonder, they
passed-on farther without awaking him. What the two discoursed of, these could
not over-heare, till a pretty while after, their passion transporting them to
high words.

Sithence you then will not (said the Druide) be satisfied with what is reason,
I cannot help it; And does your Highness (answered the Gent.) call it reason
to be confined here without having regard to what you should? And to what
(replied he) should I have a regard to, but to my self? Mary to these (said
the other) whose weal and woe depends solely on your Highness; or if so great
a tie of duty cannot yet prevail with you, (since you pretend to be quite
stripped of all humane affections) yet let the duty which you owe the Gods, work
something on you, who preordain'd you should be borne a Prince, to govern the
people committed to your charge, a charge which you without their consent
cannot lay by, no more than they may without your assent accept of any other
Sovereign Lord. And thus much my duty binds me to tell you; nor pretend I
hereby to persuade you to give over this kind of life, which (you say) is so
pleasing unto you, though (to the end it may prove yet more delightsome by your
continuing it without either scruple of conscience or vexation of spirit) I can
do no less than beseech you to but only return home to comfort the King
your Father; and then (having once settled the Realme-affaires) either to
return hither, or lead a solitary life there, as shall best suite with your
liking: what the answer was could not be understood, because in respect of
their discoasting them, these could not (being so far off them) hear other
than the confused sound of their voices, so as the Count (become curious by
reason of what he had heard) had now a great desire to know who he was,
thinking the extremes to be passing strange between a populous court and
pensive solitariness, a spacious Kingdom and an homely hermitage. Whilst in
this manner reasoning with himself he traced him with an observant eye, he
might see him, having taken in hand a book from under his arm, part from the
Gent: who the same very way returned much confused in mind. The Count stepping
out to go meet him, they courteously saluted each other, and the Gent:
understanding the manner of his landing in that Island, bade him be of good
comfort, with assuring him, that he could not be unsupplied with shipping by
such time as, for refreshing himself after his sea-sufferings, he had made a
competent abode in that place, which though it were remote and but a kind of
an hermitage, was yet sufficiently commodious to entertain Cavaliers, for
which sole end it was builded: The Count (well pleased to find in such a place
such unexpected courtesy) said unto him: Me thinks (Sir) this hermitage has a
society convenient to it self, which is the variety of sites, and objects
therein, that here all about are to be seen, effects of industry and
invention more than ordinary; which induce me to believe, that the religious
Founder thereof has fashioned out the rongues of a ladder to heaven by these
of a foreseeing and quick-witted humanity, the means of enjoying both the one
life and the other. I conceive not what it is that you mean (answered him the
Gent:) sithence that though the love to serve the Gods ought indeed to spring
from the knowledge of things, yet believe I not those things to be (for all
that) humane, especially if it be true that our election depends not
immediately on us, but on him that calls us; howsoever it be, such an election
should have wings to raise us to heaven without any mixture of terrene causes,
and without making one and the same things serve both for cart and wheel. By
all this meant the Gentleman the Druid's person, which (because the Count well
conceived him not) occasioned between them a long dispute. The first
maintained, that the vocation of such was no true calling, who either wearied
with paines-taking, or forsaken of their pleasures, make choice of a solitary
life; such motions proceeding neither from the spirit, nor from any desire of
serving the Gods, but either from the desire of repose, or from the
irkesomnesse of not being able to satisfy their own corrupt affections; which
the Count opposing not, only added, that the Gods call men sundry ways, and
that that of wordly interesses manifested their power in converting what was
ill into good. But the Gentleman (whose mind was transported with passion) not
able to contain himself within the compass of generalities, said unto him;
And would you think such a vocation befitting a Prince, who being tied in duty
to procure the welfare of his Father and Country, abandons both the one and
the other, merely out of a frantic mellancholy for his love's proving
unfortunate. But the Count not resolving him, but demanding such an example: I
will (answered the other) satisfy you willingly, hoping that you also will
(since the Gods have conducted you hither) satisfy the honest desire I have to
be by you assisted in so pious a work, sithence the Druide that you saw, is
he, who (being deceived in his conceits) goes about to cover his affects with
the pretext of serving the Gods, pretending that charity toward himself which
he denies to others, like those who being overcharged with debts for fear of
disincommodating themselves, pay not one of their creditors though he starved
for want of it; with this, taking him gently by the hand, he proceeded.

I beseech you (kind Sir) let us retire to yonder shade, where you shall be
fully informed of our case and being, to the end, that knowing us you may be
moved to take compassion of him, me, and infinite others, who bear a share in
his sufferings; I am confident that you (worthy Sir) may with the authority of
your reverend aspect and presence much further my charge, it being unpossible
that the reverence of hoary age work not much in a young Prince, already, by
reason both persuaded and convicted: As for time and opportunity to accomplish
it, we shall not miss of that, it being his ordinary use to walk through
this grove for the preservation of his bodily health, though it conduce nothing
to that of the spirit, which the Count, not contradicting, leaving his Squire
to accompany the other, sat him down by him to hear his story.

The young Knight (in the mean time) over-wearied with past watchings,
continued his sleep, arrived-upon unexpectedly by a Lady, both for complexion,
beautiful comeliness, and comely beauty worthy to be numbered among the
fairest; she was clothed in a sky-colour'd, silk gown embroydered with gold
and pearl, which she wore after the fashion most used by Nymphs, tucked up
with a rich girdle about her slender waste, so as there lay discovered to the
eye her silvered buskins, fastened with ties of riband, which in the form e of
leaves encircled in the midst of them a little rose of diamonds; her breast
sparingly discovered, dispersed not elsewhere the beholders sight, but
engrossed it wholly to it self, without giving it any occasion to repent it is
employment; the parts subject to excellency and defect indifferently
appearing; her hair neatly smoothed but dishevelled, made disorder become so
seemly and delightsome, that never any order could boast of such passing
seemlinesse: There encompassed them for honor (for, for ornament themselves
were their sole adorners) a gay and odoriferous garland: Her dainty hands (the
amorous hooks of hearts) discovered transparently, how slender-boned they
were, fleshed tender, soft, and almost unpalpable; exquisitely proportioned and
long, delicately hilly, and lasciviously dimpled, adorned with golden
bracelets, interlaced with claspes that hooked together hearts inlaid with
diamonds. She was thither come all alone, carrying with her a basket of Roses,
and in a little silver vessel quick embers. The sight of the Knight staid her
not from adorning with her flowers the Goddess and her little one, nor yet
from burning some of her sweet incense, the odoriferous fume wherofawoke him;
so as rising from off the ground, and gazing on her with astonishment, he could
hardly (as he had reason for it) believe himself; opening therefore his eyes
better (and then yet more fixed in his error) he opened their fluces, and
with a flood of tears, burst her out these speeches.

Oh with what words should I thank you, the Lady of my life, Liarta, who
having already but too much obliged me whilst you lived a mortal, are (now
that you are celestial) come to undo me with your unmeritable favors? Is it
possible that my plaint could mount so high, and move you, enthroned among the
glory of the happy, to come and comm^^tate my griefs? Which said, he (rapt
with a conjugall love) ran to embrace her, which she avoiding, he spoke on;
And will you not then (dear life of my soul) permit me to claspe you in my
unfortunate arms? No: I am sure you cannot, for I know you to be unpalpable;
yet let me enfold and hold within the circle of my arms this faite Image,
which though dead to the world, lives yet in the center of my heart; with that
offering again to embrace her, and she shunning him as before.

I perceive it is not then true (proceeded he) that to the blessed spirits,
together with the affects of virtue, does (for their greater bliss and glory)
remain the memory of things past; for then (I am sure) you would not have
forgotten your Almadero: Or was there perhaps together with your mortal body
buried my immortal love, as unworthy to be blessed with you in heaven, to make
me only among all upon earth most miserable and unfortunate? What! are souls
dumb, or can they not distinguish words as well as represent personages? But
(be it as it be will) I am sure I see you, in whose fair countenance I yet
discern the lillies I so esteemed; but ah! what is become of the roses? alas!
death has gathered them off. Which the Lady with a beck of her head denying,
and gently smiling, showed him those of the Goddess. When he (being now come
to himself somewhat better) perceived she was not indeed the same he
believed her to be, and would therefore have craved her humble pardon, but so
suddenly lost both his speech and conceit, that he could not accomplish his
intent.

She that attentively had observed him in all his deportments, and no less
liking his person than pitying his passion, returned him this answer. I am not
(gentle Sir) the Lady you take me for, since I have a real body, am yet a
woman and live; nor enjoy I ought that is celestial, save the sole hope of
this Goddess. I am very sorry that I awoke you, and crave you pardon for it,
but being come hither expressly to adore the Goddess, I could do no less
than offer her my accustomed oblations.

The Knight with a greedy eye examining in her all those beauties that in a
fair woman could be desired, (dispensing withal now, if not forgetting, his
loyal affection to his Liarta) makes her this reply.

The favor (fair Lady) that I receive from you, is of it self too great to
be merited, without the unexpressible addition of these
your-to-me-too-too-courteous satisfactions: yet wonder I not thereat, knowing
that as the Gods extend not their liberality unto us according to our dignity,
but conformable to their abundant benignity, so cannot those divine beauties of
yours, choose but participate of the self same nature, which if when
unimployed it excel the loftiest imaginations, will (no doubt) when it is well
employed surpass all humane merit; both courtesy and beauty in you with equal
pace march on to exeedingnesse; so as I being too feebleeyed to behold the
shining splendour of the one, am dazzled with the glit-Tering rays of the other,
nor can I possibly correspond with any parity an imparity so discorrespondent;
for, having been already dazzled with the like beams, I find my self so
weake-sighted, that my very intellect being, together with my senses and optic
organs enfeebled, cannot express, nor fully discern the good which in its ill
it receives: yet will I not (for all that) forbear to acknowledge, merely
out of my being sensible of the greatness of your merits, how deeply I am
engaged unto you; to the end you may both know me to be yours, and withal (so
you be pleased so much to honor me) declare me being such for your Knight
and servant.

The Lady (who by nature was endued with a vivacity disposed to a
pawze-not-intermitting-motion) impatient at so long a discourse, would gladly
have many times interrupted him, being inclined rather to speak than hear;
but restrained or rather curbed by a certain unknown force, she stood
patiently-silent, no otherwise than does a generous Courser, who though he
bite and champe the Bit, refuses not (for all that) to obey his rider. The
sight of this gentle Knight disliked her not, though she yet liked not well
the passion of his old affection, so as making as though she meant to turn
from him with an odd kind of between an amorous and disdainefull look, she
would often move her lips, eyes, and body in the action of parting, whilst part
yet she neither could nor would. Till observing him afterward silently expect
what she would say, and his discourses (contrary to his custom) seem short
unto her, her self withal become now tongue-tied with new affects, and (for
so being new) undisgested.

Sir Knight (said she) the freeness of your speech, and your language it
self speak you a stranger, in respect whereof though you have not a little
offended me, yet judge I you worthy of both excuse and pardon: For know (Sir)
that wives live in this Country subject to laws not common, whilst husbands
live after the particular laws of their own passionate-unjust wills; Indeed
the maids that live free from them, observe no other law than that common one
of honesty, conserving themselves (like stars in all aspects) entirely
beautiful; whereas the married women have their wanes in the aspects of their
husbands, from whom proceed both their light and the manner of using it: For
my part (Sir) I am a married woman, and though living in a Country favorable
to women, yet with a husband disfavourable to a wife; his age and my youth, his
jealousy and my honesty, with other contrary conditions (which for modesties
cause I conceal) have occasioned many wanes, but many more eclipses to my
liberty; your thus-entertaining me therefore with private conference is so
far from steeding me, that on the contrary it would much prejudice me, if
any body but saw you here with me, since your qualities as well by women as by
men will ever presuppose arguments of suspicion, if not of blame, especially in
regard of me, who (for many respects) might have reason to love any other than
the Prince my husband. As for your courteous proffers, I lovingly thank you
for them, and to rid from you all suspicion of my being discourteous unto you,
I kindly and gratefully accept your good will, and so commending you to the
Gods, I am gone: Yet as though she had been nailed to the earth, stirred
never a foot, but standing with her eyes immoveably fixed on those of the
Knight, seemed to expect rather a reply than a farewell.

Behold we Liarta, before so heavily sighed for, now quite forgotten, yea and
of a spirit once reputed constant; the ashes (in fine) burn not, they are no
more than the memorials and marks of an extinguished fire, and death is no
progress but an end of love, whose object are neither carcasses nor buried
bones, but a living body, the rather if it be well featured and much more if
accompanied with a gentle mind, nay though it be such as participates of
neither, yet shall it suffice that it be endued with affections proportionate
to the nature or (at leastwise to the) imagination of the lover. But to thee
deceased Liarta what imports all this? who if thou have now no more being (as
fools argue) thou have surely then no organs to express thy grief by; or if
thou live (as it is most certain thou do) then questionless thy present
being (freed from the rags of flesh) cares no more for our materialities; but
being united to that first essence, enjoyes in a pure way of action the purity
of actions, loathing now what it formerly loved in the material being of thy
senses, so that since there now remains with thee no other love, than such as
wholly conformes it self with the effect of the spirit and virtue, thou scorn
and abhorrest the other; and now that thou art blessed, griev'st only, that
he (being yet earthly and mud) does wallow so in earth. But return we now to
the Knight, who by the words and actions of the Princess was fatally caught,
insomuch as quite altering his purpose and designs, he (resolved now both to
love and wait on her) thus bespake her.

The heavens forbid (Madame) that I who was borne to serve you, should ever be
the occasion of your least discontent. The duty of a Cavalier is not to ease
but to remove and rid the afflicted from misery. How then can I endure, that
you so deserving should be so unworthily dealt withal, whilst I more than any
other am obliged to procure your content? It was no vulgar fortune (sweetest
Madame) that conducted me hither, but that eternal moderatrix, to the end
your wants might by my means be supplied, since Nature made me a King to
attempt it, dignity a Knight to effect it, and love an Orator to crave it at
the hands of your promising-goodnesse: Let not your husbands jealousy any whit
dismay you, for I will protect you both against him and all the world. Yet if
you will not either credit or favor me for the present, vouchsafe then (I beg
of you) to command my stay here, till such time as after being ascertained of
both my quality and affection, you may be pleased by accepting my service, to
favor my desires.

The title of King wrought on the Princess inclination as much (if not more)
than the beauty and youth of this young Knight, but espying (with that) from a
far off the servants that came for her; My Lord (said she) the time permits
me not to answer you, see yonder where my folk come, I pray you let them not
see you, but lay your self down distended as you were. For the rest, since I
may not pretend any authority over you, you may do what suites best with your
own liking.

The Knight well comprehending that these speeches tended not to a refusal (to
obey her) squatted close to the ground, following her nevertheless with his
eyes as far as he could see her, and fixing her shape and gesture so deep
in his thoughts, as he had not for a good while the power to get up, affording
thereby leisure to the Cavaliers (whom we left sitting under the trees shade)
to finish their discourse.

By this time they two were retired to a place, whence they might (for doubt of
being surprised by the Druide) see him as he returned; and the Squires having
withdrawn themselves, afforded them the conveniencie and leisure of speaking
freely; whereupon the other (losing no time) said unto the Count; I shall
(noble Sir) recite you the strangest story that ever you heard or read of;
wherein you may observe truly miserable effects, occasioned by youthful
passions, imaginations that corrupt health, mellancholy that physic abhorres,
and in these the occasion too that I have to find my self agreeved: Be then
(Sir) pleased to understand, that among the Royal and Sovereign
Scepter-swayers of no less fair than fertile Albion, one of them is entitled
King of Venedotia, who by a fair and virtuous wife had issue three sons and
two daughters, whose comeliness of personage and surpassing beauties were such,
as although the Island for these endowments bears away the bell from all the
people of the world, and Venedotia from the rest of the whole Island, yet did
the Royal House as far again surpass that way all the Families of that
Kingdom, as the condition of a Subject is exceeded by one who borne to
superiority, bears the Royal thereof, which are titles and Crowns. The elder
they waxed in years the more grew they (though borne all of one and the same
body, and sprung all from one and the same seed, to differ in qualities,
affections, and inclinations, to falsify the common tenent, that arguments of
the body can determine any ones wit and disposition: virtues and vices being
here individually divided; insomuch, as, look what portion of good was owned
by some of them, even so much possessed the others of evil, and because there
was a disparity in the number, badnesse would (without any nay) seize on the
greater part, so as two of them being wholly inclined to virtue, the other
three gave themselves altogether over to all lewdness and dishonest
abominations. The bringing up of them was in every respect equal, or if
otherwise, yet but so much unequal or different as was due to the difference
of the disequality of the sexes, since for the rest, as time, direction, and
years, the one enjoyed not any privilege more than the other: Their virtuous
Father thinking it unfitting to be partial in the breeding of his children,
sithence Nature had given them him without partiality in bringing them into
the world.

The last borne among the males was called Feredo, the very same you (in a
Druid's habit) saw with me erewhiles; of the other two, the firstborn was
named Edmondo, the other Galfrido. Scarce was Feredo full eighteen years of
age, when Gelinda his eldest sister fell in love with him, whilst Edmondo and
Galfrido (blinded with the like affection) doted on their younger sister named
Adeligia. Full glad was the King to see his children so loving each to other,
whilst he (good man) was far mistaken, for conceiving himself blessed in
that, which made him afterward an example of misery to all Fathers.

Gelinda nourished her fire so covertly that none could perceive it, nor durst
she indeed discover it to her brother, whose integrity (which was a natural
inclination to goodness) curbed if not terrified her, besides her own
conscience accusing her of the deformity of her love. ^^ine would she have
shaken it off, when it showing her the sweets of its delights, ever also
multiplied by imagination, deprived her of the sight of her internal lights;
no servant had Feredo more diligent about him than was his sister; for were he
disposed to exercise himself in any feats of Chivalry, his officious sister
(not trusting his Squires) would with her own hands arm him; if armed he
happened to be before, she (forsooth) must go ^^ite him; and if disarmed, 'twas
she that rubbed and dried him; were he (...) ride a hunting, she would never
leave him, but be his perpetual companion; no Roe-buck nor Greyhound was to
be found, that for velocity surpassed her or her swift Courser: no precipice
could stop her careere; If descending she were, she seemed to precipitate; if
running, to flee: In affronting wild beasts she always prevented him, though
then ever with a panting heart too, for being still jealous and fearful of
her own in another life. In fine, she so behaved her self, that Feredo had
been stupid, if he had not perceived the occasion of all these courtesies,
instructed therein no more now by a vulgar prudence, but by the love of the
other two brothers toward Adeligia; for which he abhorring them, abhorred
also Gelinda for the self same regard, conceiting with himself, that the very
thought of an affection so abominable was able to attaint him with guiltiness.
For the first remedy, he determined to shun her society, without taking on
him to conceive her designs; so as he continued to ride a hunting, but
without her company; whereat when he saw her grieve, he excused himself with
displaying before her the inconvenience that time had laid before his
consideration, how that a Princess ambuscadoed between hunters and savage
beasts, incurred continually manifest hazard of her life; beseeching her
therefore to stay at home; or if she would needs go, he wished it might be
when her mother and sister went. This so over-chary circumspection pleased not
well Gelinda, especially when she once penetrated into the cause thereof. And
he on the other side (seeing that obstinate courtesy is wont to argue
discourteously in who-so denies to accept it) knew not how to disenvelop
himself otherwise than by the hope he had of weaning her from it by little and
little without discontenting her.

The other Brothers (in the mean while) hotly solicited Adeligia, whose
shunning them could not serve her turn. Edmundo the elder and bolder of the
two, had the audacity to express himself unto her one day in these speeches.

I know not wherefore I affecting you (Adeligia) far more than a sister, you
love not me somewhat more than a brother. Whereto she answered: (My Lord) if
I loved not you, I should surely hate my self, yet if in loving you I
surpassed the limits of a sisters love, I should then neither love my self nor
you, but were worthy of both your hatred and scorn; The Prince could as then
make her no reply, for his sister favored with the occasion of her mothers
coming (who the very same instant entered into the chamber) was rid of him for
that time, though it steeded her not much (sithence he still made use of any
opportunity of meeting her) but much less Galfrido, for being the occasion of
depriving him of the means of ever speaking to her any more. A resolution
irksome and heavy to one, but mortal to the other two; for the Brothers gone
one day out on hunting, and in chasing the Heart (happening to be severed a good
distance off the rest) the Prince made a stand, that Galfrido might pass
before him, and then suddenly running him with his sword through and through,
bare him sheere off his saddle, alighted that he was off his horse to dispatch
him, he might perceive him stark dead before: Returned home alone, the Father
(who some days before had observed both the misaffections and disaffections of
his sons) ran with his imagination to the very truth; and giving thereupon
order to some few (but trusty Gentlemen) to go in search after him, he was the
self same night found out, and carried into his chamber.

I will not take on me the task of expressing his heaviness, because the
tongue is not a pensill to pourtray the grief of a Father, to whom the death
of one son may give just occasion of becoming cruel against the other.
Having therefore called before him the Prince, he showed him the corpse, with
asking him if he had slain him: but seeing him deny it in away that argued
somewhat of guiltiness, he said unto him; he that makes no scruple to murder
a Brother, will surely make no great conscience to tell a lie: the blood that
at thy appearing gurled out of this wound, both convicts thee, and requires at
my hands Justice, which I will not deny it; Only I am sorry that thy quality
(in consideration of my self) permits thee no other executioner; with this,
snatching out his sword (not as yet wiped fully dry from the blood of his
Brother) he ran it in his heart; and then (causing them to be laid in two
coffins) he strictly commanded, that this tragical case might dye with his
sons; charging all that knew it, to give out, that they were sick, and three
days after dead of a pestilentiall fever.

Well might the fear of offending the King tie men's tongues (which are subject
to sense) but not their judgments, which being internal and free, enjoy the
privileges of a free exemption from any humane dominion: But the best was,
that the Kingdom made no great reckoning of the loss of either, both of them
being by their behavior grown to be as unworthy of bemoaning as of life. But
now the Sister (good soul) the innocent occasion of the evil, could not be
either comforted or quieted, till her Father permitted her to retire to the I Will
of Man, where under the discipline of certain religious persons there
residing, she dedicated the rest of her days to a contemplative life. Only
Feredo now remained of the youngest the eldest, and his so being the sole son
had more endeer'd him to his Father, if his other worthy qualities had not
been more singular and respect worthy, than his being an only Son.

Gelinda (having understood the true tragic story of her Brother (mortified
her self a little, or at leastwise somewhat deprest the growing fire of her
affection from suggesting occasion of more disgrace: till seeing Feredo
increasing together with his years, in comeliness of person, virtue, and the
love of all, she deemed it very inconvenient for her to faulter in her
affection. Banishing therefore from her memory the sufferings and shame of her
Royal House, which till then taught her to be cautelous if not honest, she
began to prosecute her desires anew, with such fervent affection and
winning-allurements, that the Fort of Feredo's constant goodness remained
therewith shaken if not battered. But because in him goodness prevailed more
than youth, and continency more than the intising baits of an enchanting
love; he purposed (for clipping the wings of her incestuous hope) to go live
far off her, praying his Fathers assent thereunto, under pretext of going to
travel, which he no sooner asked than obtained; for, the good old King
(having noted his Daughters incestuous affection, and fearing the arising
thence of some new accidents) found his absence for some time to be to
purpose, hoping that time would in that while dry up in her that ill humor
with the medicine of oblivion, or some other new affections easy to be
exchanged for old, especially (as he imagined) in the inconstant nature of
that amorous sex.

But Gelinda more constant than the virtue of constancy permitted her,
obstinate in retaining her first designs, and resolved either to die or
transmute Feredo from a brother to a lover; emboldened with her illegitimate
love, and raised by her mortiferous resolution within a degree of the height of
impudence, taking him from the company of some young Gentlemen that entertained
him in discourse, and conducting him in her hand to the garden, she thus
bespake him.

I hold it (my Lord and Prince) a thing superfluous, to consume the small time
I have to stay with you, in any other than a free and brief language: sithence
neither the growth of years have been sufficient to give you notice of my
affection, nor the late tragedy of our Brothers served for a president to
mollify you, which me thinks it should, if not for my loves sake, yet (at
least) for the honor of our Father, our House, and our selves: you are now
going to travel, for not having me near you, and conceit (perhaps) by so
doing to shun me; but (alas) you much deceive your self; for I am resolved,
not only to be near you, but also closely to cleave to you, as does your
inseparable Genius or shadow; and if by violence you discoast or avoid me, I
will then so accoast and haunt you, as (do what you can) you shall not shake
me off; for, if it lie in the power of spirits to do it, mine then perpetually
shall do it, since you will not permit my self to enjoy so much happiness;
Pity me! oh! (I beseech you) pity me, that without you am worse than nothing:
nor let the deformity of my love serve you for an excuse; for I swear by the
immortal Gods, that if you quite reject and abandon me, I will when I am so
scorned or hated, transform me into a Fury, and will haunt you whithersoever
you go, nor will I (so it be within the reach of my power) suffer ever any
other woman to enjoy you more than I.

Stricken dumb remained Feredo with this so rash and dishonest proposition;
about her eyes (as kindled embers) he observed a deadly bluish palenesse,
arguing a mortal rancor and ghastly despair; well knew he that neither
reproach nor reproof was able to terrify one that feared not to dye, nor was
he less confident of her desperately-bold haste, which might easily raise her
resolution to such a hight of frantic desperateness, as she would not stick
to kill her self; holding it therefore his safer course rather to shun than
hazard a certain mischief, he returned her this mild answer.

Dear Lady and Sister, the love which I bear you is such, that if you knew
it, you would then know you had no cause to think your self aggrieved; I
intend to part ('it is true) not to elong my self from you, but to be more
worthily near you, when the heavens shall be pleased to favor my return.
Love (dear Sister mine) is not to be required with hate, (as you seem to
doubt of) especially by me toward you, whom I (for many special reasons) am
bound both to love and serve; all then that I beg of you, is, that
(abandoning your passions) you unite your self to reason, which can of it
self alone give you on my behalf sufficient satisfaction. Do then but
discreetly remember (sweet Sister) who we are, and what the name of a Brother
imports in nature, law, and use; and next call to mind and consider the
miserable end of the others, which should serve us for an example, not of
imitation, but of detestation and horror. Grant me (I lovingly beseech you)
your good leave to be gone on my intended journey, since I desire it may be
with your free assent and good liking. And to the end you may rest fully
assured of my true affection toward you, I here faithfully promise, that if it
come to my hands to dispose of you (my Father not preventing me for manifesting
my brotherly affection to you that way) I will spend all the Royal treasure,
yea and my very Crown besides, but I will see you well settled to your own
hearts desire.

Upon this the King calling him he left her, preparing himself to begin the
morrow following his journey toward the Kingdom of Logria.

But she (to whom brotherly admonitions were reproaches, courteous language
abuses, and promises of a rich dowry an unappealeable sentence of death)
putting on a manly courage, and laying aside all appearance of grief, could so
far temper nay command her passion, as with unbeteared eyes to see him at
parting, yea to salute him, and bid him her last farewell; and that in so free
a way too, as made him think her an altogether altered woman; whereby he
became so consolated, as he could not refrain at his departing to drop some
tears for mere unlooked for joy, though gazed on by all the Ladies that stood
by her, and accompanied (a good while on his way) by the flower of the
Nobility. But no sooner lost she once the sight of him, than that she
remained as a statue cold, senseless, and immovable: Recovered out of her
stupifying fit, she retired to her bedchamber too too delicious (God wot)
for a scene of so lugubrous an act. The return of such as had sent Feredo on
his way was the passingbell that rang out her knill of death, the
recommendations sent her from him, she received with disdain and contempt:
and then presently (not having the patience or power to stay till night) she
put off her clothes and laid her down; where being (as she thought) all
alone, she burst forth into these terms.

It is now time Gelinda for thee to free thy self from the tyranny of thy
insulting enemy [Love] it is high time that thou now revenge thy self on this
thy neither brother nor lover. Come, thou must die, and that is no news to
thee; death shall not seize on thee at unawares. Thou shall have the odds of
the rest of mortals, in being thy self thine own Judge, so freeing thy self
both from the judgment of others, and from the qualities and diversities of
deaths, being conditions that make unexpected death look on the dying wretch
with an aspect so fearful and horrid. A great spirit as thine is will flight
it, to be by it cruelly revenged on him, that no less cruelly than
ungratefully has injured thee. This said, she would have killed her self,
but thinking it too short a preamble for so doleful an end, her despairing
soul roaring from within her with an horrible and ghastly noise, she proceeded.

Implacable Dieties, ye infernal Powers, to you have I (forlorn wretch)
recourse, to you do I bequeath and consecrate this re^^^ed life of mine, in
recompense where of I desire no more, than that I may pursue and haunt the
ungrateful Feredo whithersoever he goes; put me no (...) implore the heavens
or their influences; for if mortals (subject to the h^^vie clog of a body, and
by consequence ignorant and feeble) can domineere over them, what may then the
immortal souls do, which being separated from these imperfections, must
needs be more powerful, in respect of their habits corresponding to that
privation? I grant too, that humane judgment and discretion may perhaps shun
them, yet mighty ye, whose power has no paragon, are able (I am confident)
either to corrupt or alter them. But (alas!) if it prove not so to be, how ill
then am I advised? yet how can I (that despairing hope) be possibly well
advised? whilst I believe revenge to have place among the infernal miseries,
which to the damned might prove happiness and glory, if glory and happiness
had any access to those dismal horrors? Die I will, were it but to spite and
grieve Feredo. But what place (I wonder) among the disordered confusions there,
shall the order of my uncouth affections hold? Shall it be possible, that among
those eternal disorders there, the soul be not confounded with all its parts,
especially the intellect; and that also the order which I prefix to my revenge,
be not in danger to be broken? But oh that the web I warpe here might be there
spunne, for then would I think hell were blessed! and all would then go
thither; But who will assure me thereof? yet doubtless thy death (Gelinda)
will grieve Feredo, will it so? dye then merely to vex him. But soft, too too
foolish were such a revenge, as but makes an addition to the avengers proper
prejudice. But said I not, that hell observes no order? then no reason neither
by reason of that disorder. If so, to what end tend then so many
considerations? they are needless and superfluous, ('it is true) yet let them be
dispensed withal, in privilege of being my last farewell. Here (respiting a
while to vent out the anguish of approaching death) she with a heavy groan
spoke on.

Happy thee Gelinda had thou never been borne, since that being borne thou
wast borne for hell, whose first torments thou proved'st when first thou
fell'st in love: Yet if I deserved so much misery, had it not been a greater
pain for me not to have been borne at all? if true it be, that such had been
greater than to be borne to be damned as I was? But ah me! if this were true,
sure then I had never been borne; for if among all the things that I am none
of, there had been but one, that in privation of being, had exceeded the not
being of others, then surely that same one thing had been Gelinda. Therefore
Gelinda (to her greater anguish) believes that such a thing cannot be. Besides,
the Gods were unjust, if they punished such as were not any way blemished with
as much as original sin.

Enough then! let these be my last meditations. Dye I must and will; Feredo
will none of me, no more will I him now, and for not having him I must go
elsewhere: The passage is (I confess) hard, the issue doubtful, but
whatmatters all that? I Will even venture and run with the rest; the Furies of
hell shall direct me, nay I Will make one among them, they shall adopt me, and
I Will be the fourth of those Eumenidan Sisters, which if it cannot otherwise
steed me, it shall then suffice me, that the dise^^^^teous Feredo be troubled
in his sleep, and in his repose, desire death the sole remedy to his
heart-wasting miseries; and besides, that in his loves never woman beloved by
him may ever love him, that some untimely end betide her not. More she would
have said, when one of her women (that all this while had attentively observed
her) ran toward the bed; at the first trampling noise of whose feere Gelinda
stabbed her self under the left pap, with a long silver bodkin, where with she
used to righten her hair, but by her destined for this fatal effect, which
succeeded her desire so well (if a man may say well in so ill a case) that
slipping between her ribs, it pierced her heart; which proved now as tender to
the force of hand, as it had before done to the dart of love.

The Gentlewoman that faw no signs of any violence done, and by consequence,
not suspecting any such matter, did the best she could to comfort her, till
(seeing she could get no answer of her) she opened the windows, and then
seeing her look so pale, she was again amazed; yet finding no drop of blood
about her (though her lips and eyes looked of a pale bluish color) she
gently took her by the hand, and respectively kissing it, besought her to
speak one word to her, but was answered with a ghastly groan, wherewith she
expired, because of her wounded heart's being by then quite suffocated with
blood.

The Gentlewoman searching over her body anew, and yet finding nothing,
(considering that the occasion of her death was not to be divulged) shut the
door, and went and acquainted therewith the King; who, because he could not
believe that she died without violence, commanded to view her better, himself
casting (the mean while) an eye on her pulses and paps, under one whereof as
he more heedfully observed, he came to discover the bodkin by a little blood
that trickled off the orifice of the wound; and so comprehending the cause of
her death, he charged that no words should be made thereof, giving out the
morrow following, that she was dead of an apoplexy.

Feredo in the mean time hastened on his journey (believing that the farther
he went from Venedotia, the nearer he came to content and quietness) till he
chanced to come to the famous Court of Logria; whose then King Alfrido
observing him (besides the comeliness of his person) to be endued with
incomparable qualities, had a mind, at first sight, to make him his
Son-in-law: for establishing the dominions which he possessed, lying open to
diverse hostile incursions, with the alliance and stay of a King, for
territories and power next himself the greatest of all Albion.

One sole Daughter had he of some eighteen years of age, named Alite; for
beauty singular among the fairest; and one son (as then absent) addicted to
exercises of Chivalry. No sooner was Feredo seen by her, than that she began
to affect him, seconding her Fathers secret design with an honest open love:
and the correspondencie (as it was fitting it should) had been by him as
forwardly repaid her, but that at his first coming thither he began suddenly
to feel strange passions of mellancholy; which (transporting him to turbid
imaginations) would never suffer him in quiet, for that he thought he saw
Gelinda every hour in an horrid shape with a naked and bloody breast settle her
self by him, whether he were laid in bed or walking any where abroad, so as
he passed most nights without closing his eyes; which made him desire to watch
with merry company, who upon his corrupted affects wrought just such an effect,
as does one single drop of water on one tormented with a burning fever, that
thinks all the rivers of the world too little either to cool his heat, or
quench his thirst.

Many a time have I thought upon these visions, whether any such really be or
no, and whether that which appeared was the very spirit of Gelinda, or nothing
but the mere imagination of Feredo. For if the Gods permit the dead to walk,
why more for hatred than for love, since we hear not (for the most part) of
any such apparitions, save in the likeness of such as have come to their
deaths by violent means? between husband and wife, father and son, brother
and brother, and friend and friend (in whom Nature and long practice imprint
reciprocal affections with greater efficacy) we seldom or never hear of
any such, though they should be ordinary. Which though they also were, yet
could they then neither be no arguments making for imagination, and use would
discover unto us those of reason, Nature being not able to work ordinarily by
extraordinary reasons, contrary to it self.

The Count who attentively listened, seeing him look as if he expected an
answer, said unto him: Nature (gentle Sir) cannot give a reason for all things,
as (it seems) you expect it should, since we have for attaining to it only
the two means of the practick and speculation. By the practick we cannot, she
requiring time, and we being short-lived. By speculation much less, she never
soaring higher than the pitch of sense. Hence comes it, that our common
knowledge (obscure even in things manifest) is subject to the censure of
contradictions, where of such as were Antagonists choosed for the surer side,
rather to doubt of all, than to affirm any thing for certain out of the
uncertainty of our understanding; and the same knowledge, though in much
deceivable, is yet nevertheless embraced for want of a better, which well may
(I believe) be hoped for, but not found by the means of humane organs without
a long and almost eternal life.

If then we be so ignorant in things subject to our very senses, what can we be
in those of the soul abstracted from them? yet should not (for all this) the
insufficiency of means of attaining to the knowledge of things make us deny
their effects, if any be; and yet the curiosity of seeking out for them is
hurtful, because speculation too much subtilized makes a man unfit not only
for the active, but even for the contemplative life; so as if he be but short
in conceiving the first heads, he becomes quite dull by that time he comes to
the second; so blunted shall he find his intellect with the hardness of what
he understands not; therefore a man's choyser course were to rest at quiet, and
to believe that which common opinion both drawn from all the laws, and
approved by all the prime Schoolmen of the world in all ages, induces us to
believe; which if otherwise it were not so, this Prince his very case might be
a sufficient argument for it. Since he was in perfect health when he came from
home, nor was he ever troubled with any infirmity of his fancy, till after the
death of his Sister, and then too without knowing whether she were dead or no.
So as we must of necessity, either deny all, and by consequence make the Prince
a liar; or in believing him, believe the general terient, which is a real
apparition of the dead, a belief due to the obedience of the Laws.

The Gentleman that stood listening unto him, little satisfied with what was
alleged, and loath to let the discourse fall, replied. My doubt (honored
Sir) neither touches nor arrives to the law, but is (as I may say) an abstract
from it; touch it perhaps it might, if it were incorporated with it, and
partaked of its substance and color, as wine does with those of water. The
laws have all of them the self same principals and the self same ends (at
leastwise in appearance) that is, God and good dealing or piety, the end of
this is to fear those. It will not be denied me, that apparitions belong to
piety, and by consequence make wonderfully for it: my doubt does but question
the power of Nature; for, if Nature could but be united or conformed to the Law
in things supernatural, and that what the one affirms might be visually
proved by the other, then had neither we occasion to doubt, nor the Laws to
multiply as they have ever hitherunto done; so as all that I say, is, but to
attempt their union, (if it may be) if not, I rather retire to the Law, being
well assured that in so doing I cannot err, though the intellect remain (for
all that) subject to be snapp'd at by its natural enemy [ignorance.] Let it
not then (I beseech you courteous Sir) offend you, that I say, that the denying
of the effects of things (when any such really are) is but an ignorant
presumption. Now our question is, whether any such be or no: but how can they
be, if neither reason nor sense comprehend them? Nature shows them us not, the
intellect conceives them not, the relations of them are uncertain, and the
Prince his example absolutely concludes them not; conclude them perhaps it
might, had he not known his Sisters intention. But because imaginations cannot
be fully illustrated otherwise than imaginations, I will fall again to my
story.

Alfrido having had intelligence of the death of Gelinda by the Fathers own
letters, endeavored (by charging all the Court to make no words of it) to
conceal it from Feredo, though he become by his continual visions most
certain (as he thought) of the truth, incessantly bewailed it with such
excess of grief, that he at length conceived Gelinda's ghost (seeming to be
therewith in some sort appeased, if not satisfied) had left him in quiet. How
be it he could not for many days recover himself from the great weakness he
thereby was reduced unto. To weane him from those his mellancholy fits, he was
accompanied with all the Court by turns; Alite showing her self in a deed so
pious more fervent than any other, though most cruel to herself; for her
continual conversing with this right noble Cavalier, kindling every day more
than other her affection toward him, brought her at last to that pass, as
she could no longer conceal it from him.

Feredo was in one respect a naturalist, desirous of posterity, especially in
consideration of his being brotherlesse, insomuch as he began already to be
sorry he had left his home, not for being taken with any domestic pleasures,
but because he (considering to how many dangers travel was subject unto) would
gladly first have seen a son of his own, to secure the succession, in case
the heavens disposed of him otherwise than well. Looking therefore with a no
less judicious than amorous eye into the merits and affection of the fair
Alite, he thought himself bound to assure her as much as by words could be
expressed, of the grateful correspondencie of his re-affection, entitling
himself her Knight and servant.

The night following arose a tempest so cruel, that at the ayre's being filled
with hail, thunder, and lightning, the better half of the City was burnt
amidst a deluge of water, and the innocent Alite stricken with a thunderbolt,
found on the morrow in her naked bed converted to ashes. The desolation of the
Court, the grief of the King, the complaint of the Queen, and the ruin of so
fair a City, would have moved even Tigers to compassion; and Feredo that
thought himself the sole cause of all these disasters, and raving exceedingly
thereat, banishing all further hope of fortune or content, abandoning his
servants, and all that ever he had secretly stole away from this destroyed
City, when poasting to the next haven, he suddenly embarked himself on the
first ship that launched out, which was bound for Gallicia, whence traveling
whither fortune carried him, he came to Catalonia, making his first residence
in the City of Barcelona.

To acquaint you with his designs or intentions for parting from Logria so
unaccompanied and unattended, and wherefore thence to Gallicia and so to
Catalonia, without any regard of his quality, or determinate end of his
intentions, would prove but superfluous, nor are you to expect of me any
reason for it; for that desperation and love work not by any reasonable or
orderly means.

Scarce was he come, when eyed by the Catalan Prince, and in him observed his
disposition, and a certain majesty, far different if not contrary to his
then present-seeming fortune; a humor took that Prince to have him (for
certain ends of his) to the service of the Princess his wife, and Feredo
(thinking thereby to veil himself from the eyes of both the world and
fortune) willingly accepted of the proffer. Become so from a Prince a subject,
and from an only son a punie servant, sealed this metamorphosis with his
name, which he by altering Feredo into Calaplo, endeavored with his present
condition to raze out the memory of his past misfortunes; hoping to appease at
full his Sisters Ghost with the severity of such a penance: Wherein (for now
seeing himself no more tormented) he grew to be so confirmed, as he resolved
with himself never to return home more, conceiting that very place to be
subject more than any other to the influence of his horrible visions.

Few months had he continued in that Court, when Don Peplasos (for so was the
Prince called) taking him with one other Gentleman and a Gentlewoman in his
company, went with his wife on pilgrimage to the Temple of the Goddess Juno,
in the Pyrenean Mountains. That Princess was one of the fairest and most
virtuous Ladies of the world; but for antipathy of qualities extremely hated
of her husband, who being resolved to rid himself of her, intended to have her
slain in those Mountains, and then by procuring at the self same time the
death or flight of Calaplo, to make the world believe, that she being
enamoured of him, was run away with him, hoping this report would be the
rather believed in respect of his comeliness and bodily perfections, and much
more, for that he having been with mortal passions wooed by the fairest and
noblest Dames of all that Kingdom, had (poor as he seemed to be) rejected
great fortunes in marriage, which (would be thought) he did merely for the
correspondencie of affection, he hoped for at the hands of the Princess
Eleina, a worthy occasion of slighting that of all the rest.

But come to the Temple, and considering that two murders could not (without
great danger) be committed in one and the same time, he gave Calaplo a little
wallet stuffed full of Coin and Jewels, brought thither (it should seem) for
that purpose, together with a menacing charge contained in a few words, but
concluding, that without any reply he should take it, and get him gone so far
as he might never be more seen nor heard of. He not imagining the occasion
of it, knowing the Prince to be no less mischievous than cruel, and therefore
doubting lest his denying to take the wallet might prove dangerous unto him,
thought it his best course to obey him; so as taking it with prompt obedience
from before him, he set himself onwards on his way which the Prince himself
had showed him. But passing the day following from mountain to mountain, and
chancing to see in a deep bottom that vallied a steeper precipice, a
bare-foote and bare-legg'd woman weeping, (whom upon better observance he
discovered to be the Princess) which as he thought to turn back to succor,
he was set upon by three (as he then thought) highway thieves, but were
indeed man-butchers sent purposely thither (for ought I believe) by the
Prince; whereof he having at the first blow laid one along at his feet, and
with the sight thereof put the second to flight, the third remaining alone,
thought to save himself by the nimblenesse of his heels, till Calaplo being
now justly enraged, by obstinately pursuing him, overtooke him (after a full
leagues race) with a blow so mortal, that depriving him both of speech and
breath, he could make no answer to any thing he asked him. Endeavoring to
return to the Princess, he could by no possible means find out either her,
or the place where he had left her; but resolved to leave no where thereabouts
unsearched for her, and coming by chance (as he enquired for her all about)
to the seashore, he had tidings of her by certain fishermen, who had seen
her (a-farre off) made a prize by Pirates. Whereupon reputing himself a compend
of misery, and conceiting that he could not choose but infect with his very
presence all such as he should ever but converse withal; he resolved with
himself at last (after he had bestowed in the search of her four other
months in Africa, where most Pirates have there residence) to retire to
some-where far remote from his native home, and there to end the remnant of
his days. Crossing over therefore into Sicily, he thence arrived into this
little Island, and judging it commodious for his purpose, he by the permission
of the Prince of Feacia, (who is Lord thereof) made this his resting place,
reducing it which before was savage, into the state you at this present find
it in, bestowing therein the best part of his time to withdraw his mind from
more noisome fancies.

The King his Father thus deprived of five children, three of them come to
untimely ends, a fourth dedicated to the Gods, and the fifth a lost child,
whom (after he had caused him to be sought for, though in vain, over the
greater part of the known world) he had utterly despaired of ever hearing any
news of, had he not been consolated with new hopes, springing from the
voluntary proffers of certain Knights, who bound themselves by solemn oath
never to return home, unless they found him out, or heard certain news what
became of him: which coming to the ears of others, the company increased to
the number of fifty (where of I am one) dividing (by unanimous assent) our
selves over all the Countries of the world, with order to send and give
intelligence at a place by us agreed on, for that end. Fortune would so have it
that I found him out, though to my as yet but small comfort: for though the
King will be glad to hear that he lives, yet will he be extremely sorry, when
he understands that he will not return home, he pretending to pass here a
blessed life, and thinking the shades of these trees here to be the Elizean
fields, for having never seen here abouts any apparition of Gelinda. And
alleging withal, that since he is resolved never to marry, his return would
be but unprofitable to the Kingdom, troublesome to himself, and prejudicial
to her he might match withal, in case that upon altered determination he might
be persuaded to resolve of a further trial in that kind.

Much wondered the Count at the strangeness of the story, and comforting the
Knight, he promised him to stay there some days of purpose, to further him in
his designs. But scarce had he opened his mouth to requite this story of the
Knights, with the relation of his adventures, when he might epsy issuing from
out one part of the wood Feredo, and from out the other the young Knight.
Arisen up, they went to meet the later that was next them: After reciprocal
salutes, and complementall language past of either side, the Venedotian Knight
invited the young Knight to dine with the Druide; (showing him, with that,
Feredo) the young Knight espying him, and well-liking his garb and habit, went
onwards to give him the meeting: And he understanding they were none of those
that came to seek him, received them with extraordinary courtesy, with
thanking them kindly for the favor they did him. Then would he have them
mount on horseback to get up the hill, thinking all of them therewithal
provided; but seeing the Count want one, he told him, he was sorry for it, the
heat being great, the sun of a good hight, and that day as fair and calm,
as the preceding night had been foul and tempestuous.

The young Knight was so far from following his advice, as he blushed to
hear him, whilst his proud Steed by his pransing seemed to invite the
Knights, to prove whether he were as good, as well shaped. The heat put them
off their ceremonies, by causing them to hasten to gain the shade not far off
them under a thick row of trees, that began at the foot of the hill, which
Nature had all about adorned with choice vines. The way to ascend had planted
orderly on each side thereof (like so many halberdiers) fruite-bearing trees
worthy the being grafted by a Princely hand; the hillocks top yielded a
fragrant od our from its fair crown of Orengetrees; flowers might there be
seen laid scatteringly over the surface of the earth, in such a form as the
stars are placed in the firmament, seeming to lie glorying in their rich
show, encamped in pavements embroydered with odoriferous herbs contrived into
diverse figures.

The first part of the habitation that presented it self to the eye, was the
Temple, round in form, and rough-cast without as far as its Architrave with
fine white lime, supporting a rank of finest white marble pillars, orderly
placed by two and two, with so much distance between them, as sufficed to
afford it light; the spire-roofe having no other opening, nor the round body of
the Chapel other windows. Upon the pillars (which were four and twenty) was
displayed a thin border of fine skie-colour'd mettle, divided into twelve
equal spaces, every space where of containing one sign of the Zodiake, was
again subdevided by very small lines into 30 Degrees, the first point of Aries
touching the last of Pisces in the very midst of the Frontispice. About this
border might be seen to gire the two celestial lights, the one colored with
gold, the other with silver, with an Index toward the lowermost surface of
their circumference, which precisely pointed out the place, which the true
lights possessed in that very instant in the celestial Zodiake. There might a
man see all the aspects in their proper characters. Moreover, the Moon (for
the better fitting her conjunctions) had an ampler gire than that of the
Suns; nor could it have other in respect of us, though it were contrary to
the sphere in respect of the firmament: that same thing representing in the
artificial the unequal, which indeed is naturally the concave; the eclipses
likewise might be there seen (when any were) by a plate of darke-coloured
Iron's covering so much of the Moon as was requisite. The figure of the Sun
(drawn to a correspondent circumference) corresponded to the truth of the
Eclipses of the true Sun, covered or rather veiled by his fister, according
to astronomicall suppositions. And being not able to imitate the sphere in
setting and rising, it showed instead thereof the eclipses, that were out of
our sight in the other Hemispheare.

Upon the spiry roof stood a brazen statue of excellent workmanship,
representing time, that in its footestall with the but-end of its cive struck
the hours and quarters, with so dainty an artifice, as the ear could discern
no noise of counterweights or wheels, nor the imagination conceive that any
such could be contained in the straightness of so narrow a concave. The doors
standing one of them toward the East equinoctial, and the other on the
opposite, side, were both of them adorned with seemly pillars, the Eastern of
snow-white Alablaster with stairs, threshold, and lintell of the same. The
Western with its supplements of a cole-black touchstone; that garnished with
a white Eagle, being the Hieroglyphick of heaven, this with a barking Cerberus
sad embleame of hell, never opened but when sacrifice was done to the infernal
Deities for Gelinda's ghost. For the same purpose also stood erected two
Altars, and on either of them an Image.

These briefly survaid, all of them entered into the Temple, where the
sacrifices were the hearts of two white doves, burnt upon the quick embers;
that done, they retired to the house, and were invited to sit at the table,
where the two guests were stricken with amazement at the servants and order of
service; they admired at such abundance without excess, and such delicacie
without defect; and withal, to see conformed to the humility of fair white
earthen dishes such a royal personage, place, and service. The Druide
entertained them with pleasant discourse, apparelling his countenance with an
aspect to outward seeming cheerful and blithsome; showing them withal, how
that Country was the utmost bound of Greece to the sea-ward; and then made
them a grateful expression of the great courtesies he had received at the
hands of the Prince of Feacia Lord of that I Will, and was about to particularize
somewhat thereof, when altering his conceit upon turning toward the Count, he
besought him to impart some occurrences of the Western parts, it being ten
years space, sithence he had heard any news from thence.

The Count willingly embracing the occasion of assaying to persuade him to
return home, making no show of knowing any thing thereof, expressed a
forwardness to satisfy him; so as having made some prelueds proper to his
ends, he spoke in this manner.

Irinico King of Gaula Belgica had besides two sons (the eldest whereof died)
one only daughter, whose beauty (though singular) was yet surpassed with so
many virtues, that the people thought her the compend of the Kingdoms glory;
desired she was of many, wooed by few, and won by one that was little thought
of; among her Suitors, the principal man was Teuton King of Scandinavia a
Prince, who though rich both in years and posterity, was not yet by his years
brought to any disability of body; and now his disgusts which he received
every day more than other from his sons, made him desirous of new heirs,
since he was grown resolute to raise walls against walls, till he had levelled
with the ground those, which (to his confusion) were by them built against him,
a thing practiced by him many years before to the cost of the lives of some of
them, and the brothers too. Now he had already taken many wives, and had used
them all very ill, as indeed he married them not for love, but altogether for
means, nor ever admitted he any one of them to his bed on other, than the sole
hopes of their patrimoniall Kingdoms, which conformable to his expectation
failed him not. Known it is not whether it was policy or nature in him to
affect not one of them, the sole aim of his love being levelled at the
enlarging of his Monarchy, and making himself great.

He had already by the means of some Kings of his alliance, gotten a great
footing in neighboring Countries; whereupon grown desirous to become one day
owner of Irinico's Kingdom, he made suit for his alliance, merely to ground
thereupon a foundation for his pretentions, and not to enjoy those incomparable
beauties, the only white whereat the desire of all other Princes aimed. And
having gotten an use of letting himself to be seen but of a very few, by
withdrawing himself sometimes (for many months together) from the popular
sight, a fancy took him in the head to go himself in person to Irinico, and
so (under the veil of an Ambassador) to pry into the secrets of his
Kingdom, corrupt his subjects, and win himself a wife, and by her in time a
Kingdom.

Having then left such order as he thought requisite to such as were to manage
the secrecy of his absence, he parted, accompanied with very few, increasing
by the way his retinew with such persons as had never seen him before;
traveling with all the little that he went by land, so secretly by an invention
that he had got, to confine himself for some retired imaginations within his
horse-litter, that no man in the whole dominions could come to see him in the
face.

Irinico receiving him with all possible courtesies, understanding the sum of
his embassy would not suddently dispatch him (though he were already resolved
of what he meant to do) but referred the business to his privy Council, not
so much to understand their opinions, as to know those who (some while before)
were suspected to have been corrupted.

He (in the mean time) being admitted to the sight of the Princess, proved
to be in love; indeed a strange effect in him, and yet more strange by reason
of his so fretting thereat; for, persuading himself that he could not choose
but love his own person the less, by such a portion of affection as he settled
upon any other; so as he could have heartily wished the possiblenesse of
distinguishing the person of a Prince from that of an Ambassadors, had been
within the reach of his power, that so in personating either, he might exercise
his cruelty over the other. But love (as the case stood) domineering over the
fury of his furious projects, brought his pride to so low an ebb, as from a
Statesman he would have gladly subjected his stout spirit to any inferior
servile condition, had it not showed it self too too apparently contrary to
the issue of his desires.

No whole day suffered he to pass without visiting Doricrene, this sollicitous
Ambassador laboring to gain the favor of her affection to his Prince, which
was himself, who for being more than ordinarily enriched with a buffonizing
and jearing humor, was generally in all companies a most welcome companion;
for, laying aside all gravity, he served for a make-sport, not only to the
Princess, but to all the Court besides; insomuch as Irinico himself (taking
pleasure therein) liked his company marveilous well, and withal affected very
much his way of expressing himself so different from those of other men, for
that he never spoke but by figures and proverbs, applied with particular
acuteness, with significations ever-equivocating to be solved as he pleased;
(it being indeed but reason for the speaker to be his own words interpreter)
his countenance, carriage, and habit speaking him to be one that cared for
nothing; and though he indeed was rather a Sophister than a Philosopher, yet
seemed he by his outward expression of himself, to be merely composed of
refined Court-philosophy. Speak he would the plain truth when he was sure
there was no credit given to what he spoke, yet blushed he not to lie loudly,
when it made any way for his ends, both the one and the other always most
false and deceitful like himself; little gave he, though he promised much,
yet the freeness of his carriage in what he did, grounded in men's conceits, a
foundation for the performance of his large promises. A marveilous sower he
was of soaring hopes, from which since there sprung naught else than briars and
nettles, he imputed the fault to their ill husbanding, deferring the harvesting
both of them and of other new seed to the ensuing year. Yet with all his
shifts and devices he had never the fortune to arrive to the hight of his first
design, the true artifice of accomplishing such, consisting indeed either in
not having any double meaning, (which is the sure way) or in a handsome way of
concealing it, which is full of difficulties; or being otherwise accompanied
with excessive promises, it dismembers it self and becomes subject to the
brand of incredulity.

Now Irinico had (long before this) made choice for his Son-in-law of the King
of Vlmigaria, a Prince of known great dignity, whom he thought might serve
him for a strong link in the long chain by him forecontrived on that part of
Europe in bar of the growing power of Teuton; and therefore he so crept
slily on with his pollitick reaches, dissembling being a prime article in
gaining or establishing the possesion of Kingdoms; and thought that the
affinity with that other King carried with it apparent advantages, yet the
counter-poysing disadvantages proceeding from it, were also so apparent, nay so
palpable, that an ordinarily discreet personage (much more such a sage Prince
as he was) would have not only refused but abhorred the alliance of such a
froward old man, ill reported of, and worse conditioned, cruel to his wives,
brothers, and children; besides the consideration of the likelihood of making
away the Prince Elimante by sword or poison, the Princess being capable of
succession, and sole heir in case her brother were dead.

Well perceived Teuton (though somewhat of the latest) that his was a journey
vainly bestowed, being secretly advertized, that Doricrene was otherwise to be
disposed of, so as he now comprehends how his expenses in that Kingdom (in
hope of furthering his affairs) was but money cast away; his dependences and
those of his faction being not only suspected, but most of them known, so
that therefore his stay there could not be otherwise than very chargeable, as
the profit he could expect or hope to gain thereby could be (in comparison of
his charge) but very small; nay (which spited him most) that Irinico himself
laughed (as we say) in his sleeve to see his subjects and state enriched by his
ill-founded projects and bounty. Resolved for such reasons to alter his first
determination, he fained the receiving of new commissions importing,

That his King had commanded him (sithence he had not, all that while,
concluded the marriage) suddenly to return homewards, his years now
dissuading him from matching any more; howbeit that he should assure Irinico of
his friendship, in a degree no less than if the affinity had been contracted;
and in case he saw him inclined to a cross match, to proffer him his Daughter
Celene for Elimante.

To this last proposition Irinico willingly listened, and (licensing the seeming
Ambassador with many presents) willingly embraces the offer.

As soon as Teuton came home, he sends back thither an express Ambassador,
giving him charge to keep the marriage from concluding as long as he could,
and yet to subscribe to promise all rather than break off.

The fair Doricrene was (in the mean time) married to her designed husband,
abandoning unwillingly her dear Country, and dear Brother; a match less
fortunate than corresponded to the merit of so accomplished a Princess, and
indeed the unfortunate and deceiving effect of humane prudence. Before these
nuptials, pictures of her were spread far and near over the greater part of
the world, so as there was not a Prince that therewith adorned not the most
conspicuous wall of his Palace, to rejoice and recreate by the eyes the
internal senses of the heart with an object of such an excelling beauty; only
Durislao King of the Sarmatians, was that one, that taking it away from the
common view, stored it up in a secret place, thinking it sacrilege to profane
an image by him reputed celestial, so much, as to suffer it to be exposed to
the survey of the purblind eye of popular judgment. And growing to like it
every day more than other, he at length arrived to that pass, as he knew not
whether he were more enamoured of the true Doricrene which he had never seen,
or of her (by him so continually courted) picture. When at any time he resolved
to absent himself from his Realm to go to Gaul to see the original, he had
not the power to stir when he came but to take a farewell of the Copy,
conceiting he could not be present with the one, as long as he was absent from
the other; nay he would swear, it did stir, rejoice and grieve too,
according as it saw the disposition of his affection inclined; to such a point
of insensibility had amorous superstition reduced him unto, in believing false
imaginations (the Meteor of his desires) to be the true effects of sense and
reality. But when he heard she was married in Vlmigaria with a neighboring
diffident Prince, and one whose dominions bordered with his, he was like to
dye with hearts-grefe, rage, and spite; and had resolved (even then suddenly)
to have either forcibly taken or stolen her away, if the extreme grief which
he conceived thereat, had not (by corrupting his health) stopped the current of
that his enterprise.

The fair picture exposed then to any ones view, was placed in his sight, at
his beds feet, where he two months lay sick, nor had he then risen, but for
the comforts of his uncle Teuton, who upon information received of its cause,
sent to tell him;

He wondered the fierce Sarmatia could so much degenerate from it self, as to
have insteede of a martial King a dejected lover; who for certain could not
possibly be other than a changeling, being those of his Royal Family and blood
were never owners of soft and effeminate hearts; which if otherwise he were
indeed a true branch of so Royal a stock, that he should then rouse up his
spirits and be well, since both lay in his power; warranting him, that the
noise of trumpets would soon awake him from his dump of heaviness, and a
contrary imagination as soon restore him to his former health, his love being
no other than a mere conceit, and his sickness an effect of the like cause:
Adding (for his more comfort) that he himself had also sought her to wife, but
had since with more wholesome counsel withdrawn from her his affection;
wishing him to do the like; or if affection in him (for being the younger man)
bare somewhat a greater sway, yet should its force be weakened, by considering,
that if he could leave and slight her when the effect thereof was possible,
much rather then should this nephew of his desist from an impossible
enterprise, necessity teaching him to forget her, and amorous disdain to
abhor her now that she was enjoyed by another; or if all this yet sufficed
not, yet should he not droopingly abandon himself to grief and heaviness,
but like a brave Bull win her from out the hands of his rival, and deprive
him not only of her, but also of his scepter, state, and life. Since Kings
have no other law than their wills, nor other Justice than power and Arms, the
rest being but old-wivestales, and fables of weak and heartlesse men.
Promising if he (like himself) bravely resolved to do thus, that then he
should see how he would show himself to be an uncle unto him, they being both
of the same family, and having now a joint color of quarrel against one and
the same enemy; and withal, that he was (for his part) content to let him have
to himself, and own together with his Mistress, the booty, honor, and
conquest.

This embassy delivered, up got Durislao off his bed, persuasion being a hard
Chizell to ding out of his fancy his amorous conceit, and a sharp spur to
prick him on to disdain and anger; that sweet love-commanding countenance,
that before with its sweet perfections so ravished him, seemed loathsome to
him, now that violent passions were chased away by their opposites extreme
ones; the fair picture rent off his bed was unrooted from out his heart, and
the disdain that succeeded in its place (kindled by the remaining sparkles)
flashed up with an outrageous fury.

Behold we now Sarmatia resounding all over with the death-menacing clattering
of Arms, and her vaste Champion-fields covered with swarming troops of man
and horse; Fame which saw them mustered (carrying the news thereof from the
next adjacent to the remoter Regions) caused peace to retire to the heavens at
the appearance from out their abisse of the infernal Furies, with all the
rabble of their haggish train.

There was between Vlmigaria and the other neighboring Kings a strong
defensive league, wherein, though the enemy were not expressly named, yet
their intent levelled at Teuton and Durislao; so as at the first notice of the
being of so great an army on foot, they hudled together a great number of
bodies though few hearts, and each of these few too governed by its fears, and
by their inducement rather inclined to truce than fight; whence sprung the
source of all the ensuing evils: for, humane prudence teaches us to embrace
peace till it begin to appear prejudicial unto us; but the dice once cast,
the true Cavalier cannot (without exposing himself to dangers) manifest his
valor, since life and fame cannot equally be cared for.

Durislao appeared on the confines, where he found Defendants enough, or such
at least as seemed to be such; who gave him battle, lost it, and fled, or
rather indeed fled ere they lost it. The extolled prudence of their General,
so many years before in estimation incomparable, being now tried by a true
touchstone, discovered the falsenesse of its mettle; the mountaines-promising
valor of so many Princes that under their pavillions seemed to be invincible,
as soon as it now appeared in open field was beaten down and trampled, or (at
least) put to flight, choosing to lose (rather than hazard their lives) both
their dominions, friends, and liberties; yet among all these evils, there was
one good thing, that the more base and dastard spirits (preventing the time)
gave (by their running away the first) time to the Court to save it self by
flight, the City being unable to defend it under the command of so faint
hearts: their greatest care was to inform themselves, whether the enemy had as
yet entered into or sacked the City, the terror whereof so wrought upon their
timerousnesse, as many of them forgot their very children in their cradles.

The sweetly-majesticall Queen seeing things reduced to such a point, the
City and Kingdom lost, the women weeping, and the men standing staring about
them with beteared eyes, and so confusedly crowded together, as their
disorderly swarming might endanger their escaping with safety: She (mounted on
horseback) said thus unto them.

I have no cause to wonder at my women, whose weapons are their tears, but at
you, who being Knights by your profession, had not the courage to defend them,
and yet now discover your effeminatenesse so far, as to imitate them in
weeping; I can do no less than be astonished; yet (now that I consider it)
you do well; for, it may chance to save your lives, since the enemy (how little
generous soever he be) will scorn to embrue his warlike sword in such cowardly
blood as yours. Here without staying for any answer, she (putting onwards her
Steed) spurred away, much repenting, she had not made one in the battle, her
heart giving her, that her very presence there had prevented the disaster.

Durislao (having gotten so easy a victory) with his Lance in rest marched in
brave order toward the City, where he found the gates wide open, and no man
that durst either gainesay or withstand him; yet seeing himself deprived of
his hoped-for spoils, now thought himself to be rather the conquered than
conqueror. Egged on therefore by his old love-fits, kindled by the ancient
fire that lay raked up in the ashes of his contrary resolution, he spurred
onwards to overtake the runne-away Court troop, who followed by their King,
(having abandoned their peculiar charges) had betaken themselves to the speedy
legs of their swift Coursers. Discovering the baggage, he hoped to find
there Doricrene, but found nothing answerable to his expectation, there being
no other than persons of servile conditions, indifferently unworthy of either
his love or hatred. Here understanding for a certain, that he could not
overtake her (for his coming too late, and her having far out-strip't him,
and that in a crosse-way too) he stopped his course, taking no joy in any thing
he had got, sithence he had lost her, the sole booty that he made any esteeeme
of.

Whilst he stood a good while fixed in this imagination, love opened unto his
apprehension the door of humanity, by laying open to his
meditation's-consideration, a Queen, a great Kings daughter, deprived of her
dominions, forced to fly, and wander through woods and uncouth parts, without
having (now that she had lost her baggage) as much as clothes to shift her
withal; whereat he could not refrain from dropping out tears amain; not
love now, but mere humanity, a generous spirit, and native nobility ministering
him this subject of condoling. Causing therefore the cariages to advance under
the convoy of a strong troop of horse, he commanded them to present them her
from him, offering her there withal his Royal person to be her knight and
servant.

The fair Doricrene gotten out of the City, never once turned back to look
on it, so diligent was she in her speedy course, for not falling into the
hands of her well-wishing enemy, and unbeloved lover: Onwards galloped she
all-alone foremost of all the company, without either dropping a tear or
breathing a sigh; but yet her fiery eyes kept every one aloof off her, she
being (for her disposition) generally known to own a generous heart, that
never made reckoning of any losses how heavy soever; so as what now troubled
her mind was only the dasterlinesse of her forces, and their misbehaving
themselves; and now she fled without knowing or caring whither, when at the
King's stopping his horse, all the rest made a stand.

My friends (said he) our trouping in this manner were good, if we were to
fight, but not to save our selves by flight, as we must do; we are (ye know)
unprovided of victuals, which if we chance to light on by the way, yet will
there not be enough for all of us; our better course therefore were, to
separate our selves, and take every one of us that way fortune shall direct him
in; and if the Gods shall ever hereafter behold me with a more propitious eye,
I will then remember such as have well served me. Here licensing and embracing
them one after another, he burst forth into such a passionate weeping, that the
Queen become thereat impatient, girked her Palfrey and so (followed only by
one Gentle woman) in an instant got out of all their sights: Away she rode
she knew not whither, only she (as near as she could guess) directed her
course toward that star which the King at their parting seemed to tend his
too, till losing the sight thereof at her entering into a Forest, she
committed her self to the discretion of her horse, who (somewhat after
midnight) brought her to a little dwelling, where she stopped her pace, and
espying some light there, she threw her self off her horse, her Gentlewoman
not being able to alight without help; peering then through the keyhole, she
might see an old hermit, that praised God with unfeigned devotion, and so
attentively, as he heard not the trampling of the horses, nor had he but for
the neighing of one of them heeded them when he did; but then, not staying till
they knocked, he courteously opened the door, without asking who was there: No
sooner saw he the guest, than that he (used to the splendour of Royal
Majesty's) failed little in ghessing what she was, con-Ceiving in an instant
the merits, if not the titles of so high a presence: Taking then a light in his
hand, he went out, clothing his countenance with a welcome-speaking charity so
gravely-gladsome as the Queen become consolated, thereat said unto him.

Father, may it be permitted us to stay here with you, till the coming of the
new day? being we know not whither to go, we having lost our company and they
us: Whereunto the good old man with a respective humbleness made answer.

Worthy Lady, to a person of your quality all things should be permitted,
except suffering, therefore your stay here depends on your own will, though the
discommodiousnesse of your entertainment in so homely a place cannot be as I
could wish it were; so as albeit I have (for the service of the Gods) made
choice of a voluntary poverty, yet would I think it no sin to wish for a
momentary proportion of riches to serve and accommodate you; with that helping
down off her horse the Gentlewoman, he lead the Steeds to a neere-adjoyning
Cottage, where, casting his eye on the furniture, he saw wrought in gold on the
saddle, the Arms of that Kingdom, whereby he (not ignorant of the coming of
the enemy) conceived rightly who she was; entering then into his cell, and
observing her to be the very same as had been formerly described unto him, he
said unto her.

And what misfortune (Royal Madame) leads your Majesty so alone, and at so
late an hour into my poor lodging? Let me howsoever bewail the universal
miseries, since your unparralled constancy teaches me to suffer your private
ones to pass without any tear. Is that goodly kingdom lost (Madame, I
beseech you?) which if it be, then are we lost too, and utterly ruined (for
company) with it; yet is that loss of our infinitely augmented by the loss of
your Majesty, which was the richest purchase that ever we acquired?

The Queen unwilling to leave unsatisfied so good an inclination; I am not
(honest friend) answered she, the first that was, nor shall I be the last that
shall be oppressed by the tyranny of fortune; though yet its violences have
indeed no force against such as esteem them not, as its blows are weak to a
constant mind armed for them long before: But since I see you know me, you
shall do me a special piece of service in showing me some secure way, for, I
shall not think my losses great, so I but escape the being made the enemies
prey.

The Hermit (drying his beteared eyes) assured her, he would guide her on such
a way as should (God willing) bring her beyond all danger; and then making her
a frittado of eggs and milk he set it before her, whereof she (not having
eaten any thing all that day) willingly tasted, and then being by him prayed to
repose her self on his straw-bed, she there laid her down, giving her self
over (for the space of two hours) to a sound and sweet sleep.

The good man in the mean time looking to the horses carefully, attended his
time of awaking her, which was a good while before day, and causing her to ride
with her woman hard by her, he led them the way, having much ado (although he
were well acquainted with the Forest) to find the way out, warning them, not
to speak a word; all thereabouts being a dangerous place fortheeves, whom he
yet hoped to escape by keeping wide off their dens. The journey through the
wood endured as long as the night lasted, there appearing unto their view by
that time it was day the open fields and houses, but so abandoned that no
living soul was to be seen in any of them.

Assured of her being out of danger, she thought to license the old man, and
in the way of alms to give him a diamond, which he refused to accept of, with
telling her.

Such things (Madame) befit not me, who am obliged to serve you as I am a
Knight; and besides, as I am a religious man my gemmes are those above, whose
beauty and order make me comprehend the Deity; I will wait on you yet a little
farther (if you please to give me leave) of purpose to declare unto you a case,
which, if the having of company in adversity can give any comfort to an
oppressed heart, will afford yours (I am persuaded) no small argument of
consolation.

The Queen hearing he was a Knight, used him with a greater respect, and
therefore the more earnestly importuned his return, till seeing him resolved
to accompany her yet farther, she said unto him.

Kind Father, the journey will be too great a trouble for you to go on any
farther, which if that you do, is (I assure) much against my will; yet
sithence you will need have it so, I will not refuse your courtesy in hearing
the story you would tell me; where at he drawing nearer her, spoke as follows.

I (Madame) am a native of Norwey, a great Kingdom; which though it lie
situated under a very cold clime, is not yet 10 barren that it enjoyes not many
benefits of Nature, Gimislao was the last that there swayed scepter, a Prince
exceeding well conditioned to suite with the birth of a private man, but too
too simple for a Sovereign King, which proved by consequence to be
prejudicial no less to his subjects than himself. Teutone King of
Seandinavia who of (whilome) so poor a petty King is now come to be so great a
Monarch, casting an observant eye on the simplicity of Gimislao, never left
him, till (by deceiving him by fained signs of friendship) he had wrested him
out of his dominions; whereof though he (harmless Prince) was often warned by
diverse, (and among them by my undeserving self in particular) yet was it never
possible to make him understand it, so as he (unfortunate man) was in the same
time assaulted and pillaged of all that he had, saving with much ado his
person by flight, the two Princes his sons remaining behind in the hands of
fortune. I (that had bred them up, and from the beginning of the war had
safely placed them in a strong castle, knowing it could not hold out long when
all the rest were once lost) abandoned the Father already past all help) to
save the sons from the tyrranous paws of the usurper, I clothed them then
poorly; and suiting my self in the like equipage, I bare-foote and
bare-legg'd conducted them (as mine) through the midst of the enemies army,
assured by poverty which no man took notice of: Gotten to the sea, I sailed
prosperously, the wind driving me to the Cimbrians, who (in maintenance of
their liberty) wage continual war with Teutone: There found we Gimislao, who
repenting him too late of his over-coldnesse, moved even the very stones with
the pitiful moan he made for regaining his Realm; and after, having spent
in spies and leavying of troops the little treasure he brought with him, he
died a beggar for want of any one to releeve him, ambition assayling him now
out of season, who was as incapable of riches with a kingdom, as of poverty
with a private life; having performed for him his last rites of funeral, I
seeing the impossibility of establishing the Princes in their dominions, left
them in pay with those people; and then examining (by the vanity of the world)
the inconstancy of fortune, and how moving the wheel wherein she gir'd was,
I resolved to bid her adieu, and to retire my self some-where, where neither
she nor humane hopes should ever any more deceive or molest me: Traveling
then through many countries, I chanced (at last) to light on and like the place
that I now reside in, where the meditation of divine things rid my mind of
terrene affections, making me become far more happy in my present poverty,
stripped of all vain desires, than I was in worldly riches and honors,
encumbered with insatiable affections, grieving only that I had not known
sooner, that it is merely opinion that torments the mind, a torture that ever
augments the unhappiness of humane life.

I thought good (Madame) to tell you this short story, for ministering unto your
present state some argument of consolation, and that you might support your
losses with a mind worthy your self. Which said, he kissing the skirt of her
garment, returned without either taking any further leave, or staying for other
answer.

The Queen calling to mind that her husbands last resolution was to go to
the Cimbrians, was no whit afraid to see her self alone, but still holding
straight forwards on that way, she found at the waxing brown of the evening a
few cottages, where she was lovingly (though poorly) entertained. The day
following she saw no body. On the third she met with a young countrey-swaine,
that with a piece of bread in his hand was chasing away his hunger. And she
that the day before had not eaten any thing, and the fore-past days but very
little, pricked on by the spur of famine said unto him:

Impart me (good lad) I pray thee, some of thy bread, and I will willingly
requite thee for it. The boy that till then had never seen a woman of so
majestic an appearance (paring off with a knife that part where his teeth had
bitten) reached unto her the rest with a liberal readiness; and then seeing
them and their horses too almost starved for hunger, he (serving them for a
guide) led them into a village, where she was unexpectedly met by her husband,
accompanied with a few others; who fearing till then that she had been lost,
joyed now very much to see her safely escaped.

Advertized afterward of the enemies sending her her wardrope that was coming
a little after them, with one who in his name came to present her with it; she
(in an anger) rose up, and calling for her Palfry answered them, that she
would have none of her enemies gifts, and much wondered that they were not sent
back when they were first proffered; which said, she rode on, (followed by
her train) till she came to the Cimbrians, whither were a little before
arrived from Gaul many Ladies and Knights, among whom was Elicarncta Duchess
of Monconciaco, daughter to the old Duchess that had been her governesse.
The pleasure and joy which she then conceived in seeing her, exceeded her
pastgrievances and displeasures: The Duchess exceeding by qualities not
ordinary, all ordinary merits, though great in that sex; thither was she come
(good Lady) extremely afflicted both in mind and body; in mind for the
incomparable crosse-fortunes of her beloved Mistress; in body for the
weakness of her tenderly-delicate complexion, which imitating the delicacie of
her noble conditions (the singular deliciousness of that Court) seemed to
teach us, that nature forms complexions with declination and disadvantage
after the image and according to the excellency or defect of spirits; Weep
they did, but not much, so just were they in paying every one its due, a few
tears dropped they for the unfortunate, omitting not though the consolation
due to prudence.

Irinico that (in the mean time) could not either with embassies or reasons
dissuade the Scandinavian from siding with the Sarmatan King against his
sonne-in-law, hearing now of his overthrow, and being not able to re-install
him by Arms; smoothering the injury, thought with himself to prosecute the
affair of matrimony (the Prince Elimante being already enamoured of his
pretended wife) hoping that this means might open him the way to the
restitution of what was taken away from his daughter; but the marriage being
all this while unconcluded on, he resolved to permit the Prince to go himself
in person into Scandinavia, there to prosecute the enjoying of his loves;
accordingly he goes thither unknown, giving out, that he went to travel as a
Knight Errant into other parts: Arrived there, he saw the King, whom (though
the home-glasse of many years were since run out) he yet knew by that
Embassad our that had been at his Fathers, a caveat that taught his intellect
to guide his behavior somewhat the more warily; become in that regard more
cautelous of concealing himself than before, he assaid all the means his
invention could propose to come to the sight of the Princess, who stirring
abroad but very seldom, by consequence could be but seldom seen: But
prudence and love, or rather a prudent love instructing him far above his
years, and discreetely governing him in all his ways, he came (I know not
how) to have ingresse into a park where for her health's sake she used to
walk sometimes all alone in.

The Prince was clothed in the habit of a Squire, and though his Royal
greatness remained not veiled by the disguise of the habit he was clothed in,
yet was it nevertheless shadowed with a certain taking-kinde of humility,
wherewith he believing to hide it from the fight of others, made it become
(indeed) in the eyes of all men more observed, and regardfull for its
inexpressibly-sweet delightsomnesse, and rarely selfe-peculiar hearts-winning
amability.

The Princess had (given her by her Father) Elimanto's picture sent from
Irinico, and now walking all alone, she opening its Diamantine cover,
heedfully beheld it; when casting her eye aside toward a by-corner not far
off the place where she walked, she discovered its true original: Start back
at the unexpected sight of him she did not, but drew her eye from the
artificial to the natural; and then believing she was not deceived in the
certainety of her conjecture, said unto her self. Sure this is Elimanto.

He pierced through the heart with that sudden glance, had surely fainted, but
that love received himself before him the shaft shot by the bow of her fair
eyes, (a pity not imputable either to piety or virtue, knowing him without
any new wounds to be already wounded, and withal, that he could not (in case
he killed him outright) so triumph over him as he intended.)

Elimanto took on him to be by this encounter surprised at unawares, and doing
her submissive reverence, made a show of retiring himself, when she asked him
whom he belonged unto, and how he got in there: The answer was.

Most excellent Madame, it is not long since the Knight my Master died, and
then I desirous to see, and seek a fortune in this great Court, for the
famousnesse thereof, came hither to that end; for the rest, I beseech your
Highness pardon, for my being got in hither as a stranger, curious to see what
I had never seen before.

Upon this, Celene asking him if he had ever known her before, and if not, how
he then came to know she was the Princes? I never had (indeed) the happiness
to see your Highness before (answered her the Prince) but yet to know you is
as easy as to know the sun by its shining rays; besides, my coming from a
country, in which your Highness is known by pictures, merits, and relations,
I might say by love too, if I thought there were any Prince living worthy of
your Highness: At this Celene smiled with a gentle gravity, without taking off
him her eye, more certain than before that he was Elimanto; then asking him
what Country that he spoke of was, and understanding it was Gaula Belgica,
she not daring to pass any farther held her peace: But he with a courage
spurred on by a sincere affection) proceeded.

If Prince Elimanto could but imagine me here, I am sure he would with all his
heart exchange beings with me, he owning not that affect that more sweetly
tortures him, than the desire of serving your Highness; so as if the affair
of the-by-him-so-ardently-desired-nuptials be not shortly determined, I would
not give one of these leaves for his life.

Knoweth-you then the Prince? (said Celene) if yea, why then suffers he you to
go seek any other Master? Yes Madame (said he) he knows me, but is as
willingly content that any of his subjects travel hither, as he would more
gladly come himself, so (as I dare say) that this sole favor (I am now
honored with in seeing your Highness) would suffice, to make him the happiest
of all the Princes in the world; how then can he choose but be well content,
that others come here for service, your Highness being Sovereign Mistress of
his desires, and by all his so reputed? And could I be but so fortunate, in
joining the desire to the effect so far, as that your Highness would be
pleased to receive me into your service; Prince Elimanto would think a great
part of his desires accomplished in my being so for his sake accepted, the most
honorable mark of your Princely favor that your Highness can favor him
withal.

My favors (said then Celene) stand at the dispose of the King my Father, of
whom I have not as yet received any command to any such purpose; but you (for
being a stranger, and happening to come to me before any other) I will accept
into my service, seeing the desire you have to serve me. With that, bidding a
Lady that followed her, to cause him to be (on her behalf) entertained of her
Stuart, she yet held him some while longer in discourse, growing to be ever
more and more assured, that she had not judged amiss.

Elimanto seeing himself at his first entrance so highly favored by fortune,
conceived a confident hope of a good issue therein; and conferring by night
with his Fathers Ambassador, under color of bringing him letters, made him
when he knew him) tremble to think of his no less bold than dangerous
enterprise, Teutone being of all Princes the most malicious, whose
honour-despising resolutions had no other scope, than his own private profit.

Little less than a whole years time lived Elimanto in this habit, and yet the
business went on never a whit all this while, one day suggesting unto the
other new articles of difficulty to hinder its conclusion. Nor had he (good
Prince) been yet disinveagled so soon as he was neither, (so intent were all
his thoughts on the object of his love) but for the Princess her self, who
was the first that showed him the false card dealt him.

Now she had endeavored by all the means she could, to carry her self
fairly; for though of tender years, yet being at one and the self same time
no less prudent than upright-hearted, diverse conjectures had made her imagine,
that her Father treated of this alliance with no fair meaning; so as she gave
not her affection full power to settle it self wholly on Elimanto, doubting
lest he should be betrayed, and so excluded from her; watching therefore
continually an occasion to clear her imagination of that doubt, Fortune at
length favored her better than she expected; for, chancing to be one day in
her Fathers gallery, whereinto no man entered but himself alone, she at the
chamber-doore heard him in discourse with one of his Council and favorites;
saying, he was sorry that the King of the Sarmatans carried not himself more
sagely in his courses than he seemed to do, since being assured of having
Celene, and that the holding of Irinico in hopes, was but to establish what he
had already conquered, and to facilitate the way for acquiring of more; he had
(for all that) importuned him with perpetual embassies, as if the jealousy of
Doricrene could not be otherwise extinguished than with the new love of his
daughter. A foul shame for a great Prince to love women for affections sake,
whereas his love should have no other end than his own proper ends and
interesses. Whereof in respect he had diverse times written unto him without
being able to make him yet conceive the mystery of his intention, he was now
resolved to send him thither to tell him by word of mouth: That Celene was his,
and should be no other man's, since he neither would nor indeed could settle
her in a better or fitter place, their blood and interesses loudly proclaiming
her his; That the late conquest of Vlmigaria did but make his way to greater
enterprises, if he would be but ruled by him, if not, that then he might chance
to encounter with greater difficulties than he yet imagined; That his intention
was to go on the way he had begun, which was, to procure Arms of Irinico
(that hang rusting on the walls) under the hopes of the marriage of Celene to
his son; That therefore if he heard of any treaty about it, he should not be
(in the least manner) moved thereat, nor in any case believe it, though his
ears and eyes with all his outward senses showed it him concluded: That his
design was to negotiate it till such time, as their joint Standard-royall and
victorious Arms (passing the Rhene and Elbe) were displaid victorious in the
Countries and dominions of Irinico, where he had infinite dependents that
favored their faction. And that so high a design merited his patience, the
delay not depriving him of his Spouse, but presenting him (together with her)
occasions to make him become the famousest King that ever wore Crown; to these
added he many other instructions tending all to one and the same purpose: But
here the Princess (for fear of being espied) retired, astonished at such a
master-plot of treachery and being conditioned differently from her Father,
could not choose but favor Elimanto's true affection, and correspond thereunto
as far as her honor permitted her, so as she resolved (whatsoever came
on it) to open the matter unto him that he might be gone his ways, and dispose
otherwise of his affection.

All this while had she governed her self with such circumspection, that he
could never perceive that she knew him, and he (on the other side) was endued
with such a singular modesty, as he had not the boldness to discover himself,
content only to contemplate in the sun (as does a generous Eagle) those
rays he so admired and loved; and though youth prompt him on to more bold
resolutions, yet bore reason and discretion in him a greater stroke than any
other affect whatsoever.

Celene went (according as she was wont) into her park to walk, whither
causing to be brought her by Elimante (that gave out his name to be Velusio) a
little mantle (which she usually wore to keep her from the cold air when she
walked) she thus bespake him.

Velusio, I have hitherto known thee so discreet, that I hope thou will serve
me faithfully in a business wherein I mean to employ thee; which is, that
thou return to thy country, and tell Prince Elimante from me, that all the
means which he and his Father use to obtain me are but merely vain, the
King my Father being resolved to dispose otherwise of me; acquaint him further,
that his love has obliged me to correspond him, if not in love, yet (at least)
in good will, which has transported me to discover unto him this countries
crossing of his design, seeing I cannot (with my honor) requite him with any
greater or other expression of my gratitude; here told she him all that she
had heard, charging him to part suddenly, and to advise Elimante to alter the
object of his love, and think of another wife: I know not whether or no there
distilled at these words some humidity from her fair eyes, for, the staidness
of her countenance and speech made not any show of any greater affect than her
language uttered. To describe the case Elimante was in, were impossible for me,
whose heart (good Prince) was so overwhelmed with extremity of anguish, that
if anger and disdain (which served for a compound cordial) had not sustained
his drooping spirits in their functions, he had doubtless sunk to the ground:
But considering how much it then stood him upon, he with a generous resolution
returned her this answer.

Incomparable Madame, I yield your Highness the greatest thanks that I can
express or imagine, since the favor you do me far excels any merit of
mine, only in one respect I may think my self worthy, which is, that your
Highness shall not be deceived in the opinion you conceive of my fidelity. I
see in this business two great extremes; the King, and your Highness: Prince
Elimante (though betrayed) will never repent him of having served so high and
virtuous a Princess, whose exemplary gratitude shall make him think well
employed all the time spent in bearing with the ingratitude of others. I shall
acquaint him with as much as your Highness commands me, beseeching you to rest
assured, that he will never forget his beholdingness to your Highness for so
great a favor; One sole thing I doubt of, (which is) that the badnesse of the
news will go near to kill him, and by so much the rather, that in the loss
which he sustaines, the same in the very act of its losing shows the
inestimablenesse of its excellency and value. But the Princess having not the
heart to answer him (her constancy beginning now to fail her) without further
speech to him, went and placed her self among the Ladies.

The Prince making no longer tarrying (having conferred with his Fathers
Ambassador, and changed his apparel) departed thence, arriving within few
days at his own home, where unbuttoning his breast, he plucked out thence the
wrongs done him. He burst off the treaty, and would (if his Father had
suffered him) have broken off the peace too; howsoever, the seeming preparation
he is now busied about, makes the world expect for wars.

The other Princes stand all of them observing the issue, desirous to free
themselves from suspicions and hidden treacheries, though with manifest
dangers; and I am now going to recall Polimero Prince of Sardinia, (now many
years sithence banished, through the occasion of the King his
Father-in-lawes-doting fits) to the end he, returned home, may (if need be)
make one with the rest. This is the danger wherein wear: The world on that
part has one sole enemy, superior to any one, inferior to all together; this
is known unto all, and yet such as can withstand him, will not; they shut
their eyes, and run for company down the stream of the ruined to their own
utter ruin, thinking themselves more hurt with the biting of a flea that skips
in their shirts, than with the venomous teeth and poisoned breath of the
dragon, that both infects them and devoures their dominions. Some Princes there
are, that (for certain rules) cannot leave off siding with the Scandinavian,
though they be sure to be in the end oppressed, or (which is the least evil
they can hope for) to be of freemen made first subjects, and then slaves:
Others think it a happiness to be the last that perish. We have none of us
any prudence, but are all carried to action it we do any thing) by spirits of
confusion, and brought to that pass, that the Gods (being pleased to punish
mortals) reduce them unto, which is, to deprive them of their diviner part
their understanding.

Here held the ancient Knight his peace, seconded with a sad silence of all,
full of that horror wherewith an unexpected evil encumbers men's spirits: But
the Druide having stood a good while with downe-cast eyes, thinking his present
profession obliged him to speak, knew not well what to resolve of; so
distracted was he with a passionate affection that egged him on, to make others
believe that, which reason suffered not himself to give any credit unto. Now
he had ever since the arrival of the Venedotian Knight had great conflicts in
his mind about his return, but his first deliberation grown up now to the
hight of obstinacy, tied him fast to his resolution of not parting; though
love and filial duty persuaded him strongly to the contrary, insomuch as he
persuaded himself that that was his best course, now that the entrance into
wholesome counsels was shut up, and that he fostered (in their steed)
imaginations, which being once tasted, it is a hard matter to forget their
smacke, and leave them to catch hold of the real substance and guile-detesting
truth.

Having then heard this story treating of a public State, which imposed on him
a necessity of changing his purpose, he gladly would for not changing it have
deceived himself, with beguiling also the rest of the company, and persuading
them to think well of that opinion, which he knew in his own conscience to be
stark naught.

This noble Knights tale (said he) has horrible appearances, and minds taken
at unawares may easily conceive fears to be where none are, by measuring the
effects, or rather the expectation of them with the deceivable rule of false
good and false evil: Here is presented to our view an altered and a new world,
as if it and its accidents had not ever been the same, sithence it first began
to have a being; not that I deny alterations, but consider them in the
revolution of times, which if they could choose but be changed, mutations then
could not but be denied; but if they be at this present in a bad state, they
shall (no doubt) hereafter be in a goood one. It Is ordinary for old men to
praise the greenness of their youth, and for Poets to run on the
commendation of the Spring, yet perceive not the former, that if they were not
waxen old, nothing would seem altered unto them; Cities, towns, and houses
would then have the self same aspects, and appear unto them with the very
same beauty; menthen should have their delights confined to past-sports, would
taste all meats with the same relish, and the spirit glutted and tired with
merry thoughts, far distant from mellancholike Philosophy, would not be
capable of such differences, no not so much as to imagine that any such were or
could be. Poets likewise would say, that the world were ever the same, or if it
ever altered, that then it rather bettered than otherwise; for, in later ages
were never known (as in the first) brother-killers without any precedent
example, promiscuous lusts without shame or punishment, incests with fathers,
nor a thousand other mischiefs and lewd villainies.

Alterations of States, civil and domestic enmities, pestilences and famines
have been in all times; so have there ever been eclipses, lightning,
thunderbolts, droughts, earthquakes and comets; and if not always deluges, no
more does there always meet in the deepest of the heavens in the sign Cancer
the great conjunction of Jove and Saturn: Besides, the Gods (which is indeed
the true reason) do not always punish us according to our deservings. The
world though placed in the midst of the air, yet falls not, its own nature
upholds it, and makes it durable for alterations, without which the heaven and
earth would seem to us to be of iron. If it be so; then things present should
not seem so strange to us, (seeing they are but even what have been before)
nor yet afflict us, if leaving natural considerations, we accoast to the
supernatural, which may alone serve us for a true rule in all things. Men
talk of a general revolution in the world, by which most believe, that the
buds of the growing Monarchy is to be pruned off, no otherwise, than if we
thought it possible to strike a nail in the celestial wheel, or believed
that the disposition of the Gods were unto us as prejudicial as
incomprehensible: But if we believe that there are Gods, and that they have a
provident care over us, does it not imply, that the means of their providence
stand above the reach of our knowledge, and that they oftentimes make for our
good, when they seem in our eyes to work our prejudice? Humane minds
(capable only of the individual things present) measure all eternal
universal acts by the short Ell of their clouded capacity, not considering,
how that the infinite essence has a constant care of the finite, with an Idea
of eternity, which we comprehend not: for, to comprehend it, would be required
an instrument proportionable, which is divinity, being a rule fit to square all
things by, from which are derived, and wherein ends the circle of the whole
universe and all things therein contained, with a perpetual undeceivable gire,
not casual, but predeterminate and certain, so as our oppositions cannot
hinder it, nor our reasons persuade it to alter its course. Which if it so be,
to what end then serve either our fears or complaints? And again, if it be
not so, what good do our Altars or Temples do us? What! are there no Gods at
all? well! we will then be gods to ourselves, and may then rest confident, that
in whatsoever we do or take in hand, either the strongest or subtlest will
prevail; Let the hopes and fears of the life to come then cease, nor let us
any more vainly spend either our time or blood for maintaining the opinion of
Deities in this present life, not knowing either what or who they are: But if
such both are indeed, and will needs have these alterations, let us then cede to
their power and will, it befitting not us to know or dispute the reason why,
but humbly to kiss the whip wherewith we are scourged: Nor should our having
in our own hands the disposing of our own free will make us believe that we
are (for all that) withdrawn from under the subjection of their providence;
for if it so were, then were that providence in vain, and divinity quite
abolished, or at least idle, unactive, and incapable of any operation: Now then
if any Gods be, doubtless they do foresee and provide, not that which we, but
what they in their inscrutable wisdom judge expedient for us; And if to
withstand or repine at what befalls us be to oppugn the divine providence, then
who-so believes, opposes it not, but obeys their irresistible wills, and
suffers this wheel to run round, since it cannot but gire, to the end its
standing still make it not become contrary to the nature of the eternal
motion. The world could not conserve it self in its general being but for
corruption, which in it ingenders singular things of their own essence; and
this change is that so much spoken of vicissitude, by which the Gods abase and
exalt whom and what they please.

These are the reasons which for the one only (though the only good) part, may
partly be alleged in this matter.

For the other, I see no reason of opposing rising commands, or growing
Monarchies; be it of Prince or people; of Princes, they know that theirs must
one day come to a period, and therefore the signs foreshewing it being once
come, they should not either impugn them, or oppose the will of Fate.
Alteration is less violent in ceding than withstanding, The bow that bends
not, breaks: But grant, that they will defend themselves, tell me, will they
do it solely or jointly? If solely, the inferiority then of forces will be the
touchstone of their losses; if accompanied, then the disaccompanying of their
interesses will reserve them by such delay for a greater precipice. The
colleagues have all of them their particular and several ends, and when in the
extreme ruins of their fellows they see themselves likely to escape the
being ruined for that present, they neglect to succor them in the field, and
withdraw their hand from the community of their perils, for fear of falling
with them. Examples thereof we have enough in the present days, without
borrowing any from past ages; but could a Prince be always in the same state,
it were doubtless better for him: The worst is that, which this noble Knight
tells us; That the world become senseless, neither sees nor feels its own
imminent evils; That the enemy may ever run and rove wheresoever he list, the
impediments being few and weak; That who-so can withstand him, is by fatal
inconsideration become so confident as he will not do it; being all of them
signs, whereby Princes are admonished to foresec, and with prompt remedy to
provide for the evils that hang over their heads, which in wills so disjoined in
such a conjunction of perils and interesses, I see not how they can otherwise
do than by ceding; since yielding brings far lesser losses than utter
undoing.

For the people, I know no necessity of their ruining themselves with their
Sovereigns, they are always sure to serve one or other; to what end then
should they purchase a ruinous decaying servitude at the price of their blood,
and ruin of their country? Must the ambition (forsooth) of Princes destroy
the world? the Fates forbid that; Why they have commanded already their shares,
let them therefore (a gods name) give place to others. Have they more
pretension in what they or their Ancestors acquired, than others have had? Were
they borne (trow we) Princes with the world, or came they by that dignity after
a long succession of years, and after others that ruled before them? If so,
the first that got it, could he come by it otherwise than by violence? and if
by such means, why then may not another do the like? The self same shall in
future ages befall our present Conquerours, who for being by then founded on
the continuation of a long possession, will think it an injury to them what
now they make no scruple of doing to others, though indeed it neither then will
be, nor now is such. The world is a scene where are represented its accidents;
the spectators are the Gods, who delighting themselves in humane things, would
take no pleasure therein, if they continued to be always the same; they will
that their power shine over all; and such men as ordinary (though miraculous)
things cannot illuminate, must be taken out of darkness by extraordinary
means: In fine, I believe, the Gods deprive not Princes of their judgment and
valor, but to bring in new personages in a new commedy, and the scene being
theirs, they may represent there what they please, and we can but serve them at
a beck, in taking up and letting down the hangings, and in putting a hand to
the machines, and being employed in other common and meaner services, whilst
the Princes appearing in the scene (sometimes happy, and some other times
miserable, one while triumphant, and another while captives) show themselves in
the Catastrophe to be subject to a power greater than theirs.

Here ended the Druide, when the Venedotian Knight, who had many times changed
his color, seeing him now silent, rose up and said.

Feredo Prince of Vencdotia (even this same (my Lords) you here see in this
habit) and with that turning toward him; I beseech your Highness (said he on)
to pardon my discovering you.

The times now permit you not to be any longer confined to these weeds, nor
with them to those resolutions that ruin the person of so great a Prince; you
pretend that humane judgment, for being deprived of the right instrument to
judge things by, is deceivable; and true it is: But be it what it will, either
you were not pleased to express it, or else you would not seem to know it,
for doubt of being induced to yield to what you might by irrefuteable arguments
be persuaded unto. The Gods (with your gracious pardon) are not that
instrument, though they be indeed the Authors and the end thereof; nor in
giving it us, give they us themselves, but their assistant grace, whereby we
are made capable of using it; nor yet have they been pleased to bestow it upon
us in an incomprehensible way, beyond the capacity of our senses, as they
themselves are; lest we should then impudently deny it, as they themselves have
been sometimes impiously renounced; to prevent which, they have naturally
engrafted it in us, and withal made us doubly sensible of having it in our
heart, and in our intellect; Conscience that witness against our selves, is
that instrument, that conscience which I will term Natural, to distinguish it
from the Religious one. By this Natural Conscience, I mean that remorse
common to all creatures, which though void of reason, are not (for all that)
deprived of a certain knowledge of the evils they commit, more or less
according to the degrees of their capacities; and such a conscience is singular
in us in the years of our infancy.

A Religious Conscience I intend to be that, whose object is Divinity, but for
being built upon diverse laws (contrary or disaccording) cannot be so general,
as to form this instrument; Natural Conscience then, as a common immutable
principle, shall serve us for a rule in our affairs, without neglecting (for
all that) the use of the religious one, when we treat of the Gods, or of their
operations in us.

Let us now then first see, if Princes and people be indifferently bound to
conserve, those their dominion, these their present state; or if the pretext of
predestination or divine will does constrain them to run to ruin, for
default of defending themselves: For the Princes, my Prince here believes there
is no reason for it, since their own interesses will make them use the means.
For the people, he speaks nearer the quick of the seeming truth; for he holds
them exempted of all defense, for not receiving any change thereby (as touching
the natural conscience) and for not opposing the divine will in
obsequiousness to the religious one. But I (being (under correction) of a
contrary opinion) say, that they ought to shun by all means any new
principality; for being by the religious Conscience thereto bound by oaths of
fealty and obedience. And the alleging, that the beginnings of Monarchies
were violent, is a reason that (under favor) proves not his, but my opinion;
since when the Law declares things unowned to be his that first comes to the
enjoying of them, it shows clearly the property thereof to be by natural
reason such or such a ones: And the same Law that by the self same reasons
would take away all occasions of contentions that might spring from old
pretensions, gives us likewise prescription of time, which being expired,
declares the things in controversy to be under the dominion of the last
possessor; But I admit not this violence, much less believe it to have bin a
degree to the first Signiories: For, if it be true, that golden ages first were
and afterward degenerated, it is strange to me, since I find them not now
degenerated nor abased, but rather reduced to a finer caract and a better state
than ever they were before in.

Nature desires Monarchy and will needs have it; we see not any one thing that
depends not on another. The Sun lords over the Planets, among beasts the Lion
rules, and of birds the Eagle is sovereign; The secondary causes also depend
on one prime singular; the affects and temperatures are subject to one
predominating Element; the soul rules the body, the father his children and
family; if then every little house has by nature its King, why shall not then a
City, a Province, nay a whole Nation have one? The first that reduced men
together, did it not to lord over, but to instruct and disciplinate them; nor
can indeed a Teacher discharge well the function of a Teacher, without
jurisdiction over his Disciples; and the Heavens that would have a Monarchy
among men, as in other things brought in for Monarchs elevated wits, which
were the first that began to oversway the depressed and servile: And though I
did admit (which I do not) that the stream of Monarchies sprung from the
fountain of tyranny, yet might I gather thence the learning of good
government by bad (as by the infirmity the medicine, and by it the restoration
of health) which being an inestimable treasure, let us endeavor as much more
to conserve it, as in procuring its reduction from tyranny to a legitimate and
necessary Magistracy, whereby and by whose means mankind is governed and
made happy. So far therefore are those that first ruled out of the reach of
accusation, that even antiquity it self has (to eternize their memories)
honored them as Gods.

The people then ought (for the religious conscience's sake) to obey their
Princes, and (for the natural one) to do the same for their own peculiar
interesses. Never was there State seen pass from one government to another
without its own proper violence of Laws or customs, which being so violated,
breaks the peace, and ingenders factions and sometimes insurrections, by
reason of the Subject's being restrained to new laws and orders contrary to
the first; a passion in Nature intolerable: Besides that, a new Prince, though
he enter never so peaceably, cannot yet otherwise choose but come armed, so as
the Subject's goods and houses remain to be exposed to the Soldiers, and
justice in the hand of new Ministers under new terms and laws: And if the
change chance to be from a bad Prince to a worser, or from a good to a bad one,
should not then an indifferent and easy servitude be preferred before an heavy
and intolerable one: The comparison demonstrating unto us, that a great
difference in things, though of the selfsame species, makes them become not
only unequal but opposite? My Lord (the Prince) counsels as a Druide, that
which as a Prince he surely would not do, which is, that considering the
confusion and ill intelligence among Princes, and seeing the signs of the
divine will to threaten (as it were) their ruin, it would prove their best
course, quietly and patiently to endure the yoke of the divine will, and
withal as willingly to subject themselves to the hand of man for fear of
perishing. But I would feign know, who will or can assure me of the will of the
Gods? or in case I might be thereof assured, yet who will calculate me the
degrees thereof, or show me the limits of its extent? But will they needs have
me undone howsoever? Indeed, if I look into my own demerits, it will be no
difficult matter to induce me to believe it, nay I doubt me, that by this
reason most, if not all the world would be undone.

That then which concerns me to know more particularly, is, Whether they will
deprive me of my dominion totally, or with it subject me to another, or neither
this nor that, but afflict me with long wars? If no man can tell it me, how
shall I then behave my self for not opposing the divine will? Nature teaches
me to defend my self. The Gods forbid me not to do it, and men will commend
me for so doing; none will blame me for it save mine enemies, to whom only my
virtue will be detestable, for being prejudicial unto them. If to conserve my
state I bow my neck to the yoke of subjection, I shall then oppose the Gods,
in case their will be to have me either afflicted or utterly ruined; the same
may I say of any other election of mine. The Gods when they are disposed to
subject, ruin, or afflict me, will not send me Geniuses to buzze or trumpet it
in my ears, they need no means, but can make my self serve for the
instrument of my own raising or downfall: yea my own ill directed actions
will conduct, nay hurry me to the end prefixed me by their will; so as under
such a pretext to do this rather than that, will give them cause, not only to
cross me, but to be withal justly displeased at me, for pretending to pry
into that which is inscrutable, whilst I should rather second it with the
means bestowed upon me, which is defense.

As for the reason, that Princes have no just title in their possessions,
presupposing their coming by them anciently to have been by violence, I would
here feign know how the new may be termed just, if the old (justified by
ancient possession, with the prescription of times, assent of subjects, and
confirmed with blood oftentimes, spilt in defending it, yea with the death of
the Princes themselves) be unjust? And as touching the scene and its
representations, the Gods would not be spectators if there were no
stage players, whose parts to act, one Prince must defend if another assail.
But if there be this day any Prince obliged to the defense of his Subjects, you
(Prince of Venedotia) are surely he, you having no brother, your father being
sickly and weak; your people left for a prey to their enemies, without any
Prince, or defender. With which, prostrating himself at his feet, he
proceeded. Therefore I humbly beseech your Highness, that, abandoning your
incertaine deceivable conceits, you reassume the filial affection that you
have forgotten, the inclination of a Prince which you have left off, and the
duty of a Cavalier by you some while sithence abandoned. More he would have
said, but that his tenderheartednesse restrained him, so as, with an
affectionate respect, kissing his knees, he besought him with silence and
tears more effectually, than he could have done by either persuasions or
entreaties: But he graciously raising him up off the ground, after a short
pause, said unto him.

Cataulo no more, since you have already by doing your duty taught me mine, and
though ought otherwise than good should come thereof, yet will I prefer the
public good before my own private interesses; I thank you for the pains you
have taken, which shall not (on my word) prove to be sown in the sands.
Behold, I am now persuaded to go and restore my self to my father and
Country, in hope the Gods will be therewith well pleased: At these words, all
of them rising up did him humble reverence, with congratulating and praising
the resolution he had taken.

All that day passed they over exceeding joyfully, and the ensuing, the Prince
(desirous to know them) enquired who they were, especially the young Knight,
who now standing in a muse, discovered by his face a confused mind, he seeming
at the instant of Feredo's resolution, to ruminate some till then unthought of
deliberations, and to contemplate that site with greater curiosity than before.
Of which new passion of his, the Prince taking notice, could not choose but
tell him, that he much marveiled to see him so transported.

My Lord (with blushing thereat said he) I beseech your Highness not to take
it ill I obey you not, my fortunes and quality being so mean, as the knowing
them cannot be any way serviceable unto you; and though that the concealing
thereof might disadvantage me in the way of begging a favor at your Highness
hands, nevertheless such is the opinion that I have of your generous and noble
disposition, that I hope you will grant it me by so much the willinger, by how
much the less my silence merits it; And withal, I should think my obligation
doubled to your Princely favor, if vouchsafing to admit of my excuses, you
deem me the less discourteous by believing, that I conceal my self for an
urgent and necessary occasion.

Feredo that by this young Knights Squire had secretly learned who he was, not
caring to know thereof any further, answered him. Your aspect (Sir) promises
so much, as your quality and unseene merit cannot without injury be doubted of;
therefore if the desire I had to be acquainted with you only to serve you,
made me desirous to know your being, the same now teaches me to content my
self with what best pleases you, so as your silence should no whit
disencourage you from commanding me, since it deprives me not of the will to
obey you.

The young Knight blushing at this courteous answer, with doing him humble
obeisance, said. I must then (my Lord) in begging this favor at your Princely
hands, first tell you this much of my self, that being a distressed Gentleman
exiled from my Country, and in disfavour with my Prince, I thought (my heart
indeed so giving me) when first I had the fortune to see you, that the tempest
had brought me hither to shroude me here as in a sanctuary: But seeing your
Highness now resolved to return home, I bethought me of a new course, which
was to implore of your liberality, the resignation of this place under such
vassallage and obligation as might stand best with your Highness good liking.

Much wrought this request on the noble heart of Feredo, who by his own case
had learned to have a feeling of that of anothermans; full loath was he to say
his demand, nay, and yet having been informed of his desperate love, he feared
that the subscribing to his desire might turn to his prejudice; Taking him
therefore aside, he praid him to acquaint him with the occasion that moved him
to settle himself in that Island: But seeing he could not draw any thing out of
him, he then by laying before his eyes his own example, counseled him to
alter his resolution, for the suspicion or rather belief he had, that some
desperation had guided him to some ruinous resolution; but the young man with a
gladsome countenance assured him, no manner of desperation now troubled him,
any passion tending that way being cured by that climate, where it behoved him
to stay some time, to take the benefit of that air for confirming it.

Feredo would not rest satisfied with such reasons, neither would the other
manifest unto him his secrets, yet so much did he by the order and manner of
his speech discover, that the Prince might penetrate somewhat into his new
love, or at least free himself of the suspicion he had of him before;
observing now in him those joys, which cannot easily be concealed in those
enamoured hearts, which confidently hope for the full fruition of their
desires, so as, laying aside all doubts, he bestowed on him the house with all
that was therein, with no other obligation but to acknowledge it the Prince of
Feacia's; so gladsome was the Knight of this gift, that he would by all means
kiss his hands for so noble a favor.

As they two stood pleasantly conferring together of diverse subjects, their
discourse was interrupted by the trampling of two horses, who (pricked hotly
on) thought by the swiftness of their course to shun the sting of the
spur; the one fled from the other, and the foremost (being not able to rule
his) suffered him to run his breast against the wall, and his fore-feete into
a window of a house, that stood erected on that plain, but thence fell down
so near the wall, that his rider (tumbling down topsie-turvy with his head
undermost) ding'd out his brains, and remained stone-dead in the place; The
second that pursued him, being already alighted, seeing him quite dead,
remounted on horseback, without doing him other harm, but turning back to
encounter a great troop of highway the eves that made after him; and giving
no ear to the Prince, (who courteously welcomed him thither) he furiously
galloped down the hill, and rushing in among them, made of them so great a
slaughter, that by that time Feredo arrived (who with the others came in
speedily to his succor) the greater part of them lay dead in the field, the
rest (knowing themselves inferior in force, and seeing no possibility of
running away) yielded to the vanquisher; who being weary, and in some parts of
his body wounded, went and laid himself down on the ground, to recover his
then well-neere-forlorne breath.

Before I tell you who this was, give me leave to let you know, how that the
Princess Elenia staid a great while in Sardinia with Eromena, for being so
fond each of other, as they could not part company; till at last the multiplied
messengers from Elenia's father, her duty, and desire of seeing him after so
many years, induced her to take her leave, she parting obliged, beloved, and
presented with rich gifts.

Her tenderly-loving father (that in her misfortunes had refined his love, by
the experimented confirmation of the constant opinion he had of her goodness)
welcomed her with all those expressions of a fatherly affection, which could be
showed toward an only beloved and virtuous (though little fortunate) daughter.

Her stepmother having first heard of, and afterward seen the reality of her
merits, conformed her self in her entertainment both to her husbands will and
her own inclination. Don Eleimo was seen of her with such an eye, as generous
Princes are wont to behold with, such as have loyally served them, she
thinking it withal no shame to publish her obligation, and confess her
engagement to him; for which she could never satiate her self in rewarding
his merits, and gratifying him, though indeed she thought all money too light
for such an use. But to Don Eleimo seemed it on the contrary, that so great and
accumulated favors, brought (in some sort) a prejudice or blemish to the
greatness of his generous mind; and living perpetually in some measure
tormented with an extreme desire of going to seek after Don Eulavio, whom he
feared to be in a weak and succour-needing fortune, he made suit to depart,
obtaining at length by his assiduall importunity leave, though with much ado,
which but for that sole occasion he could not have obtained. And so away he
goes to travel, and seeks him over all such countries as his Genius directed
him to; and at last (after the spending of many years in the search of him)
found him out, and brought him to the Court of Aquitaine, where he resolved to
make a period of his travels, and to spend the remnant of his days, not
trusting to the Catalan's promises, but refusing them, he (banishing the
too-tender affects to country and kindred) resolved to let the world see, that
he could live any where, and that a sincere innate goodness is more acceptable
in foreign countries than in its own. Needs would Don Eleimos by all means
bear him company in his exile, to recompense in some measure his accompanying
him in his misfortunes, the sole occasion of his so living a banished man.

Impossible it were to describe a happier life than this of theirs, both of
them being ennobled Gentlemen of one and the same Country, nursed up with the
milk of one and the same Court, banished for the self same cause, both alike
magnanimous in enduring misfortunes, and in counting them instruments of their
felicity, for having been the means of joining them together, the one serving
to the other for father and brother, having but one and the same purse, one
interesse, and one heart. But Don Eulavio fortuning to dye a little after, the
other (deprived of so desre a friend) seeing fortune not yet satisfied to have
laden him with perpetual vexation of spirit, thought to lighten it with
toyling exercises of his body; In accomplishment whereof, when he had sought
after death through all the wars of the Western, Northern, and Southern
parts of the known world, and yet not found it; he resolved to seek then
after new enterprises in those parts where the Sun rises, but being by a
storm wind-driven into Ericusa, he happened (as he walked along the seashore)
to light on that good bird Catascopo.

That villain was fled from Arelate the very day before he should have made a
miserable spectacle of himself unto the popular eye, by paying with his death
the debt due from the deeds of his mischievous life. He had about him in his
clothes a flat-fashioned bottle of a certain water of so strange a virtue,
that it made all the iron it but touched become instantly as brittle as glass,
which he had got from one, that having spent all his substance in alembicks, in
hope of finding out the richest transmutation of metals, had by chance lighted
on this rare secret: Nor is it a thing to be wondered at, for such men happen
sometimes (after many losses and much time and coin spent in vain) to meet
by the way with many excellent things, without being therefore beholding either
to other men's doctrine or their own proper judgment. And this purchase came
in that archcaitive his way, just as (returned from the Pyrenean Mountains) he
lived in doubt how to dispose of himself, when he had counterpoyzed in a just
balance his Masters nature with his own foul demerits.

Having then oftentimes experimented the secret, and found it by proof to be
right and good for his purpose, he bought it, ministering thereby matter to the
poor Alchimist to waste his brains about his endless search of his rich
gold-hatching Elixar, though the others conscience made him esteem this water
far more precious than the Philosophers-stone itself: yet never was he
favored with the opportunity of making use of it all the time of his long
imprisonment in Sardinia, nor yet in Arelate, till the very night that should
have preceded his ignominious death; But then being cast into a low prison not
much pestered with company (as in sundry places is usual and ordinary, to the
end the condemned may dispose of what they have, and prepare themselves for
death) he having by his waters virtue made brittle and beaten to pieces first
his manacles and shackles, and then his heavy boults, escaped sheere away: And
then, not knowing either whither to go, or what course to take, his worse than
bad inclination (depriving him of the least good thought) brought him to rob on
the highway; but being weary of the Gauls, he passed the Alps, and got into
the fair Provinces of Ausonia, where grown to be for his infamy famous, he in
a short time assembled all the murderers and thieves of that Country, by whom
he being proclaimed king of the fields, usurped the authority of commanding
often contributions and exactions, not only from Villages and Castles, but
even from walled Towns and strong Cities, till such time as being desirous of
a staid life, he entered into the pay of the Eugaenean Republic, entertained by
them to confront other thieves like himself that pestered their sea coasts;
but he neither obeying them in any thing committed to his charge, nor going
whither he was by them directed and sent, but busying his brains about the
sacking of Cities, that he might afterward retire again to his wonted haunts,
and sheltering groves, was ere he could execute his purpose set upon unawares
by the General of that noble people, and constrained to fly away with but
sixteen of his consorts, leaving the rest a prey to the fish and Vulturs;
whereof when sixty of them were hanged, the rest were reserved for the
galleyes: He in the mean time chanced to be wind-driven into Ericusa, where
lighting on a Bark (that launching out of the Illirian Bay, was bound for
Peucetia) laden with horses, he robbed her of them, and then mounting thereon
his confederates, was (as he stood busied in putting them in order to disorder
the Island) unexpectedly arrived on by his old betrayed Master Don Elcimos,
whose physiognomy and countenance, though not seen by him long time before,
nevertheless so stung his horrid conscience with a feeling of his own
infamous treachery, as his eyes unable to endure the justice-menacing-lookes of
his betrayed Lord, forced him to fly his presence, but was as speedily pursued
by him, who with prompt counsel mounted on one of the very same horses, and
fiercely chased him, till the happening of what has been already related.

Just that very morning had Feredo put off his habit of Priesthood, so as it
was now lawful for him in his coming down to buckle on his armor, which he
always kept in a by-roome for that purpose, thinking (nor did he therein
think amiss) that such a store was no sore, as might steed no less a
peaceable man in conserving his quiet, than a man of a contrary inclination to
a contrary use. Yet had he now no occasion to make use of them, the troop of
thieves being before he came, put to route and forced to yield; so as he needed
to take no other care, than about Don Elcimos wounds, which though not very
deep, did yet somewhat trouble him in mind, because he had not wherewithal
to cure them; but the patient himself making no reckoning of them, (for having
been used to be his own Surgeon) courteously thanking them all for their
careful loves, suffered himself to be convayed to the house, where with
Turpentine incorporated with the yoalke of an egg (an easy and soon made
medicine) he in a few days cured himself.

Causing in that mean space to be brought before him all Catascopo's
companions, and informed by them at full of their quality and being, he
determined to let them go free, for not knowing what to do with them; now,
that he had already restored the horses and bark to the Merchants that owned
them: Having therefore admonished and persuaded them to leave off that wicked
course of life, he licensed them to depart, when one of them speaking for the
rest, after having humbly thanked him for so great a favor, said thus unto him.

My life's Lord, we have promised you to leave off the wicked life which
hitherunto we have led, and that surely with a sincere and fraudlesse
intention; because (if nothing else induced us so to do) our very being
wearied therewith necessarily enjoynes us thereto, besides the being impossible
that fortune also be not as much wearied in conserving us. But yet no man can
be bound to do more than he can do, we are now in such a case as we cannot
live anywhere safe, since that the eye of justice being bent toward our past
life, will (without making any reckoning of our present internal repentance)
punish us wheresoever we be resident. The proposition therefore of reducing us
to a civil life, is (though weebe most obsequious thereto) a thing even
unpossible for us to perform, since we enjoy not the least assurance of our
secure living by such a life, our offenses being innumerable, our enemies
infinite, there being no Prince by us unoffended, and our selves, though
accustomed to toylsomnesse and sufferings, yet be not enured to the
miserableness of poverty or want, the sole motive that compels many men to
take leude and desperate courses of life; Nay give me leave to tell you yet
further, that any he of us that shall have the greatest desire to be reduced to
a good course of life, cannot attain thereto but by wicked means, (and that
is) by the murdering of one or more of us his companions, without whose deaths
it is certain he is sure not to obtain the impunity of his delicts; therefore
as it lay in your hands to give us both life and liberty, so may you also (if
you please) conserve those lives of ours to a good use, without suffering them
to be the means of greater misdeeds. You have here Catascopo dead, his head
(so your goodness be pleased to give it us) is of a value sufficient, not only
to restore us to our liberties, and procure us our free pardon in our own
Countries, but also to raise us to a competent estate, which may serve us to
live honestly withal, it being worth many talents which shall be among us
equally shared.

This request of theirs no whit displeased Don Elcimos, who freely granting it,
gave them leave to depart with it, and use it as they pleased. Whereupon they
taking it off the trunk, emblamed it to preserve it from putrefaction, and
then carried it to Parthenope the Metropolis of those happy Countries, where
(crowned with a counterfeit Diadem) it was placed on the principal Gate for a
perpetual example.

Don Elcimos was courteously visited of all, and especially of Feredo, who
having first heard Catascopo's name, and then seen his wicked head, knew him
for that of the Traitors: But because Don Elcimos had need of repose, he
thought it unfit to trouble him with any discourse till the day following, and
then he acquainted him with his being also a personal actor in the
Tragyck-comedy of that virtuous Princess Eleina; the other astonished at so
strange an accident, (with humbling himself before him more submissively than
before) told him, he was heartily sorry to have had for companion in his
miseries so worthy a Prince, howbeit he now believed the Gods had so many
years reserved Catascopo to make him in both their sights an example of his
justice, to satisfy both of them the debt due to their revenge, the Princess
being partly avenged before by his long imprisonment.

The Prince afterward falling into discourse of the general affairs of the
then-present times, and desirous to know why Polimero lived an exiled Prince,
the Count of Bona not knowing how to conceal himself, tells him what he was,
relates unto him all Polimero's affairs, and what had happened him from his
first parting from Sardinia even to his second, where he continuing his
discourse, proceeded in these words.

King Arato remained so profoundly heart-strucken with the death of Prince
Perosphilo, that not ceding in his love to him to the Queen his Mother, he
would needs evidently testify it, though not by being stark frantic as she
was, yet by raving in such a manner, that as often as he happened to remember it,
he (deprived of his understanding) spoke and did things unworthy of his Regal
quality; and if he chanced to observe in any young Gentleman any extraordinary
good parts, he would then instantly repine at them, as robbed from his son,
and withal extremely hate such as owned them. But if there was any
accomplished Gentleman, that in bodily feature and excelling qualities exceeded
all others, and paragonized Perosphilo, then surely that same one was the
excellent Polimero, who returned from Mauritania with his wife and daughter,
passed three years time without any notable disturbance, his father-in-lawe's
doting humor being not as then grown up to its full ripeness, but increasing
proportionably with his age, and by his remarking every day more than other in
Polimero such qualities as were peculiar in Perosphilo, he began first to envy
and then by degrees to hate him, till at last he grew to that pass, that he
could not endure the sight of him.

In all things else Arato conserved his ancient prudence with other virtues
wherewith he was well stored; nor were they always obscured with this frantic
humor of his, which being a motion of the imagination contrary to the ordinary
motion of reason, prevailed only then when reason (oppressed with this
frantic humor) remained impedited in its operations, free in any other thing
where the mind was not obstructed by its malignity, only in this one thing he
lost, nay went besides himself, so as there was no man about him that could or
durst either show him his error, or appease or divert him from the passion of
his no less unreasonable than violent desire, either to see Polimero dead, or
never to see him at all.

Eromena more troubled in mind with this than ought else that ever befell her,
spoke and did (good Princess) what she could; the same did also the Kings
Council: But (alas!) what good can persuasion work upon a doting brain, that
in its fancy forms things diversely from what they really are, by reason of
the judgment and senses being corrupted and spoiled? But Arato finding the
point of ridding him away to be difficult to be resolved on, it treating of a
Prince and his supposed successor, innocent, generally beloved, and behoovefull
to commonweal and country, thought now to beguile his humor, in making the
world believe, (...) was not he that he disaffected, but that the bow of his
hatred (a strange and unheard of fantasy) was bent against the babe, presumed
heir to Perosphilo, being such a one too as indeed together with the kingdom
succeeded him in perfections of body and mind, those of manly valor (though in
a woman) not excepted; on her therefore spent he all the talent of his hatred,
whilst she (pretty soul) that with her sweet loveliness and quaint prattling
was able to win the hearts of the cruellest tigers, could never (for all
that) any whit mollify that of her braine-sick Grandfather, by whom she being
banished from Sardinia, was conveyed by her mothers affectionate care into
Majorica, whither for some new progressions of the Tingitan, Metaneone was
run with his Eromilia, of both which she was received with affections
different from those of her Grandfather, they compassionately bemoaning in the
tenderness of her years the hardness of her fortune, for which respect no
body could ever afterward endure to call her Lindadori, but ever by the
nickname of Donzella Desterrada (that is). A damsel expelled or banished her
country.

Express I would (if knew how) the fair Eromena's griefs in their pure
essence (especially at her parting from her deerely-tendred girl) and the
adorations which she made her father to remove him from that passion, if the
expression of them were less difficult than their imagination; yet this
beteared privation neither augmented nor diminished, only it aggravated his
frenzy, for not discerning before which of the two it was that he hated; but
now seeing himself rid of the one, which confounded his judgment, in
distinguishing the hatred he bare to the other, he came to know that he had
erred, the plummet of his passion falling not on Lindadori, but on Polimero; it
may be, he would have thought the same of her if she had staid, because the
violence of the humor was come to such a pass, as it passed all limits of
discretion and judgment, the first effects of his infirmity taking up all his
mind, and staying it from proceeding to any other operation. And withal, to
contradict or dissuade him from any of his Capricio's, was as dangerous as
bootelesse, for then he becoming raging mad, both commanded as a King, and
executed as an officer; the Court being taught by other men's harms to shun
him in those fits, or at least to stand quiet without contrasting with him, who
in the rage of his fury would have gone near to have killed Eromena her self,
had she not proved as strong in resisting as discreet in evading his furious
passions.

The noble-hearted Polimero was therefore constrained to give his humor way,
and to retire into Corsica, a kingdom (by his prowes) acquired and united to
the Crown of Sardinia. But because Eromena went often to see him, the
crasie-brain'd King, upon calling to mind the repining hate of the Corses, the
reason that Polimero had to detest him, the greatness of his reputation in
both kingdoms, together with the neerenesse of his affinity and alliance with
the two neighboring Kings of Majorica and Mauritania, resolved not to have him
by any means abide so near him. And knowing that it was his best course to
confirm his banishment with the authority of his Privy Council (a prime
article in the art of ruling, to make other men the authors of things odious
and displeasing to the people) he called them unto him and told them:

That he well knew that his kingdoms, and some (or perhaps all) of them there
present disliked his demeanor toward his sonne-in-law (a Cavalier in all
things else of royal parts, and real worth) but yet that the reasons moving
him so to do were of so high a consideration, as would astonish them, were it
but lawful for him to publish them; That now then the same reason that before
induced him to banish him from Sardinia, constrained him also now to exile him
from Corsica; he would have said from Majorica and Minorica too, if in those
parts he had had the same jurisdiction over him as King, as he had as
predecessor and father-in-law; but where the one wanted, his intention and will
was, that the other might supply its defects, with promising, that if (as a
good son) he so made appear unto him the respects and observance he owed
him by this implicit obedience, not retiring into Majorica or Mauritania
places by him suspected, that then his such obsequiousness should serve as an
instrument to scrue into his favor by, and a prevailing Orator for obtaining
leave for his more speedy return, telling them plainly therewithal, That his
sending for them to come to him, was not to ask their counsels, but to make
them the authors of his, which he straightly enjoined them to execute in such
form as best suited with the accomplishment of his desire.

The sweetly-majesticall Princess that till that instant knew nothing of her
fathers design, remained blanke at such an Oration; what to resolve of she
knew not; contrasting with him being as perilous as profitlesse, till at last
with bending one knee, she thus briefly bespake him.

My Sovereign Lord, there is no reason for any one to contradict your Royal
will, and yet less for me than any other; yet, because I know that Prince
Polimero is to you both a good son, and a loyal servant; and that though
declared for such by your own mouth, you are for all that resolved to banish
him; it is not fitting that I (being his wife) be here consenting to any such
decree against him, much less by dissenting to oppose any will or command of
yours. Which said, she went her ways out, though then neither her warlike
ferocity, nor native generosity was able in that delicate sex to stop the
lubrick channels of her eyes from dropping a few pearlike tears.

The King let her go without speaking any word to her, but seemed by his
actions to express, that he would not have her know all; the decree was hard
to be expounded, it being unpossible for colors to subsist without any
substance. But that which made it the more difficult, was, that the King
unwilling to express himself, would yet have his intention effected, as if
they had understood him; which was the occasion, that they there spent the
whole day about it, the Secretaries being puzzled in penning each his peculiar
draught, and the King leaning on the shoulders while of the one and while of
the other, was ever busied in reading, cancelling or interlining,
all-to-be-blurring and blotting it, as black and foul indeed was all that was
there done. At length a long edict was concluded upon, couched in abstruse
words with an equivocall sense, to make it the more difficult to be understood
of any that would conster it in the right and worse sense, plainly discovering
absolute authority in the whole, justice never a whit, words enough without any
kind of sense; The contents of as much as might be understood thereby was:

That Prince Polimero was at the request of the Privy Council banished both
kingdoms (during his Majesty's pleasure) for secret reasons concerning the
State: In this decree were involved particular letters from some of the
Council to Polimero, wherein were plainly expressed their unwilling sorrow to
be drawn to subscribe to such a resolution, beseeching him to retire to some
place unsuspected, far distant from the kingdoms of Majorica and Mauritania,
from which it lying not in their power to banish him, they did as good as pray
him to banish himself, otherwise that the punishment of his transgression
would be, his being deprived of all hope of ever being recalled again.

Eromena presently upon her going out (as I told you) from the Council, gave
order that (whilst she armed her self) the fleetest galley that then rode in
the bay should be made ready to part suddenly; nor knowing how otherwise to
evaporate the bitterness of the anger she conceived against her father, she
wrote him a letter, and then accompanied only with Aretia and a few servants,
she went to the port, where turning toward those that had attended her
thither, she said unto them.

Countrie-men and friends, I go in expedition of a business that much imports
both ye and me, I leave you in a settled peace, and recommend to your care,
obedience, and love, the King and Realm; and you Count of Toralba I shall
enjoyne to deliver the King this letter.

The people that no less loved than honored her, seeing her armed at all
peies (a habit not used to be worn by her, save in time of war or tourneyes)
remained amazed thereat, kissing with all affectionate reverence some her fair
hands, and other some the skirt of her bases; but she causing the ladder to be
hoist a-boord the galley, that none might follow her, went a-boord the long
boat, and then (without permitting either the Ghing to salute, or any Trumpet
to be touched) launched out, steering a direct course for Sardinia, where the
second day she safely arrived, and being there landed, would not suffer any
other messenger than her self to bring her husband the news of her arrival
thither.

Polimero abode in Corsica adored by all, insomuch as even those, to whom (by
occasion of the wars) he had been somewhat prejudicial, seeing now in so
many occasions his royal demeanor, grew to be so affectionate toward him, as
that they accounted their losses well employed, for having made so advantageous
an exchange of Epicamedo for him: And though his domestical affairs, as the
privation of his wife and daughter much troubled his mind, yet the noble
company of the Marquess of Oristanio and other accomplished Gentlemen much
sollaced him, who also discreetly endeavored to weane his mind from grief, by
being always employed in some exercise or other.

And now it so pleased fortune, that he was that day rode forth on hunting that
very same way that Eromena came galloping to find him out, who hearing the
winding of the horns, and deep cry of the hounds, imagined what was there a
doing; following therefore the cry, she arrived unawares just as the Prince,
the Marquess, and I were alighted to the fall of a goodly Stagge: She leaping
from off her horse into her husbands arms (that with great amazement was by
then run to help her down) having affectionately kissed him with out
answering to his demand of her sudden coming, would needs come benignely to
greet us and all the rest one after another.

The Prince most glad of this unexpected encounter, said unto her; Your coming
(sweet Lady of my bliss) cannot prove but most welcome and happy unto me, be
it for what occasion it will; though in token of my extreme content I cannot
(at this present) dedicate to your welcome other than the life of this Heart.

The tired beast lay on the ground expecting his death with beteared eyes,
grieving perhaps, that Nature having been liberal in enduing him with so long
a life (if what is thereof reported be true) humane cruelty for an inhumane
delight corrupted his enjoying it, without the curiosity of as much as trying
in him, whether his life could extend it self to many ages; whether he had in
himself any such discourse or no I know not, though I well know, that the
gentle Eromena, accoasting and seeing him a goodly one, and to seem (at the
very point of death) to beg favor at her hands, answered: Be your present
(my endeer'd Lord) waited on by a good augury, which I accept with a better,
and will (so please you) that he live: with this, calling for the huntsmen,
she asked them what years he might be of; But because the Gods gave us the
world in controversy, not excluding as much as those things whereof practique
and observation are our masters, they could never accord about his years, by
reason of their disagreeing in the marks of his age: The belief then of
knowing any thing certain, so as others think they have not their certainties
to contradict it, is a belief notoriously false.

The Princess (whose mind was busied in a more important thought) remounting
with the rest, rode toward the City, where being come, she would needs have
the Marquess and my self to be partakers of her relation contained in a few
words: By which she unfolded her fathers obstinate mind, her departing
without his leave, and resolution to live and dye with her husband; discourse
there was enough, without (for all that) so much as once proposing any thing
that savoured of violence; the Marquess and I being old enough to know what
are the troubles of a civil war, especially of such a one which (for all the
reasons making for it) cannot but be unjust against a father with the schism
of subjects and states; and they though young, and undeservedly hardly used,
being yet of a sweet nature, patiently bare with the author of their injuries,
choosing rather to suffer, than to endeavor to avenge or right themselves.

The whole difficulty consisted in the choice of a place to reside in; for
Majorica and Mauritania being prohibited, they knew not whither to betake
themselves; we argued a long time whether or no it were her best course to
follow him, and leave the Realm in the hands of a frantic father, whose
infirmity might encourage the Corses to attempt innovations, spurred on by the
Tingitan with promises of men and shipping. Besides, the ill constitution of
Sardinia whose dangers were manifest, by reason of the intelligences of
bandities (being the relics of the Admiralls conspiracy) who, backed by the
Tingitan, daily wrought and persuaded their kinsfolks and allies to revolt;
which once happening, who alas was there then to sustain the ruin, she being
far off, the Corses become rebels, and the King for his weakness contemned?
these reasons the Princess would neither give ear to, nor admit of. Polimero
knowing them to be good as he opposed them not, so contradict his wife he
durst not, yet wished he that some body else would persuade her to stay: but
because the decree was not as yet come thither, and that for the executing
thereof there was no necessity of an immediate departure, they resolved to stay
till it came, their deliberations in the mean while ripening with the
privilege of this short time.

Arato gone out from the Council, was by the Earl of Toralba presented with
Eromena's letter, whereat he asking if she could not come to speak to him her
self? No (my Liege) answered the Count, for she is some two hours since gone
aboard the vice admiral and lanch'd out without acquainting any body whither
she went, but for ought was seen she made toward the Promontory of the
East. Arato confused in mind opened the letter, which I afterward often read,
so as I believe I shall not fail much in repeating it, whose tenor was such.

My Sovereign Liege, I go to Corsica to find out Polimero, a husband taken
by me by your Royal assent, a Prince every way worthy and accomplished, to
whose virtue and prowes the kingdom owes its conservation, and you both the
Crown of Corsica and Perosphilo's revenge. I know not whether I ought or no to
excuse my self for departing without your Royal leave, nor yet in case I
should, know I to whom to do it, to a King, or to a father; your Majesty
using toward me the power of the distinct person of a King, and quite
debarring me from the privilege of the other; I well know that I speak to a
King, yet forget I not that I am a Kings daughter and heir, and that I ought
to be used as such a one. I am sure I have ever honored you as a daughter,
served you as a vassal, and borne with your passions in so obsequious a
manner, as other than such as have the gift of obedience (as I have) could not
have done. I will not (my Liege) exaltmine own merits, though the having the
power to transgress and not to do it, is in some respects esteeme-worthy.
Only I must tell you, that as I have from you the right of the Realms
succession by nature, so have you from me the possession thereof by prowes, for
(though as then a may den) I only with the assistance of Prince Polimero saved
both it to you, and you to it; and did (when your infirmities brought you to be
incapable of holding its scepter) bind it to your hand, and with my own hands
fastened on your head the kingdoms Crown: whereas you now suffer your self
to be upbraided, rather than you will acknowledge, much less remunerate the
deserts of others, so constraining me to leave you for your unjustly-depriving
me of my husband, and more cruelly bereaving me of my daughter, to whom by the
Laws both of God and nature the mother is so expressly bound to tender and
bring up; from which since I cannot otherwise conjecture, than that your
pleasure is to live all alone in the world, I leave you to live so (in Gods
name) and pray Heaven (to the end you may the longer live) to shower on you all
content and happiness. Eromena.

This letter wrought not that effect that reason required it should, for, the
King more enraged for it than before, would (by all means) disinherit his
daughter, suspending the decree against his son-in-law, with an intention to
unite them in the fault, that so he might wind them both in one punishment; so
as it was very difficult to weane him from that humor, with the considerations
of his being aged, his having no other child, and the being of no other
Princes of the blood to succeed him, have the Marquess of Oristanio, who was
not only old and issuelesse, but above all others the most faithful servant
to Eromena and her husband: Besides the being of Corsica in dange to be lost,
for, being environed with enemies, and bereft of her friends, unless it
yielded to the subjection of the Tingitan, the only means to deprive
(together with his daughter and grandchilde) himself also of the Sardan
Crown, since other than he would never accept of a kingdom in the midst of
the sea, so far distant, with so many difficulties, and undergo the charge
and trouble of defending it from so many enemies, which were Right, the Corses,
the Moors, and the Balears.

The King bare an innate hatred to the Tingitan, than whom he knew no other
would have accepted the proffer of succession, being so dear a purchase,
considering the danger and charge wherewith it was to be maintained; but that
which most of all vexed him, was, to think that his children in all
probability would (if all other helps failed) put themselves (out of mere
desperation) under his protection, which he would not see come to pass for as
much as his life was worth. Doubting therefore, lest they should settle
themselves in Corsica, and be there crowned, he commanded his horse and foot
to be suddenly mustered, marching himself in person toward Luogodori,
followed by all the Nobility and attended by his Council. He received by the
way the Marquess of Oristanio's letters with news of the Princesse's
arrival, and how that expecting the decree against her husband, she prepared
to accompany him in his banishment: Hence taking occasion he showed him the
discontents and inconveniences that might thence arise, displaying before him
his sonne-in-lawes merits, with the advantages he had in keeping him near him.

The King was upon these news somewhat pacified that his daughter departed not
for any evil intent of doing him any hurt, yet not quite freed from
suspicions, and resolved not to suffer Polimero to live either at home or near
him, he wrote to the Marquess, sending him the Councels decree, and
commanding him to put it in execution, composed nevertheless of moderate
words, as if he desired rather to triumph over his sonne-inlawes obedience,
than to harbor any intention of keeping him long a far off him; The same
made he his daughter also believe, writing unto her a kind letter, and
recalling her home with the hope of her husbands speedy return.

These letters being read, Polimero knew not what to resolve of, well conceived
he that the humbling himself to his father-in-law could not but be imputed
unto him for glory, so as the satisfying of his desire troubled him not, but to
be deprived of a beloved wife, and debarred of either seeing his daughter,
saluting his brother, or visiting his father, without knowing whither to betake
himself, was that which tortured him much, but much more Eromena, who not
caring for her father, was resolved to neglect all other affairs and follow
him; company (God wot) of all others to him the dearest, and incomparably most
desired, but yet neither expedient or necessary; Oppose her (as I have already
said) he would not, love being a thing too too delicate, and too much
encumbered with fears and jealousies; Who knows (thought he with himself) but
that prudence may be by her construed for an effect of small love, which (for
being blind) neither sees nor admits of virtues if they thwart it, nor any
other affect save it self? But the Marquess and I wrought so much, that we
both persuaded the one, and disposed of the other. The agreement was, that she
should stay, because that besides her watchfulness over the state-affaires,
she might light on an opportunity of procuring his more speedy return, and
that he should travel toward the East, where having spent such time as he
pleased in seeing of foreign countries, he might (in case his return were
not by that time procured) make his abode in some part of Greece; Athens was
named for the place of correspondencie, whither were to be directed, sent, and
conveyed their letters, messengers, and moneys. Of this his resolution to part,
they sent the King word, to free him (as much as in them lay) of his doubts and
jealousies, which the Princess also signified unto him by writing, praying
withal leave to stay there till her husbands departure, wherewith he was well
contented, not abandoning (for all that) the sight of Corsica, but standing
always in a readiness with his Army, and Galleyes pressed to cross the
channel if ocsion required.

The few days that the Prince spent with his wife were by her passed in
qeeping and heaviness, which made us endeavor to hasten his departure, that
so she might the less waste her self with the imagination of this privation;
but the day being come, she said thus unto him.

I see then (my Lord) you will go, and leave behind you your Eromena, which
wanting you will want both heart and soul, impossible will it be for her to
live being separated from you, or if any thing keep her alive, it must needs
be the hope of seeing you again shortly. I am sorry that her love has so
small interest in you, as that other considerations exceed it; such force have
they not in her, whom if you permit to go along with you (as by your mutual
affection she thereto conjures you) no loss (though it were the heaviest that
could be by any imagination conceived) shall then taste bitter in her palate,
might it be but sugared with the unexpressable sweetness, which she shall
receive in being present to serve you; with that word she affectionately kissed
him without ceasing to importune him with more earnest entreaties mingled with
her tears, till he being no longer able to refrain from accompanying her in
the weeping-expression of her heaviness, returned her this answer.

I part hence (dear directresse of my destiny) it is true! but not so, as not
to have you continually with me; the tempest of my travels shall ever have
repose in the pleasant calm of your ever-deere memory, the only sovereign
cordial to my misfortunes; which without it would sink me into the gulf of
an unmedicable despair; as for my love I cannot imagine how you can in the
best manner doubt of it, or how you can but imagine that I can prefer any
necessity how urgent-soever before that of enjoying your presence, since it is
in you only that I both joy and live. But if such whose judgments are not
clouded with our passions hold it convenient, the execution of it then depends
on you; for, I not having the power to discontent you in any thing, would much
more unwillingly displease you in that whereon all my content and joy depends.

Their kisses confused among their tears were numberless, their grievings
measurelesse, all in extremes and endless. But go he needs must howsoever;
I would have had our departure to have been about midnight without making any
words of it, but that the Marquess would not; laying before our eyes the
distaste which she would have conceived threat, beside the being unpossible
for us to steal away whilst she lay asleep, for she as then never closed
her eyes; the last parting-words were Polimero's concerning his daughter, which
were not well heard of any, or at least I was so heart-stucken with their
griefs as I heeded them not; but I suppose that their purport were to advise
her not to take away their daughter from her uncle, as long as Arato continued
in his mad whimsees.

Arrived that we were in Greece, I would by all means pass further on, and
accompany him whithersoever he went: But no sooner came we to Athens, than
that he made me return back to bring tidings of him: Accordingly I went, and
carried first to Mauritania to the King his father the packet I had for him,
and thence passed over into Sardinia, where having with his letters and my
relations comforted Eromena, I found unexpectedly the King a quite altered man;
for he not only (contrary to his wonted custom) vouchsafed to admit me to
his presence, but also with great tenderness kindly asked me how his
sonne-in-law did. And I being afterward desirous to go to Maurica to see the
young Princess, he hearing her but named, was suddenly moved with a passionate
tenderness of affection, which made him (after he had stood a pretty while
silent) say thus unto me:

My Lord, you shall do me a special courtesy in thanking the King of
Majorica and Prince Metaneone his sonne-in-law for the favors I received from
them in my Lindadori, and to tell them, that I mean shortly to send to fetch
her away, which friendly office I would have now prayed you to have done me, if
I thought that you could pass with her hither in safety. But our seas being
full of the vessels of the Tingitan, I doubt she cannot safely be conveyed
hither without a fleet, and I hope that to strengthen the convoy, both he and
the King of Mauritania will for such an occasion prove so courteous, as to lend
me their galleyes. The Princess (hearing this) ran to kiss his hands, and
he courteously (lifting her up) kissed her on the cheek, promising her to
perform it the next Spring, willing her (in the mean time) to take the charge
of putting all the galleyes in a readiness, and me on his behalf to write to
Mauritania, and to further the offices which he would cause to be there done by
his Ambassador; adding, that he would to that end send by me letters to the
King and Prince of Majorica. And further promising her (on his Royal word)
that when this were done, he would (for the accomplishment of her content)
immediately recall Prince Polimero, assuring her, that he was already well
pleased, that he came when he thought good.

Having heard this good news, and sent them in writing to Polimero, I went to
Majorica, where I found the no more now Lindadori, but Donzella Desterrada, so
displeased at her grandfather, as that she openly and plainly said, that she
would never see him more; which I at first conceiving to be some by-phrase that
some Lady had taken pleasure to teach her to say by rote, perceived it
afterward to be no such matter, sithence her uncle and aunt, and all the rest
with persuasions, and pretty alluring toys, endeavored to win her to the
contrary, though to no purpose; for, the generous girl, by reciting the
occasions she had to disaffect him, showed, that such conceits were her own,
and not infused into her by others.

Arato (by this time fully returned to his senses) not only disliked his
former extravagancies, but was sorry that he heard no news from his
sonne-in-law, who (not making account to return till after his father-inlawes
death) was parted for Greece, with a resolution to survey the utmost parts of
the earth, leaving in Athens his letters which were received of Eromena, with
that heaviness which an interrupted hope brings with it. Feign would she have
gone in person to seek him out; but Arato using no more now the authority
either of a King or father, showed her so many disswasive reasons, and so
earnestly entreated her to the contrary, that she yielded to his persuasions
upon the uncertainety of finding him out.

For Donzella Desterrada were galleyes a trimming, and new ones a building in
three several Arcenalls; mean while the Tingitan had his spies every where,
it being ordinary with him to spend more on them than on his soldiers.

The South has for its scourge the Tingitan, as the North has the
Scandinavian, who for their age, nature, and ends, a man would take for one and
the same thing; In those parts the one enjoyes all, in these the other
confounds, entangles and devoures all that he can; showing himself very
liberal to the corruption of States, taking example from the corruption of an
humane body, after which follows sickness, and after sickness death. Being
fortunate in having an advantage over all other Princes, not one of them using
such pollitick reaches and cunning ways in governing as he does; for which
sole reason he would by this time have gotten into his subjection all that part
of the world, if the great body of his dominions, and monstrous division of its
members (which in maintaining themselves contrast with nature) had not made the
end of his designs almost impossible. The three kingdoms of Majorica,
Sardinia, and Mauritania lie so near and fit for him, that he thinks himself
no King till he acquire those, so as he has many accomplices in every of them,
brought to be at his devotion by pensions and hopes which many times prevail
more than even present gifts themselves; for, when Kings govern after the
manner of ancient times, when there were not any superior forces, without
altering upon new occasions their old form of government, they do (in some
sort) foreshew their downe-fall; whereupon the more ambitious, aspiring to the
raising of their own particular fortunes, cannot choose but desire if not
attempt the ruin of their Prince and Country.

The Tingitan then having understood by these his spies, the secret preparation
of the fleet with the occasion thereof, was exceeding glad of it, and being
rich of invention hatched many projects, whereof he would be well content if
but any one took effect. First then he sent Ambassadors to all three, to
express how sorry he was, that the pirates (without any fear or danger)
insolently scoured all the coasts, and commanded the sea, whilst their galleyes
(to the common prejudice) lay rocked in their havens, of three things therefore
he demanded any one, that they would agree to, (which were) either that they
would clear the seas alone, or unite themselves with him, or else give way to
him to clear them alone at his own sole charge, which he would do, upon
condition, that the parts of all three stood open and free for him, and that
withal his fleet might have for money such provision as it should stand in
need of.

This embassy was by the wiser Statesmen taken for a martial defiance, and
the Ambassadors reputed for Harrolds, who entertaining themselves at the
charge of the Kings, (under pretext of staying for new Commissions) pried into
the secrets of the King and State that entertained them, the poasts and vessels
of intelligence (in the mean while) going and coming incessantly without any
business; long it was ere the answers were returned, by reason of the Kings
communicating them between them, that so they might the better accord on them;
for which end I was sent from Prince Metaneone to Sardinia, and thence to
Mauritania. The sum of their contents was;

That the Tingitan complained of what they had far more reason to complain
of, none of them having to do in that business. Sithence as for the Kingdom
of Majorica, that (alas!) could not be termed other than a point (as it were)
in the Mediterranean, and withal stood so far distant from Africa, as there
was no reason to charge it, where it had neither utility nor interest. That the
parts nearest it were the Tingitans now acquists in Iberia, and the farthest
off it Africa it self, being the Tingitan's ancient possession, so as the
defense thereof concerned him most, the pirates (a few excepted) being his
natural subjects, and nested in his own ports, where he might (if he pleased)
take them without a fleet; a deed well becoming both the justice of a good
King, and power of a great Monarch.

The same was answered for Sardinia, for being separated from Africa and its
commerce; she trafficking and trading with the opposite shores of Gaul,
Liguria, and Ausonia; adding, that she was sorry for the insolent roaving of
the pirates, whose pride she would be glad to see abated; yet held it not
fitting to do with more that which well might as well be done with less;
especially since each by himself (but with an unanimous accord) might in one
and the same time pursue and extirpate them, if the neighboring Kings would
but accord as well to do good, as they did to effect what was evil: which was
not indeed to be hoped for, because the pirates being his subjects and
harbored in his ports, had correspondencie with many great ones, and (what
imports more) the speech went, that they were countenanced by him himself.

And for Mauritania the answer was, That she wondered at his demand, she
suffering no damage by such rascally sea-scummers, who having their abode in
Tingitana, lie lurking only for the shipping of the Ocean, from whom they got
more than they were like to get from his, and whose being so molested and
hindered, redounded to the Tingitan's no small profit, the greater part of them
being such as before were his subjects, and colourably pretend to be rebels
against him; besides, that in case she were any way incommodated by them, she
would not expect to be led on or assisted by any other, but would with her own
sole forces and power chastise them conformable to their demerits. So might the
Tingitan also do (if he listed) being potent enough to effect it, without
borrowing foreign galleyes, or needing the use of foreign havens.

This last answer netled the Tingitan more than the other two, which he had
made known to the world too; but that he had enough to do elsewhere, yet
being desirous to lay a foundation to the ruin of that kingdom confining with
him by a long space of ground, besides its being that of his, its competitor by
name, and ancient enemy by neighborhood, he bethought himself how to gaul
him another way, without making any show of it, and that was, by putting in
execution a conceit of his, sprung from his fertile brain many years before.

There stands East of Mauritania the Island Melita, of a most strong situation,
under the command of a particular Prince; many times had the Tingitan thought
with himself, that to separate the countries, he had acquired in the West of
Europe from their assistants in the East, it behoved him to become Lord of the
sea, without which he was never able to enjoy his acquists, nor to pretend
claim to the rest, or live much above the common opinion of other ordinary
Princes: But not knowing where to set footing, he was advertised, how that in
this Island (owning most ample ports, under the jurisdiction of a weak Prince)
he might by sending thither unexpectedly a strange fleet, build a good
fortress, wherewith he might not only shut up the ports on that part of that
sea, as he had block't up on the other part those of the Ocean by his conquests
in Iberia, but also make way to the conquering of Sicily, and by it to that of
Ausonia, barring up the passage between Sicily and Africa, and penning in the
Islands within it, together with Mauritania, so as all those Kings could never
hope to be succored by other than their own forces.

This project till now being (as I said) immature in the fertile soil of his
braine-plot, grew upon this occasion to be fully ripened; for, gathering
together his galleyes (under pretense of sending them against pirates) and
ballacing them with tools and materials to build withal, he first scouring
amain along those coasts, passed before Majorica and Sardinia to terrify
them, and then (with his sails swollen with a fair stiff gale of wind) went
and landed unawares at port Euro in Melita, where (disembarking his troops)
he in a few days built a fortress, which at this day is unexpugnable. To the
Prince's Ambassadors (that came to know what that fleet pretended was
answered, that the King of Tingitana, taking into his careful consideration
the safety of that sea, because of the large share of dominions he had
thereabouts, (desirous to cleanse it from pirates, and understanding that the
Prince of Melita kept so important a port in danger of being seized on by some
foreign power for want of being fortified) had sent to build the sconce they
there saw, for the good of the Island, Prince, and all the Mediterranean Kings:
A charity by the Ambassadors judged tyranny and wicked hypocrisy, as if it
were lawful to rob and enjoy that which is another man's, for fear some other
should rob him of it and possess it. To this they answered, that their own
Prince would make one himself; whereunto was replied, that then he should do
well to treat of it with their King, for that subjects were bound to execute
such orders as they received.

The walls being thus reduced to a defensive form, the General leaving there
a strong Garrison and a Squadron of thirty galleyes, returned back, passing and
repassing in a braving manner before the channel of Birsa, so to hinder
Catalampo from joining with Arato: It was my chance to be then there, where I
saw the Mauritanian King stand a good while in a muse not knowing what to
resolve of; at length he thought of dispatching me into Sardinia, for
counselling Arato to send privily to fetch away the little Princess with a
swift shallop under my conduct, saying, that in desperate cases unlooked for
attempts thrive best. Since he could not possibly unite himself with him and
Majorica, for being hindered by the fleet that coasted his kingdom, but much
more for the danger he remained in, if when he wanted his fleet, the enemy
came and assailed him; besides, that although they were joined, yet lay it not
in their power (riding as they must have done in the open sea) to shun the
fight, wherein if they chanced to have the worst, then they lost all, if the
better, yet could they not reap from that victory other fruit than forcing
the enemy to a retreat, their forces being too weak to assault him at his
own home, the ordinary disadvantage of all those that war in defense.

Having received my instructions, I passed over to Sardinia upon a galley
reinforced to the full, where having delivered my embassage to Arato, I added:
That if the counsel seemed dangerous in his eyes, it might then very well be
suspended, there being not any urgent necessity that required (for ought I
knew) the return of the Princess in that instant, since that Metaneone and
Eromilia tendered her deerer than any daughter of their own, and would be loath
to hazard her unnecessarily to so great a danger. Upon this Eromena seeming to
sparkle fire out of her eyes, turning toward her father thus bespake him.

My Lord and Sovereign, it is a foul shame for us to endure to be so braved
and cubb'd in as we are; the return of my daughter (though nor otherwise
necessary than to enjoy the favor you have done me) should be hastened, were
it but to let the Tingitan see, that he with all his forces are not able to
hinder it, my opinion therefore is, that embracing the King my father-in-lawes
counsel, you send the Count of Bona to fetch her away.

The King consenting thereto gave order to the Admiral to arm secretly the
shallop of the Royal, and to double-man her with the best and choysest of the
whole fleet. I embarked my self the very same night, leaving my own galley
riding in the bay, which made every one think, that I was in Caleri, the King
giving out, that I was sick, and causing a fame to be spread abroad by a most
trusty physician of his, that my disease was both infectious, very dangerous,
and past all hope of recovery, with strictly forbidding all men from coming to
visit me.

I, in the mean time (resting neither day nor night, but changing rowers every
five miles, and leaving some to repose themselves whilst the others labored)
arrived (by force of oars in the still calm of summer with fresh ghing) at
Majorica; where wondering to see me come in such a vessel so unexpectedly, they
expected some bad news after the subjection of Melita; but the letters being
read, they resolved to deliver me, the Princess, that I might depart with her
that very night; and she (being already informed of the altering of her
grandsires humor) was now most willing to return; for though she loved well
her aunt, yet had she a great desire to see her mother; whom though she did
not otherwise remember than (as it were) in a dream, yet hearing that she was
fierce and martially given, she thought every hour an year till she might
feast her eyes with the delightsome spectacle of seeing her clad in complete
armor, that she also might arm her self with her. She was then near
thirteen years of age, of a stature somewhat taller than ordinary, and
withal so well proportioned, and in her deportment so graceful, as that she
had not her equal; her manners and demeanor were formed altogether after the
Idea of honor by nature, education, and hight of courage; for the rest, she
was endued with peculiar pure spirits, and inclinations quite different to
those of all other girls, yea and unto her very sex; It grieved her to be a
woman, because she could not endure man should be termed her superior, which
made her profess him open enmity. Love she would and hate too without any
mediocrity, friendship she would have to exceed reason, and reason to be
trampled under the feet of disdain; being all affects extreme, and unjust,
but yet generous.

Whilst then it was thought, that I (wearied with my sea-voyage) lay sleeping
in bed, having taken leave of the King and Metancone, and of Eromilias tears
(the children-princes and all the rest knowing nothing of this my parting) I
embarked this martial girl, accompanied with one only damsel and two
Knights: and returned (in the same manner as I came) without any breath of
wind, when the third night the arising of a thick dusky cloud (the Moon then
not appearing for being weary of running through almost all the Signs of the
Zodiake) so deprived us of the benefit of our sight, that in the maine sea, we
(thinking we were run against some rock) fell foul on the larbur side of a
fleere-galley of pirates, which (carried by the tide) fell toward us. The
shallop entangled in the shrowdes could not put off, and the pirates
(perceiving themselves shrewdly bruised) fell to their Arms, and killing some
of our Oare-men, became master of our shallop, ere we could well put our
selves in defense.

My grief for this unexpected disaster cannot be described, whose
unsupportablenesse would surely have forced me to drown my self, had there
not sprung from my heart I know not what kind of hope, which raised my spirits
to that hight of boldness, as to ask who they were, whereunto they as boldly
answering me, proved to be such as I well knew; yet doubting lest they should
violate the Princess, I (turning toward the principal among them) said thus
unto him:

Captain, you have in your hands a prey of a great value, from which you may
raise as great an utility, I beseech you then to use her with all due respects,
for which I promise you such a ransom as shall well merit your being courteous
unto her; upon this he asking me who I was, I told him freely; and for the
Princess, though I once thought to feign her my daughter, yet doubting my
being found a liar, would redound the more to her prejudice, and knowing that
the worst was but a matter of ransom, I preferred her security before any
interest of treasure whatsoever. He (glad of so rich a booty) promised me to
use her with all the respects that could be, praying me only to bring her
aboard the ship, where she should be well accommodated more at her ease in a
convenient chamber.

The Princess that from out the poope Room of the shallop had heard all, yet
spoke never a word, till after she had caused her self to be half clothed,
she asked who was there? whereupon I acquainted her with our misfortune, but
yet told her, that we were in the hands of a noble fellow that would not suffer
her to be any way injured; whereunto she (being very sleepy and void of
apprehension, peering out in the dark through the caban window, answered, that
it was no great matter; yet changing her disposition in an instant, with
shaking off her drowsinesse, and making a reflection upon my words, seeing
before her the ship and those smotty-faces, she concealing her disdainefull
anger, said, she would sleep no more, because it was day, which by then was
so indeed, the clouds together with the night vanishing away for fear of the
fiery look of the approaching Sun.

Then we passed over into the ship, where we were with interessed kindness
conveniently accommodated in the Castle of the poope, without being pestred
with any of their company, and bringing thither our bedding, they laid the
Princesse's bed in a little chamber, whereon she lay a while in her clothes,
causing her woman to lie down by her.

The pirates searching our shallop, and finding naught there (save victuals,
our Arms, and the Princesse's Jewels) towed her along, having first assured
her with six of their men to secure her from the rowers already disarmed.

At Sunne-rising there began to breathe a gentle breath of wind, so as
desirous to spread the sails, one of the saylors came abaft to the misen mast
near us, and where the Princess (come out of her chamber with her
Gentlewoman, to shun the sweltry hot air of her caban) was laid her down
upon a quilt. This fellow being a lusty young lad (as soon as he espied them)
in beastly manner threw himself upon the Gentlewoman that was nearest him,
straightly embracing her to force a kiss from her, The Princess not
accustomed to such sports, seizing on a whinyard she spyed hanging at his
side, stabbed him with many thrusts, not without endangering th Gentlewoman;
the young fellow escaping out of her hands, lept down, showing of himself a
miserable spectacle to his companions.

The Castle of the poope was the standing-place of the archers, and therefore
well furnished with bows, arrows, spears, and javelings to steed them in
occasions of boording. The Princess took a bow in hand without any further
intention, than to assay if she had well learnt that art. Whilst the pirates
looking for no worse than what was past, desirous to chastise our boldness,
and not believing that such stabbes were given by a maidens hand, would needs
come up to us: we (fortified by the odds of our side) kept them off with
half pikes we there found, which (for all that) had done us but small
service, if the Princess had not secured us with her bow, whose ascendent
being Sagittarius it was no marveile, if she never shot that she either
wounded or killed not.

I seeing the two sides well defended, seconded the stout Princess with
another bow, the Gentlewoman supplying both of us with arrows; but it was not
possible for me to level one shaft aright, for she triumphing in her hits,
came to me to rejoice for them, as it our shooting had been in jest, and those
living bodies immovable marks not to be accounted of. Our good-fortune
indeed was the indiscretion of the pirates, who excepting in the poope, and on
maine Top, had never a bow; therefore they went climing along the shrowdes to
get to the maine-yard, but ere they scarce could proffer to touch a rope, they
still fell down dead or wounded; yet they having no other save this one
(though dangerous) way to releeve themselves, thought to attempt it in so many
several places at once, as the obstinate resolution of many might gain time
of our few shaftes, so as they endeavored to get up by clammering by three and
three upon diverse several tackles.

The Princess glad to have the pleasure of varying her shots ministered her by
their so varying of her marks, bethought her of a subtlety fitter indeed to
be experimented some other time; and that was, to try if (leaving the men) she
could cut in two the shrowdes; whereupon making her aim at the file of the
rope, she clove it in twain, which for being well twisted, received the blow
for them that climbed it up; but being unable to bear their weight, burst just
in the cloven place, letting the three fall down on the hatches between dead
and stupefied: Of this shot the Princess was so exceeding joy full, as she
ran to embrace me, showing me (by pointing at) those that tumbled down with
such gladsomnesse, as greater she could not have conceived at any recreative
spectacle whatsoever. And I busied in shooting, did applaude her for it, to the
end she might neither give over her self nor hinder me.

The Captain seeing the bloody slaughter of his men, stood crying, and lifting
up his hand, with a desire (it should seem) to speak some thing: Be there the
Princess deeming that posture of his worthy one of her arrows, shot at him,
wherewith she nailed fast his hand to his mouth, as if the one had enjoined the
other to silence, so as in the self same time she paid and he received her
ransom. In fine, she slew so many of them, as I with the two Knights durst
(though unarmed) descend to make an end of the rest, who were crouch't and
squatted down to shelter and hide themselves, some behind the masts, and
others beneath in the sink.

In the shall op were heard these great outcries, though the occasion thereof
was unknown, till the accoasting of the six to one of the sides afforded our
Knights the commodity to tell our Oare-men that the ship was by us taken, and
all her men slain; whereupon they, suddenly assaulting their guardians, slew
three of them, and had not then staid their hands, but for my crying out to
them to save the rest alive.

The Princess then laying aside her bow, returned all-quiet into her shallop,
and having given the sack of the ship unto her rowers, we set her a fire and
so left her, arriving in Caleri the day following.

The King understanding that she was arrived at the haven, would needs go in
person to meet her, followed with such shoutings for joy by the Court, City,
and whole kingdom, as the like was not seen for many years before. The old
King could never satiate himself in making much of her, and blaming himself
for his fault, for which he had done sufficient penance by being (for so long a
time) deprived of her all-delighting company. Eromen a likewise (giving full
reins to her extreme affection) expressed unto her a mothers unparalleled
tenderness to an only child.

Whilst thus she stood halfe-extasied with joy, there were presented her
letters from Polimero, written from Pelusio, wherein he promised to return
shortly into Greece; Whereupon both father and daughter praid me to go to
find him out, and bring him home: Whence being for this effect parted, I
happened to come hither in the manner you already wot of.

Extreme was the delight which all of them conceived at the Count's narration;
in way of courteous expression where of the Prince assured him, he would not
depart till he saw him accommodated, who soon after sent Cataulo to the Prince
of Feacia (that resided not far thence in one of his houses of pleasure) with
order to tell him who he was, and also to acquaint him with his resolution of
parting thence, (though not without first thanking him for the favors received
of him) and to entreat him, that he might (with his Princely assent) leave
that place to a Knight, who being banished from his Country, would (so it
stood with his Highness good liking) make his abode there. He charged him
further, to enquire out for some ship bound for Greece.

Full sorry was the old Prince, for having had in his house veiled under such a
habit so great a Prince, without honoring him conformable to his high quality;
causing therefore his horses to be sadled, he went to visit him. Feredo taking
by the hand the Knight of the tears, went to meet him, whom (when they had
done complementing) he presented unto him, with saying, that he had
substituted him to be his servant in his steed, whereunto the Prince answered,
that he was sorry for his parting, but embraced the favor of his substitute,
not to expect any service from him, but to do him the service he owed his
substitutor.

Going afterward to take his leave, he had much ado to find justifications
against the courteous quarrels of the Princess, to whom he presented (as
unknown) the Knight that she well knew before; and then having courteously
resigned him his house and servants, he parted for Feacia, whence taking his
journey toward the Western parts, he kindly took leave of the Count of Bona
and Don Eleimos, who embarked themselves together, turning their prow toward
the Eastern territories.

The end of the first Book OF Donzella Desterrada.
Cavalier Gio. Francesco Biondi HIS DONZELLA DESTERRADA. THE SECOND BOOK.
POlimero (after the Count's departure) remained in Athens, full little
satisfied with his content-thwarting fortune; Much was he (good Prince)
afflicted with the heart-stinging memory of the King his father-in-law's
froward humors, difficult to be purged by reason of his bloods being corrupted
not by any cureable infirmity, but by that desperately incureable disease
[oldage.] What to resolve of he knew not, his discontented mind become now
both Sergeant and Jailer to arest and imprison his ambiguous will, so as he
found himself (by being so deprived of his free will) quite excluded from all
choice of running any course conformable to the noble inclination of his
heroike Genius.

True it is, that at his arrival there, he thought (by frequenting those
famous Schools) to ease the pain of his wounded mind, with the sovereign
balm of Philosophy, which he heard to be there propagated with precepts
directed to its use. But when he came to experiment it by his own occular
observation, he found it far short, if not quite different from his
expectation, in that the lives and manners of the professors held no conformity
with what they professed, the later requiring the solid truth, the former
content with the superficial truth-resembling, the one reality of matter, the
other formality of words.

Strange seemed it to him, That the repeating by rote a thing read in a bare
literal sense, without understanding its true meaning, was reputed knowledge.
That a compendiary way might serve for a master-path of disciplines, whereas
indeed science cannot be reduced to a compendiousnesse in respect of the
infiniteness of intelligible objects. And that mere discourse sufficed to
teach one virtue, whilst vices were learnt in a measure so boundless, as there
could never be found actions or means enough to put them in practice. All
which are no less fond than false conceits, entertained and approved by common
Custom, but not by a well-instructed Polimero; That Custom being a false,
popular, and appealeable Judge, for being often the cause that the white of
virtue is hit by so few; and that the greater number having no staidness nor
assurance in their aim, shot wide of all sides of the Butt.

He therefore resolved, after he had first given order whither any letters to
him should be directed (leaving the rest of his attendants behind him) to part
thence, waited on by no other than Catasio. His first journey was for Egypt,
which Country then (thanks to its good Kings) flourished in the excellency
of all things. Psemitide at that time reigning, had extended his dominions
along'st the seacoasts, from the mouths of Nile to the Western Promontory,
having acquired of the Inland all from the Arabian Creek to Mount Azaro,
containing some thirteen degrees in longitude, without comprehending the eight
of latitude thence to the Libian sea. Passing then Eastward of the Tropicks,
his Sovereignty reached even to the Equinoctial in Ethiopia, placed between
the Arabian sea (as far as the Troglodites) and that continued file of
Mountains which sever it from the Garamants. The scope of his intent was to
come as far as the springs of Nile in the Mountains of Luna, and there to
bound and terminate his dominions, but that the dangerous sands, the scortching
heat of the Sun, and (above all) the uncertainety of finding them out, made
him alter his designed intention.

Returned home, he would needs there also out-doe, and surpass his
predecessors in all things, for slighting the Piramides (as but Tombs of the
dead) he with a till-then-unheard-of-wonder founded a City in the waters in
the midst of the Lake Meride, assembling there such as (for having been by the
sword expelled from elsewhere) were desirous to give this new miracle a
beginning.

The Streets there were Channels, the Coaches stately Barges fortified at both
ends with long necks of bright steel engrailed, and covered with such pompous
stateliness and stately commodiousnesse as stirred up envy in the starry ship
of the firmament. The buildings (emulating the great-designes of Kings) were
not private, but royal edifices, and from one part of the City to the other
were (in various prospectives) reared up divine-seeming Temples, and sumptuous
Palaces, enriched with furniture worthy to entertain Sovereign Princes; for
the rest, as the beauty of the women, the commerce of trade, the liberty and
concourse of all sorts of people, it is a description not to be comprehended
otherwise, than by the Organ of the eye guided by the ray of a perfect
judgment: And withal, that this his City might not be any way defective, he
made it a free State, subject to nothing but laws, and such laws too as
indeed raised it to a pitch of immortality, for being grounded on equity the
only law written in men's hearts by the hand of Nature.

Thither would Polimero's will have presently guided his longing eyes, but that
it was retarded by the inviting commodity of his being so near the Piramides,
where Architecture bred in him no less admiration, than their excessive charge
astonishment: Surveying them therefore with an observant eye, he chanced to
epsy in one of them a great deal of blood, and a little further a young woman
wounded, whose habit denoted her to be of eminent quality, her years seemed to
be short of six and twenty, her countenance was pale and wan, yet not so
altered as to hinder the conceit to discern the perfections of an exquisite
(though martirized) beauty.

Now Polimero had with him a guide and two men, who carried upon two camels his
pavilion and victuals, having sent then Carasio to cause the former to be
pitched, and to fetch thereout some unguents, he night see her a little after
come to her self; her tongue and voice were deprived of the use of their
organs, yet seemed she by the expressive signs she made with her eyes and
hands, silently to pray him not to discover her.

Carasio being returned, found to be in her breast and lower down in her flank
three deep wounds: yet the probe managed by a gently-expert hand (long before
to his Lords cost Master in that art) assured her of her life: Polimero being
(in the mean time) busied in comforting her, and using courteous force in
constraining her to endure the being dressed, without being able to get one
word out of her, till (a while after) when her pain was by the medicaments
operation somewhat assuaged, she began in the Greek tongue, to ask where she
was? and being by Carasio answered, In merciful hands, unlike to those that so
hardly had used her, she thanked him; and then turning to Polimero-wards, and
pitifully weeping.

Courteous Sir (said she) I am in good hope you will not aband on me wretched
woman, but that (to oblige me the more to your goodness) you will cause me to
be (by some means or other) brought to Memphi. Polimero (assuring her that he
would rather abandon his own life than leave her unaccompanied) persuaded her
to take her repose; and sending the day following for some that (for the
service of passengers) dwelt near the piramides, he having caused them to
contrive with many poles joined together a kind of a litter, made them therein
carry her to the next village, because it was impossible to bring her to Memphi
in the dangerous plight she then lay in, her weakness withal so increasing
as they many times reputed her dead, many days expiring ere they could
conceive any assured hope of her life.

Exceeding loath was Polimero to leave her, though he yet had an extreme
great desire to see those countries ere his return to Greece; observing
therefore the critical days, and forecasting with himself how that by the
judgment which by them and by the wounds Carasio made, it would be long ere
she could be cured, he resolved to go thence alone, and to leave Carasio with
her, whereunto he would by no means assent, but become now (contrary to his
accustomed carriage) disobedient, would in any case obstinately follow him,
endeavoring by all means possible to persuade his Lord to the acceptance of
his necessary attendance, by laying before him a thousand accidents that in
such a journey might befall him. Till in the end his Lord was feign to command
him absolutely to stay there behind him.

Polimero then setting himself forwards on his way to Memphi, without knowing
any foot thereof, lost the direct rode, so as his horse the third day of his
journey carried him to some of those low grounds, which the Nile by its
frequent inundations makes in many places to become fenny; where not knowing
which way to get out, he made toward a plat of ground bearing canes,
whereunto the nearer that he approached. the more distinctly might his
attentive ear hear one while the loud shoutes of skreeching voices, and
another while the uncouth murmr of dying groans, which though they still more
and more increased, yet deprived they him not of hearing also the sound of
blows as of men fighting; come thither on a speedy gallop, and discovering
what (for the canes) he could not before discern, he saw one Knight alone
combated, beaten off his horse and wounded; the assaulters being above thirty,
and all Arabians, the greater part whereof lay down on the field either dead
or wounded, (with such marveilous dexterity swayed that one his sword) so as he
being armed seemed to fight with them being unarmed, as with beasts that had
neither tooth nor tallent, yet had they for all that unhorst him with the rude
blows of poles and clubs, whereto he was for fear of killing his horse
constrained to cede.

But no sooner came Polimero, than they were forced to save themselves by
flight, for, he encountering him that had seized on the Courser, bare him to the
ground with a thrust, and then taking the Steed gently by the reins,
courteously presented him to the Knight, who lightly remounting him, slew of
them as many as he could come at, assisted by the valor of his companion, who
seeing them betaken to their flight (not daigning to pursue them) came to him
and asked how he felt himself; he affectionately thanking him, answered, that
he had no hurt at all, which indeed was true, though his wounded thigh by its
free bleeding gave the spectators eye occasion to suspect the wound to be far
more dangerous than it was.

This Knight seemed not to be above eighteen years of age, which bred the
greater wonder in Polimero, who taking from out his saddle-bow a box of
ointment (prepared for him by Carasio for such like occurrences) carefully
dressed him, understanding by him (in the mean while) that the fray sprung from
no other occasion, than from the desire they had to rob him, the ordinary
profession that these bloody villains lived by.

Desirous therefore to know whitherward he went, (for that he was loath to
leave him in those perilous places alone) he understood that his way tended
toward the red Sea, to pass over thence into Arabia, where he had some small
affairs of his own to dispatch: and this expressed he in a strangely-intricate
manner of speech, which being composed of sundry languages, would (for the well
understanding of it) give a good linguist somewhat to do. It seemed to
Polimero, that he should know that accent whereof he grew soon afterward to
be more assured, when observing the devise of his shield, he saw there a Swan,
which coming out of the Sea, pitched his foot upon an Island, that (by the
number of bones that there might be seen) seemed to be a Churchyard,
environed with a motto in the Etrutrian character and tongue, which imported,
No matter so I but sing. And being in that tongue praid to discover what that
device intimated, he answered:

That fortune having now at length driven him ashore on a most pleasant Island,
he (having till then champed on the bit of a continued though undue affection
toward his, to him unjust and ungrateful Country) had resolved to end there
his days, yet in such a condition as he might not dye there obscurely. And
that as the swan (if it be true that he dies singing) publishes his death with
the melody of his song, even so desired he also to have his actions appear to
be such, as might leave a good name behind him, so as death should gain
nothing by him save his bones only.

Full well pleased was Polimero with so accomplished a spirit, remembering that
contemners of fame are commonly despisers of virtue; and though the desire of
eternizing it be indeed in some respects a most vain affect, yet is it
nothing so in such as consider the branch whence bud forth those generous acts
which make a man become beneficial to the community of humane society.

Beholding him therefore more observantly, he might see his upper garments and
bases all over slasht and shagg'd, rather with swords than with any instrument
of ingenious invention, so as in an habit of simple show his quality promised
very much, and that too very contrary to the present being he then appeared in;
but in his face (being the paper wherein Heaven imprints the character of good
and evil) might be read a constant nobleness: There also might be discerned
lamps of heroical inclinations, so as neither poverty nor destiny were able
either to remove the one or obscure the other, wherewith Polimero was so taken,
as he would (by all means) bear him company to some secure place, no more now
for pitties sake, but to satisfy the ardent desire he had to enjoy his
company.

Being both then come (with no mean toil) to a Countrey-farme, and there
informed, how they were (by then) come past Memphi to the seaward in the
confines of Arabia, subject to the Egyptian; Polimero told him, that (for his
part) his affairs made no distinction of Countries, seeing that
Knight-errantry governing it self from one accident to another, was neither
observer of days nor provident storer for aftertimes; and that therefore
since he was come on so far, he now intended to see whether the further
Arabia enjoyed with just title the surname of Happy.

The young Knight (with his cogitations parted between perturbation and
pleasure) stood pawsing a good while, without making him any answer; till after
having by the examination of his judgment found him to be neither Araba nor
Egyptian, but rather of those countries where himself was bred in, and by
consequence not to be suspected, he thus bespake him.

Noble Sir, if you had not already so much obliged me to your merits, you then
had at this instant bound me to be eternally yours by this your resolution,
which (but for doubt of arrogating too much to my self) I should conceive to
be done in favor of me. But be it as it be will, it cannot but constrain
me to kiss your hands for it, beseeching you to believe it employed on one
that shall serve you whilst he breathes. Or if I be deceived in so flattering
my self, and that you have a desire to survey those parts merely for your
pleasure and minds sake: Behold me then most ready and willing to attend and
serve you: If neither that nor this, but that this days example, or your
pitying my youth and weakness, moves you to leave me not unaccompanied; be
pleased then (worthy Sir) to give me leave to tell you, that the profession I
am of, wills me to beseech you to spare your self that labor.

Polimero (having from the beginning of his suspension observed in him some
concealed suspicion, and in its progress many reasons which denoted a kind of
a strange reservednesse in his demeanor, desirous to know what he was) framed
him this reply.

I cannot (Sir Knight) deny my going for Arabia to be a new resolution
conceived in this very instant, though I shall entreat you to believe me, that
to go thither rather than elsewhere is to me a thing indifferent, my
business consisting wholly on the passing away of two or three months time,
nor will I tell you, that my desire to wend that way is sprung from the gust I
conceive from your company (which I would not confess unto you to be so,
though it were, lest you (whom I see so repleat of courtesy) might pretend
your self beholding to me for it) only this much I affirm, that these
countries make me hate solitariness; and since that fortune has made me so
happy as to light on your company, I would not willingly forgo the benefit and
content of enjoying it, but rather heartily offer (for the accomplishing or
furthering of any affair of yours) my person at your free dispose and service.

The excellent Polimero had in expressing himself a natural efficacy,
accompanied with a kind of winning behavior far from any dissimulation, a
quality as noble again being discreetly employed, as prejudicial being used
indifferently to all men: this was it that persuaded the Knight, not only to
accept but desire his company.

That night they reposed themselves, riding the day following toward Arsinoe,
during which time Polimero by taking a particular survey of all his actions,
observed how in his discourse his mind would be often alierated from the
subject treated of, and (then a little after) recover it self again, which
gave him occasion oft-times to tell him smiling, that surely love should be the
occasioner of these abstractions, in which point the other forbore a while to
satisfy him, yet could not at length (after diverse excuses and new demands)
choose but return him this answer.

Worthy Sir, I acknowledge and judge my self over-discourteous in concealing
from you my being and affairs, yet fear my proving much more injurious in
drawing on (perhaps) (by acquainting you with-them) your forward goodness to
bear a share in my perils. I beseech you then to believe, that this was the
sole cause of my being hitherto silent, and the obligation of obeying you the
only spur that now pricks me on to reveal unto you the true and whole
story of my life and being, albeit I yet know you for no other than for the
most courteous Cavalier living. Here Polimero suddenly interrupting him,
answered.

Gentle Sir, your knowing me in so favorable a construction is too too
courteous, wherein if you be mistaken (which I would be sorry you should) yet
shall you not be deceived in knowing me for Polimero of Mauritania, Prince of
Sardinia, who if before he were inquisitive of your being, only to be
acquainted with you, desires now to know you, to the end he may lend you his
assistance in any thing he may steed you in; wherein I pray you spare me not,
for I assure you, that the greater the danger which you propose me shall be,
the more shall I think my self favored by you.

The young Knight exceeding glad of this offer, excused himself in the best
terms he could imagine, for not having borne him the respects due to the
eminency of his quality, with promising, that he would yet make him amends (in
part) for that defect, by acquainting his Highness with some news which (he
was sure) would well please him; and therewithal told him; How that his
Father-in-law King Arato had (now some-while sithence) fully recovered his
health and senses; whereof the first sign was, his sending to fetch (by the
Count of Bona) Donzella Desterrada from Majorica, relating unto him the story
of the pirates, and acquainting him with what tears of joy she was welcomed
home by her Grandfather: The second was, the ardent desire he had to see him
his son-in-law again; for which end he (not knowing how to accomplish it
otherwise more speedily) had with the privity and counsel of the Princess
Eromena given order to the Count of Bona to go fetch him home, who (at his
parting thence) had not for ought he could learn (as then) begun his voyage,
but could not (for all that) choose but be by then at Athens, where he was to
enquire whither to go to find him out.

Inestimable were the joys that Polimero conceived at these good news, for
which he (affectionately embracing the Knight) assured him, that he was not
able to express his thankfulness; But gathering by his discourse that he
came not thence, he asked him, how he came to know these passages: Sithence
it is (answered him the other) your Highness pleasure to command me to lay
open unto you my being and quality, you shall therefore by the story of my life
understand where I might have heard them, assuring you in the mean time, that
your Highness need no whit to doubt of their certainty. Polimero (more
curious now than before) praid him to do him the favor of relating it.
Whereupon the other (who was Coralbo son to the Queen, and heir of Arabia)
succinctly recounted to him his past fortunes; the beginning whereof is in the
sixth Book of Eromena, whose progress he continued in these words.

Sotiro kept me in the Island of Capraia till I came to be six years of age,
mistrustfull of the very air, and observing with a jealous eye even the poor
fishermen that came thither, and many times suspecting their simplicity to be
some counterfeit train to steal me away; till upon discreetly considering,
that superfluous and over-nice care in bringing up a child, does often deprive
him of the means of well-receiving any good breeding: he thought it needful
to hazard me somewhat more, by committing me (my years now requiring it) unto
a civil society. Away then took he me from the Island, and with me as much of
the treasure as he thought necessary for my maintenance for many years,
burying the residue under the rubbish and ruins of the Cottage, (having first
burnt all its timber and thatch, lest the commodity of the materials might
invite any man to build it up anew:) which done, he placed me to the study
of Arts (I having before hand during the time of our abode in the Island learned
of him my first rudiments of humanity;) But he (good man) entertained of me
too too elevated an opinion, in being persuaded, that Nature had bestowed on me
a peculiar ingenuity of examining her ways, seeing that in the investigation
thereof, no means which I judged either insufficient or vain could give me
any kind of satisfaction. Pedants and their ways were unto me insupportable,
I could not brook the being necessitated to believe what they said, only
because they said so; as if the intellect could be satisfied with the bare
authority of such kind of people, when the true reasons (being by them either
harshly or not at all explicated) are so far distant from their purblinde
sight, as is the South point from the inhabitants of the Artick Pole.

A glad man was Sotiro to see me to his thinking so punctual, hoping that the
speculation of general things would wear out of my memory the smarting
thought of my own particular crosses; and that by becoming stupefied by
continual poring on books, I might happily shun the eminent dangers which
hung over my head, by occasion of the waking curiosity of knowing what I was.
Yet I vow unto you by Mars, that, though no man gave me ever any such inkling,
I yet never believed him to be my father (albeit he ever preached me such a
doctrine) were it for the respect he bore me, or that some Genius so inspired
me. Suffice it, that among my general speculations, I never abandoned my
private and particular ones, to loose the knot of this my so important doubt,
which I reduced at length to this certain proposition, that (for certain) he
was not my father.

Most true it is, that I called to mind my having seen the Princess
Eromilia, who with her husband the Prince of Mauritania (your renowned brother)
chanced to land in our Island, when I was yet but four years old; and that he
having admitted them to our secret dwelling, had (without heeding me) made
them a punctual relation of my fortunes, whereof there remained in me a
certain impression, which though then obscure and imperfect, became afterward
in time more clear and perspicuous; so as I was no sooner grown up to be ten
years old, than I began to raise my spirits to such a pitch, as to pretend to
become from his son and pupil, to be his Master and Prince, which though I
declared not openly in words, yet did my carriage and actions manifest as much;
for (rejecting my books) I then took no pleasure in any thing I had formerly
learnt, save only Music, the exercise of Chivalry and Arms grown indeed to
be now the chief Lords of my desires, which I drank thirstily with my eyes,
for not being yet able to practice them, because of the tenderness of my
years; and with the same facility wherewith I had learnt the Arts, conceived I
also the precepts that I heard given in the exercise of Arms, intentively
meditating on the terms and ways of both warding and striking, and
consideratly practicing it alone by myself; strictly observing if one foot
corresponded in due distance to the other, if my pace were constantly-varying,
my point continually-moving, or rather giring about the center of a true guard,
and my thrusts put on with a fair reach, seconded with a proportionate, firm,
and nimble retire, or nod; handling otherwhiles (for loosening of my hand, and
confirming of my nerves and pulse) some massy thing or other, with enduring
and practicing my self in advancing, retiring, and imitating whatsoever I had
seen done by any judicious weapon-man.

These ways of mine Sotiro noted with great disgust, sprung from the fear he
conceived, lest such a study united to the nobility of my birth, might in time
occasion my fatal overthrow; for which he (become now severe) did often jerke
me; so as I being unable to endure him, determined with my self to run away
from him; which determination of mine grew soon afterward to be confirmed to
a resolution, by my chancing to get into my hands a Book of errant-chivalry,
in so much as I persuaded myself to find (as soon as I were gotten out of the
walls) an enchantresse to furnish me with horse and Arms, and some unknown
Prince to dubbe me a Knight. But meeting by chance with a pilgrim, and
putting my self into his company; it was my fortune to be stopped for getting
out by some of the watch that knew me, whom a little more had incited to stay
for company my new Camerade, out of the suspicion they conceived of his having
seduced me away.

Upon this occasion Sotiro advertised my mother of my disobedience to
him-wards, whereupon she (good woman) egged on with a motherly affection took
on her to go to perform a vow she had made to Jupiter Ammon, and so came in
pilgrims weeds to see me; which journey of hers (though far) was yet neither
very toylesome nor over-difficult; for she fraighting a-shippe in one of the
mouths of Nile, fared by sea as far as the port of the Goddess Venus, and
thence without any great ado came and found us out at Nepa, where we then
sojourned. I know not whether was then greater, the wonder or discontent of
Sotiro to see her, conceiting, that her coming tended to the destruction of
the foundation of my education, laid by him rather with an intention to
conserve me in safety from the knowledge of my cruel brother-in-law, than to
restore me (with such eminent dangers) to the greatness of my birth; and thus
much made he known unto her ere she saw me. All which notwithstanding she
(were it for the greatness of her mind, or that she were impatient to live
long without me) having a purpose quite contrary to his, would needs make me
know her for my mother, with intention to take me home with her; till he
(discreetly reasoning with her of the imminent dangers that hung over my head,
and letting her plainly see, how ruinous a foundation the relying on the
wavering love of the people was) after she had for two months space staid
with us, persuaded her (with much ado) to return without me, having first
straightly charged me to the obedience of Sotiro, as of the faithfullest and
truest friend, she had found and tried in the worst of her adverse fortunes.

The course they resolved on, was, to suit my education to my years, (wherein
I went advancing) and in such a way as might enable me when I came to mature
years to be mine own counselor, as soon as I had attained to the strength
of putting it in execution, and years not to be contemned of such as yet
conserved in the closet of a loyal breast, her and my fathers memory and
affection.

My mother being then gone, I remained with a mind more prompt and heedfull to
the instructions of Sotiro, being assured, I should one day take such a course
of life as were most conformable to my own Genius. Yet began I now to addict
my self to the exercise of Arms and riding, retaining of my old studies,
only such things as bred in me the greater delight and liking; for being such
as might really steed me in some of my important occasions, it being indeed a
tenent undeniable, that disciplines illuminate the intellect, making it more
apt for humane affairs, and that from them discourse receives ornament, and
prudence an essential stay.

By now I was got free from under the subjection of Pedants, the only
insupportable weight that over-loaded me; the observant Sotiro was well pleased
to see me (without abandoning suddenly my first education) apply my mind of my
own accord) to the Mathematics, with an intention to steed me there with in
the Art Millitary: But the habit which I had gotten in speculation, was the
cause that not contenting my self with that part which that study required, I
would needs assay the other which pretends to measure the heavens, calculate
the course of the Planets and stars, and to know their nature, influence and
inclinations. From which sprung the curiosity of knowing also what they
promised me, excepting always the divine providence, against which neither
influence, science, art, nor artist can in the least measure prevail. I
comprehended that all was but vanity, and found the wise-mans saying true, that
who-so accumulates knowledge, heaps up but trouble and vexation of spirit: For
I found an unfortunate ascendent, a fall of parents, loss of goods, recovery
thereof none or small, late, and subject to the will and power of others; the
love of Princes, but without effect, a good fame and repute, but a fortune bad,
lame, and weak; so as I could have wished never to have known it; such ado
had I in striving not to believe it, though both divinity and reason dissuaded
me from giving any credit to it.

Thus spent I my time while Sotiro lived, which was till I came to be
thirteen years old; with being by him sometimes instructed for traveling
State-pollicie and practices of Princes Courts, as far as that age was
capable of, not as yet of the fittest for such judgement-requiring disciplines;
yet (me thought) it did me good in razing from my intellect oblivion, and in
its steed bringing in the memory of such things as I possessed when I was last
in the world: If so be it be true, that when the Firmaments slow gire is ended,
we either return to live again with the same accidents, manners and qualities
as before, or that we pass from one body into another.

After my mothers departure, we continued there some two years without
hearing any news from her, or sending any body to her; for that we daily
expected some messenger from her, till at length, seeing no body came, Sotiro
(mistrusting that some disaster had befallen her) resolved to send to learn
the truth thereof. He and I having spent sometime in surveying of foreign
parts, were by this time returned from our travels to Etruria, and thence to
Capraia, where we were to expect what answer the messenger would bring us, but
there (to our grief) we found the Caban leavelled with the ground, the
dwelling under the soft stone broken open, and discovered, and all the treasure
stolen away: The other losses, though no less than of kingdoms were all
nothing in comparison of this, which made the good Sotiro (who examined its
consequences more feelingly than I) to fall into a mellancholy so deep and
grievous, that for its being incureable by either Physicians skill, or virtue
of medicines; he (shortly after our return to Nepa) took his last leave of
both me and the world: which I, that (drawn on with childish affections) had
till then wished him dead, took (now that I had obtained my desire) so to
heart, as I wonder that I in some of my many extreme fits of grief, died not
after him. Then was it and not before, that I came to know his tender loving
care, and my obligations to him for it his happiness to be rid of worldly
troubles, and my hard fortune to remain over-loaden with them in a tender age,
without parents, government, means, or counsel. Only the Heavens (who caused
me to be borne for toil and sorrow) had given me withal bodily force and
courage, that I might live to endure their influences.

I had yet left me a small residue of that coin which Sotiro took with him,
when we first parted from the Island (as I told you) wherewith I purposed to
expect the answer of our messenger, and then to go for Arabia. Till after
seeing, that for the space of a year and more I had expected it in vain,
without hearing any news of either our messenger or any other in his steed, I
resolved by going my self to be both ambassador and embassy: For Nature
having together with making me to be borne a Prince, endued me with a spirit
conformable to that dignity, drew me on to the impossibility of the journey,
and yet seemed to delay it by violently hurrying me on the wheels of an
over-free disposition to bounties disproportionable to the state I was in; and
this chiefly, because (poor as I was) the miseries of other men touched my
compassion nearer the quick than any of mine own. So is it (for the most part)
wont to befall such, as are predestined to perish; for, whom fortune cannot
bring to ruin by means of open vices, those she precipitates down the
precipice of misery by the means of masked virtues, which lose their name,
though not their luster. Because impoverishing by malignity of destiny,
engenders compassion, whereas such as hazard the falling into a greater poverty
when fortune has forewarned them of it, deserve to suffer for their folly: and
liberality itself grown to be prodigality, and so become its owners foe, both
draws contempt on them, and shows others the way of being ungrateful toward
them. To be short, I staid so long till the wings of my liberality were so
clipped, as I was feign to depart accompanied with no other than my old
foster-father, even he that whilome had carried me in his arms one of
Cardamina.

Come near that we were to Parthenope in the Sannits Country, we lighted on
a company of highway thieves, from whom whilst I did my best to defend my
self, the poor old man was slain before my face; his death I to my utmost
power endeavored to revenge, till beaten off my horse, robbed and stripped, I
lay on the ground half dead and senseless all the night, scaping narrowly
from being trodnn under foot, by a strong squadron of horse that came prancing
that-a-way by the break of the next day, if two of their Scouts had not (by
good fortune) chanced to hear me groan; who making thereupon a stand, and
espying the dead bodies, and among them my unfortunate self, robbed, stripped,
and wounded, they soon imagined what had been done, which made them return
to give an account of what they had found and seen; On this, the rest spurring
on in a fair troop, with a Lady in the midst of them, came where I was: But
she, commiserating my youth and woeful plight, (seeing my weakness
disenabled me of satisfying any demand of hers) caused my wounds to be bound
up; and then being by her commandment laid in a horse-litter that followed
her, I began to come to my self, and to beseech them either to bury my
foster-father, or to let me lie there and dye with him for company, with giving
them special marks and counter-signes to know him from the rest; whereupon he
was laid athwart one of their horses, and so carried to a Castle hard by and
there buried; and thus the first act of my tragedy ended.

I remained a long time in cure, my wounds (which were all deep and inward)
being aggravated with many raving-feaverish fits, my body withal become now so
void of blood, as it was a wonder it remained not void of life.

The noble Lady, touched with a fellow-feeling pity of my hurts, came often to
visit me, the desire to see me cured daily increasing in her noble heart, so
as at the recovery of my spirits, she began to change her compassion into a
love-preceding pity.

This Lady being the greatest Princess of that Country was a widow fresh and
fair, and a mother of two sons. Little dreamed I (God wot) of any affection
of hers, nor had I (alas!) any reason to hope for any such matter, my weakened
body being sore all over by reason of my wounds, my dejected mind afflicted
for my irrecoverable losses, and my wretched self so bereft of my good hopes,
as I knew not how to dispose of my self if I were recovered: And though
hope-inspiring youth endeavored the best it could to cut off the plummets
thread wherewith the depth of miseries were sounded, yet the extremity of my
over-hard fortune forcibly countermanding it, vanquished both youth and nature,
and subjected their bold necks to the heart-mastering yoke of
despaire-ushering mellancholy, in so much, as upon considerate examination of
my deplorable condition, I heartily wished rather my death than recovery; till
after that the channels of my veins began to be replenished with fresh springs
of blood, I then grew to be somewhat better consolated, though I yet knew not
whether it then proceeded more from the sweet pity or rare beauty of the
Duchess Crisanta, for so was she called. I had (I confess) lightly assaid
before some touches (if not slight wounds) of loves shafts that had already
spurred on my desire to the knowledge of its sweetes, which was of me (being
then but a raw youth) as easily undergone as forgotten. For I was a short time
a novice at Cupid's Academy at Nepa, where though I was as yet but fifteen
years old, yet had my standing there freed me from the name of a fresh-man.
Oftentimes would I contemplate the fairer parts of her sweetly-featured face,
contending among themselves for graceful comelinesle and comely gracefulness,
from whose attracting presence (me thought) I breathed so vital an air, as my
wounds were rather cured by it, than by the virtue of the unguents. Full often
would my captived heart pant and beat in hot desire, when she feeling my
pulse, (through inward alteration distempered) would with a kind of
fellow-feeling compassion bemoane it to the Physicians, who finding it by that
time they touched it to be otherwise, admired thereat, for not conceiving, that
th'artire touched by the delicious hand of a beloved Mistress beats
differently from what it does at the feeling of the cold hand of a Physician.

Scarce was I freed from the peril of death, when I found my self so dead for
love, as (having quite forgotten all my past disasters) I thought now no more
of being Coralbo, of the loss of my estate, or my naked condition; but
banishing all such like conceits, I suffered my self to be by my imagination
transported to those gusts, which were (as I then thought) far from any
effect, which plunged me anew into the gulf of so deep a mellanc holy, that
if timely remedy had not happened, I am persuaded I had in few days remained
irrecoverably dead.

The Duchess (on the other side enflamed with the ardencie of her affection)
led (good Lady) a life subject to greater sufferings; because she saw no
means of ever accomplishing her desires, in that she durst not discover them,
fearful was she of imparting to me her affection, and mistrustfull of my
green years, which she conceived to be either hazardous or unfit to be
trusted unto, for being as yet too young to discern a real fire from an
imaginary sparkle; and again to acquaint me with her flames, as it stood not
with her honor, so believed she that it might bring her into manifest danger.

All this while left I not my bed, but (simple as she took me for) conceived
(though) which way the wind blew, to my so excessive joy, that if I had been
to balance it with all the pleasures of the world, I would have been heartily
content for the enjoying of it alone to rest deprived of all others: Then (and
never till then) was it, that I first began to distinguish between charity and
love, between the effects of the one and affects of the other, the consolation
whereof restored me to both flesh and color: But now the more I amended, the
more she drooped; the more I fatned, the leaner grew she; my recovery
occasioning her sickning, for that she feared that I would not (when I were
fully recovered) make any long abode with her.

Her sons following the mothers example, came likewise often to visit me,
who though they punctually examined not my qualities, yet did the neerenesse of
our years and other proportions between us procure me (besides their
friendship) their good opinion and affection, so as delighting in my
conversation, they (out of the hope they had of enjoying it so much the longer)
made wondrous much of me, not without expressing (withal) so much unto their
mother, who therefore began now to hope she would not loose me so soon as
shee-once feared she should: No sooner was I fully recovered, than I began to
manifest my self to be other than fortune showed me to be; In public
exercises I appeared no more him that was the other day robbed, stripped, and
wounded, now that it behoved me (being wounded with a fresh and more inward
wound, and robbed of my wonted liberty) to subject my self to the cruel
hazard of a severe and despaire-threatning destiny.

There was then Lord of Can one named Cripasso a wealthy and wellesteemed
Cavalier, who (being some-while before enamoured of the Duchess) had done
what he could to gain her liking, though for being composed of an indeed
odious simmetry, he could never gain as much as her least good liking, much
less her affection. His age was conformable to hers, nor came he much short of
her for nobility and riches, I would say for virtue and good parts too; but
that the end of his actions and life together deprived him of the merit of so
splendent attributes; he was indeed famed to be one of the most courteous and
valiant spirits of all that country; but yet grown (to be for his person)
much deformed through the dissolution of his youth consumed in disordinate
lusts. For his forehead grown to be deeply dented and foulely scarified
through the want of a bone (which for being rotted by the French malady was
taken out of his skull) made him look monstrous ugly; besides, the littleness
of his face disproportioned to the rest of his body, and yet more disfigured,
with his hollow-squint-fired-eyes; so as if the sweetness of his carriage, his
liberality and such other like noble conditions of his, had not in some sort
countervailed those his imperfections, he would have been notoriously noted
for the monstrous deformity of that age.

Many years before was Crisanta (being left a widow in the flower of her
fairer years with two male babes) sought for and sued unto by him in the way
of matrimony, though she could not by any means be drawn to hearken
thereunto, his good parts and laudable conditions being not only obscured, but
come to be of no value in comparison of the contrary, and therefore shifted she
him modestly off with an excuse, that she never meant to marry any man; the
state of her sons, and good (as she would allege) of her house requiring
her being free from the subjection of husbands.

He not thinking himself (for all that) rejected, for being so excluded only
in general terms, daily waited on her, and observantly served her, hoping in
time to enjoy her as a Mistress if not own her as a Wife, wherein though the
course of many years had showed him his mistake, yet lay it not (for all that)
within the power of his discretion to withdraw from her his affection; love
being now grown a tytant over him, and his desires not only linked-in him but
in such sort enflamed, as merely ceremonial respects served him for
touch-powder to fire it the more vehemently. And since it is a thing in us so
ordinary and natural to conceit well of our selves, it was no wonder, if that
he never once observed as much as one among so many disproportions of his,
because his self-love flattering him hid in one and the same bundle among his
good qualities his worser, which later because he saw not, he could not choose
but be confident of, and presume on those others which he saw, by which he
thought he merited not only the Duchess Crisanta, but even the worthiest,
fairest, and greatest Lady of the Universe.

I know not how he came by seeing me to know himself somewhat better than he
did before, not in regard there abounded in me any womandelighting qualities,
but because there superabounded in him conditions not only ill-beseeming, but
even odious in any man, and by consequence more eminent in a person of his
quality. Me then he envied and beheld with a jealous eye before he knew of
any of my doings, without conceiting for all that) any thing the worse of
himself, envy (or rather emulation in love) being numbered among the more
generous defects. But understanding how I was found on the highway robbed and
stript-naked, he then imagined he had no cause to fear or doubt of me; as if
love and hatred had forsooth) their dependencies on the favors or defects of
desert-seldome favoring fortune.

In the mean while Crisanta, in whom during the time of my sickness love had
(as I told you) sowed its heart-enflaming seeds, felt them (now that I was
recovered) sprowt up and grow to the prejudice and anguish of both her life and
spirit. I know not if or no it were her modesty that restrained her from having
recourse to me for remedy; in that I believed, that true modesty neither
proceeds from fears, nor has other ends than it self; only I must tell
you, that her silence interpreted by my simplicity to be coldness of affection
made me resolve not to lose my self in an imaginative sense, doubting or
rather believing that all former demonstrations which made me think my self
beloved of her, were but merely sweet effects of a noble mind, which then
gave me occasion to learn to discern the true difference between
well-wishing and affection. For my own part I hated the ordinary presumption
of such young men as believe that a woman cannot (as much as) glance on them a
look, with out intimating to her eyes object the homage of her liberty and
person; well might I indeed persuade my self, that some internal gift might
perhaps serve me for a ladder to climb up to men's good opinions, but was never
(for all that) so selfe-conceited, as to believe, that either my looks, face,
or person had the power to allure or gain me the affection, liking or good
opinion of any one sex or other: Then began I to make some signs of my
departure not without an internal hearts-griefe occasioned by a
truly-affectionate love: But scarce had I therein opened my mouth, when
Crisanta reposing her hand on my arm as we walked alone in a large alley in
the garden, spoke thus unto me.

Celio, (for so made I my self be called) I understand that this country
likes you not (no more does perhaps this house neither) and that you therefore
intend to be gone; But I could wish you would prove so courteous, as to make
first known unto me the reason why you do so; for if it so be that you
received any disgust here, take my word, I will endeavor to see you righted;
because indeed my intent and desire is, that of mine you be honored, as of me
you are beloved and held in as dear and respective an esteem as are my own
sons. But if this be not it that ails you, and that naught else save mere
heat of youth spurs you onwards to such a resolution, I could then advise
you to think better on it first, and to consider how you are (now that you
have lost your old servant) left all alone; and although I would not be
backwards in supplying you with whatsoever you should want for your journey,
yet should you (me thinks) have already learnt to your cost, that simple
provisions suffice not, being you may in your way light on not only highway
thieves (as you did in my country) but a thousand other inimaginable
misadventures: now then so you be pleased to oblige me so much as to let me but
know who you are, and to make withal your business appear to me, such as
require your so sudden departure, I will then (on my word) take order that you
be conveyed by such a company, as shall secure you from all perils: But if the
case with you stand quite otherwise, and that there be no such matter, I shall
then lovingly entreat you, to suspend the deliberation thereof, at least so
long, till I have time to resolve with my self, whether I can be without you
or no, whom I love (though you know it not) deerer than my own life. These
last words drew she out of her mouth with a kind of a pretty unwilling
willingness, which so got out had drawn others after them, if bashfulnesse
(having displayed its vermilion colors on her beteared cheeks) had not staid
her tongue with the modest curb of the consideration of her sex.

At the sweet sound of these her sweeter words I altered my first
deliberation, more speedily than does a dancer at the change of the musicks
tone alter his manner of footing. Nor held I it my best course to tempt
fortune, by doing the office of a woman in refusing, since she had already
done that of a man in proffering; for, having been already sufficiently turred
therein at the cost of others: That a woman (unless she be impudently-bold)
can hardly resolve with her self to ask a second time a blesh-procuring
question. The consideration where of made me return her this answer.

This is (unparalled Madame) the only Country where I have lighted on the
best and worst of fortunes spite and favor, your Excellency being the best of
good, and the thieves that robbed me the worst of ills. But now the evil
(since past and gone) corrupts not the sweet relish of the present good,
which is the only subject whereabout my thoughts are busied; and that the
rather, because discontent has no abiding place either under the heaven you
breathe in, or in the spirits that receive from you their influence: And for my
own part (Madame) I see my self both honored beyond my fortune and beloved
beyond my merit, so as the resolution of my parting hence springs not from
these grounds your goodness thought good to mention, nor yet from my (in that
behalf) innocent youth, but indeed from the consideration of my being a mere
stranger, and from the doubt I conceived of abusing with a too too bold (if not
odious) indiscretion the noble courtesy of so long an entertainment; besides
some peculiar affairs of mine own requiring my crossing the sea, to see the
state and being of my poor house and mother, though I know I cannot do that
neither without your courteous and obliging furtherance, which in its time I
neither can nor will refuse to accept of. The loss which I sustained in the
death of my deerely-tendred servant was indeed exceeding great, but millions
of degrees short, nay nothing in comparison of the acquisition of so high and
noble a Mistress. Here stopping my speech with colored cheeks and
downe-cast eyes, I stood (some short while) mute, when she taking me by the
hand and gently wringing it) thus bespake me.

Hitherto (Colio) do I hold my self satisfied, but what answer make you me
for the rest? What further answer can I make you Madame (said I) seeing that
for as much as depends on me I have already expressed my self; and then for
that which depends on you, the answer thereof lies in your own breast: Depends
it on me (replied she) to know either your being, since I am a mere stranger
to it, or your stay here, since I cannot divine your thoughts? yea Madame (said
I) very well both the one and the other, because my being depends wholly on
you, nor can I in such a case either make my self better known unto you, or
receive any alteration of being without you: But she not yet fully conceiving
me, I then with a bolder courage thus proceeded.

Noble Madame, of my native being I beseech you question me no farther at this
time, lest the story thereof seem a fable unto you, all other being of mine
is yours, and has its whole dependence on you. By you and through your means
I live to the world, for having been (through your compassionate benignity)
from being left for dead gathered up and cured: And by you also (thanks to
your obliging love) I now live to my self, being cured of a wound which for
not daring to manifest, I should (if I had parted hence) have carried along
with me bleeding in my heart. No sooner heard she this, than with a blithsome
countenance, she said unto me.

My Celio, I know not whether I may confidently believe or no what you tell
me, I beseech you deceive me not, though I must confess, that my douot of it
springs but from the difficulty of believing what is ardently desired. But if
it so be indeed, that your words are true interpreters of your heart, resolve
(I conjure you) then to stay here with me: for, the company of my sons and
the excuse of expecting to hear some news from your home will give a
sufficient color for the occasion of your abode here.

This advise of hers being by our mutual consent grown to the ripeness of a
resolution, we (after having first taken such order as was requisite for the
fruition of our loves) returned in gladsomely disposed, delaying no time of
confirming our words with actions, to the so passing content of both of us, as
there was no degree (I am persuaded) of joy and delight that could exceed that
of our furtive conversation. The darkness with us was light, our sun eyes,
its beams amorous glances, our sincere affection the fair weather, heaven our
bed, and its truer influences dalliance and kisses, so as the large scope of
our imaginations could not comprehend any felicity or condition more desirable
than ours: And I, though of years but green, burned yet in love so
vehemently, that the more I enjoyed her, the more ardently found I my self
enflamed; whereas she being of fully ripened years, and therefore
consequently capable of enjoying its pleasure at full, found her self so
ravished with its delicious sweetes, as for not being able to endure the
tedious longsomnesse of the day, which deprived her of them, she would often
come with diverse excuses to take me away from her sons, for engrossing me to
her self alone; so had her affection blinded her, as she neglected or rather
forgot both the dignity of her place and quality of her person.

But after that love had reduced us both to one only heart, taking from us all
other distinction, except (to make us the happier) that of our persons and
sexes, it lay then no more in my power to conceal from her either Coralbo, or
his birth or harsh fortunes, which wrought in her a confirmation if not
augmentation of her affection. But tormented afterward with the Idea of my
States privation, reason persuading her, that the recovery thereof was
necessary, she would oft-times sigh to think of it, with proposing me diverse
proffers for the accomplishing by other men's means, what none but my self
could well effect; but comprehending every proposition defective, as hatched by
the blindness of an extreme affection rather than by any perfect rule of a
prudent judgment, she assented to the reasons that contradicted her, but
dissented again, when to put them in effect, the discording string of my
departure was to betouched.

Her design was to give me martial forces under pretext of employing them in
some secret enterprises; but the consideration of the way being for distance
far, and for passage difficult, and through the dominions of sundry Princes,
stopped even in its very source the current of any such counsel. But admitting
that both all those difficulties were removed, and all these ways levelled;
yet (alas!) what could they have done without me? she proffered me a great
sum of money to leavy soldiers in those parts by my mother or some other,
yet made not this neither for the purpose, as well because no man could put a
hand to the enterprise without me, as also for that the principal means for
the recovery of a State consists not either in foreign forces or expense of
treasure, but chiefly (if not wholly) in the love of the subjects, which only
being wanting, all other means would prove no lest vain than superfluous.

In the mean time she seeing me desirous to be knighted would by all means
procure my content, the age of her sons become now capable of the like
honor; therefore sent she all of us to Parthenope to receive the Order of
Knighthood, with the occasion of the marriage of the Princess Corianna the
Kings only daughter, which was then shortly to be solemnized, accompanied
with a train of many noble Knights, and among them the Lord of Can, who
thought by this service to manifest the continuance of his affection toward
her, with the opinion of meriting it, or to show the constancy of his
affections to be such, as could not be blown down by any blast of small hope.

Arrived at Parthenope, we were all three of us dubbed Knights, the Court
favoring us, though ill satisfied with the Duchess for not coming thither,
she being known to be the fairest Lady of the whole kingdom: But the reason
indeed of her not coming, was an agreement between us, that I being to part
away from my company under the color of some secret enterprise, she should
take on her to be sick, that so she might expect me at her house, whither I
was privily to retire my self for the enjoying of each other free from the
scanning of so many eyes, especially of those of her sons, which troubled her
more than the rest.

The Prince of Sicily was expected to come and espouse the Princess, when one
night she fled out of a Castle that lies on the Sea, whither (feigning her
self sick) she was retired, and where were many found slain, the Duke of
Lucania and the Lord high Constable, two of the chief Peers of the Realm,
together with two servants of the later: The original ground of which accident
could not be possibly learnt out. There was not a Knight that set not himself
in the search of her, and among the rest the two brothers my companions, I
taking for an excuse of not following them a blow of a lance which the day
before had both beaten off my helm, and bruised my head, which (me thought)
happened very fit for my purpose.

The Lord of Can, who with rather enamoured than squint-eyes had noted
something between me and Crisanta, seeing me now stay behind, resolved to do
himself the like, and then watching the time of my parting, dogged me a-farre
off, till upon his observing my way tend toward the Sannits, he assaulted me
unawares, with calling me unworthy villain and base traitor; I unused to be
so styled answered him with sword in hand: The fight lested a good while, both
of us being armed, and each of us resolved to kill the other; of my death, his
valor and my youth made him confident, till my agility deprived him of that
hope; for being, because of the weariness of our horses driven to alight, I
then so tired him, as he was glad to fall from pursuing me to defend himself.

The danger and earnestness of this our combat could not (for all that)
withdraw my thoughts from musing what should be the occasion of this affront;
seeing him therefore stand in need of a breathing-time, I besought him to
hear me a word; whereunto when he condescended, I asked him why he had so
assaulted me and called me traitor? he answered, Because I had violated the
bonds of hospitality by enjoying a Princess whom I was not worthy as much as
to name, whilst others far worthier than my self were of her favors in the
way of affection most injuriously excluded; At these words I was so exceedingly
vexed at the heart, as I cannot tell you which at that instant was greater my
spite and rage, for having a rival, or fear that my secrets were revealed:
howsoever, I made no conscience to lie boldly, in telling him, that he lied
most falsely, and to defend (by so belying him) the Dutchesse's honor and mine;
howbeit my words were few, assured and confirmed rather by the sword than by a
good conscience: But by this time, for being exposed to the open violence of
the sun, even half melted with heat, and grown fainty for weariness,
thirst, and sweat, we therefore agreed to disarme us, and so make a quick
dispatch one way or other: In execution whereof, we hastily cut off each others
armour-strops, throwing there withal away our shields together with our
daggers, the usual successors in that office.

Our faces so now uncovered, there provoked us on more eagerly, him my youth,
and me his ugliness, the disequality encouraging each of us to rid himself
of his enemy by no milder means than death, the one to free himself of a
rival which could not be surely effected by other means than by killing him;
the other to cure the wound given Crisanta's honor could not be salved
otherwise than by his rivals death; scarce had we force enough left us to
weild our swords, being now grown so weary and faintish, as we could not lift
them up to make use of our edges, whilst our eyes stood fixed or rather chained
(as it were) to the enemies swordhand, to gather thence the time, and so either
to prevent or put him by:

By this time we were both of us slightly wounded, rather through the defects
of our ill-closed hilts, than for any great odds that either of us had of
other in fencing, and by our swords-points slipping through the hilts into our
hands and arms, though then in our heat we had no feeling of being so mangled.

For my own part I persuade my self that I had sooner obtained the victory,
if I had but made use of, and followed the advantages I saw; for, holding it
(though I know not why) foul play, to both strike and thrust when the enemy
made only use of his point, I still followed on my play conformable to his, as
if there had been a law so to do. But considering at length how this kind of
play did but dally out the time, and observing my advantage of having my pulses
both firmer and less wearied than those of mine enemies, I began to alter my
play, falling from thrusts to downright and back-blowes, and those laid I on
too with all the force I had, so as the back of the contrary sword (sustained
by a tired arm, and withal carried without the compass of my offers and his
true ward) favored me with the opportunity of striking him first in the face
athwart the midst of his nose, and afterward on the head; at which blow the
sword dropped out of his hand to the ground, and close by it himself (to my
thinking) dead; which so freed me of a rival, and Crisanta of infamy.

But now the worst was, that I could not possibly re-arme my self, my
armour-tyes being (as I told you) almost all of them cut off. And though my
Genius seemed to prompt me to make Cripasso cock sure, with fresh and more
certain wounds, yet could I not find in my heart to do so, for that I deemed
such a deed unworthy a Gentleman, yet parted I not presently (for all that)
but staid to see whether he would revive or no; till the wound of his head
(which was the dangerous one) occasioning a strange wrigling of his members
with hanging out his tongue between his teeth, (he being at best but very
ugly, and now in such a plight gastfull for being assailed with terrible
convulsions and shiverings) made me confident of his being dead; so as to rid
me off so hideous and horrible a spectacle, I went my ways without any longer
stay, leaving him laid along in the field, and my Arms hard by him.

The Duchess (to expect me with more conveniencie in a place where I might
be received by night, without being encumbered with any watch) was retired to
the Country, having at my parting from her given me the key of a Tower, that
so I might steal in unto her unknown to any body, and so indeed I came in
thither unexpected, and found her a-bed broad waking, and entertained in
discourse by the Gentlewoman that was our counsell-keeper, who lay on a pallet
at her beds feet. The Lamp let her soon see who I was, yet were her (at
first sight) excessive joys mortified by seeing my right hand swadled up, and
my arm hung in a scarf at my neck, howsoeven she imagined the disaster to be
far lesle than it was; for having found me herself once before in a far
worse taking, but having understood how the case stood, she was like to sink
down dead at the conceit of it, but for my assuring her that I had slain him:
the sense of this her grief was aggravated by the accident of Corianna
befallen in the self same time, but much more by the departure of her sons;
so as our content remained corrupted by the mortifications that suspicions and
fears wrought in her: Full often conceived she (as indeed she had good
reason so to do) that all slippes of women would be more rigorously examined
for the Princesse's errors sake; so as she could by no means be persuaded to
desist from weeping and grieving; besides she slept never a wink, which
caused our before-amorous-watchings to be now changed into consultations,
discourses, and presages of evil: But Nature requiring in me some repose, I
was feign to sleep (as I may say) waking, so exceedingly was I troubled with
the heart-rending tones of her lamentations; till at length I (unable to endure
them any longer) grew to be so perplexed thereat, that choosing rather to dye
than to see her so languish, I thus bespake her.

Dear bliss of my joys, I beseech you prevent not the uncertain evil with
a certain, what cause (I pray you) of fear have you, now that Cripasso is
dead and gone? sithence we may so behave ourselves as the very air cannot
smell out our secrets; it was nothing (alas) but mere jealousy that made him
believe the truth to be true, though (for all that) such as he could not
possibly be ever an eyewitness unto, nor consequently assure himself
thereof. For, otherwise he had never (I warrant you) this long have deferred
its discovery. Here interrupting me, Ah! Coralbo (said she) you are but young,
you think that Cripasso is dead, but (the more woe is me) I fear me he yet
lives, the accidents that you saw in him were (for what I gather by your
describing them) no other than convulsions and violent stupifying fits. I
cannot believe but he is by this time come to himself again, since he has
not any wound, save that of his head that can prove mortal: you tell me that
he sunk not down presently, but fought a good while after, whence I gather,
that it was a strangelystupifying blow but not otherwise dangerous, which if it
so prove to be, I am then a woman utterly undone. Besides, your reason of our
not being otherwise discovered than by a bare imagination is not good, since
mere imagination in this case is sufficient to make me lose both life and
honor. Besides which, even Cripasso's behavior toward me speaks him to be
more discreet, than to discredit himself in blazoning to my infamy upon bare
conjectures any miscarriage he certainly knew not in me, who never did him
other injury than deny him my love, which nothing in him obliged me to grant
him: But now that he has for the self same occasion been so roughly handled
by you, he will doubtless endeavor to be revenged of us both at once.

The Duchess persisted constantly in these her opinions, from which I could
not by any means divert her, especially because of their likelihood of being
true, upon the divulging of news, that Cripasso was found dangerously wounded,
and that the Chirurgions had warranted his life; howbeit the wound on's face
had so disfigured him, as he had not been known but by his former and more
ugly scarres; but how this had befallen him no man knew, because of his
concealing of both its author and occasion.

On this, Crisanta began in her desperation to conceive some hopes of comfort,
from the consideration of Cripasso's wonted modest demeanor, wherein his
concealing the case seemed (to her thinking) to argue a perseverance; but alas
(good Lady) she was therein exceedingly mistaken. For, his affection (being
corrupted by the injury sustained, and extinguished with desire of revenge)
egged on his cruelty to plot the mischief, which afterward he put in
execution against us.

Cured that I was of my wounds, we resolved upon my return to Parthenope, that
I should go find out her sons, and on my going (as soon as I had
reconducted them home) to go look to my own affairs, with an intention to
send her (when I had recovered my kingdom) Ambassadors to espouse her for me.
Accordingly I went, and found the two brothers in Parthenope confused in mind
for my being departed, Cripasso's lying wounded, the impossibility of finding
out the Princess, the extreme perplexity of the King, and both desolation and
dissolution of the Court. Return home they would not, but desired to go
travel as Knight Errant; I signified by letter so much unto the Duchess, who
was well pleased therewithal, for being thereby freed of her minde-afflicting
fear that in their way homewards they would call to see Cripasso, as they
could (indeed) no less than do, his house lying right on their rode, which
was (I profess) a thing that I never dreamt of.

Some months spent we in this our journey, (wherein I was favored with
occasions of obliging them sundry times) and had continued it longer, had not
the Duchess (who now thought her self secure) sent for us home, where the
affection between her and me (more ardent now than ever before) recalled us to
our wonted pleasures, when Cripasso sent the brothers word to have a more chary
respect to their honors, which for being so drily written, made them the more
earnestly desirous to know the occasion thereof; but finding him unwilling
either to come himself to them, or to suffer them to come to him, they
appointed a place to meet and confer together, where he telsthem.

That he having long before taken notice of the note-worthy favors which the
Duchess hourly showed me, and of her good liking to me, construed them for
no other than effects of noble courtesy; till such time as he coming one day
to see her, found the door of her back-chamber fast-locked, into which he
(because he heard there within some gentle stirring) observantly peeping
through the keyhole, might there see her and I, in close embraces together,
whereof he had no reason (though) to make any words of, the fact not
concerning him otherwise than as a wellwisher to their house and honor:
Besides, his being the more unwilling to discover it, as well because he
thought it could not be remedied otherwise than by violence, as also for the
hope he conceived that my departure would bring that evil to an end. Till
seeing how I had in Parthenope left them embarke themselves alone, of purpose
to sneake homewards without them, he resolved to trace me, with an intention
(in case I went that way) to prove a rub in my way: assuring himself, that
if he did not so, the infamy (till then kept secret) would for want of
circumspection in us be noted and made shortly known to all the world. But
that fortune disfavouring him, he was by me shrewdly wounded and left for dead
in the open field; with all which passages he thought fit to acquaint them, now
that grown to men's estates, and honored with the dignity of Knighthood, they
might have an eye to their own honors, wishing them withal to provide for
the executing of what was intended, since he could warrant them, they should
without any great ado catch (as they say) the hare in the parfley-bed.

The young Noblemen (pricked to the quick with such unwelcome news, and being
besides of their own nature prone enough to any cruel resolution, and yet
more feelingly incensed by his egging them on) resolved to murder us both in
the act; from which Cripasso dissuaded them, by showing, that it was fit
indeed that their design should be effected, but yet not at one and the same
time, since it was best, first to kill me and the Gentlewoman mediatrix,
under pretext of having found us twain naught together, and so save their own
honors with that of their mothers; whom they might afterward (without making
any show of suspecting her) strangle or make away by poison or other means, as
they saw occasion: Having thus concluded, they knew so well how to dissemble,
that we (having by this time clean forgot Cripasso's injury) were taken
napping when we least thought of them.

It was past midnight when the Gentlewoman rush't in furiously to awake us,
whereupon I (ghessing by the bouncing at the door, what she had to say,
taking a farewell-kisse of the Duchess, and clothing my self as well as
haste permitted me) took my weapons in hand: By when the door (for not being
opened from within when they knocked) was beaten down from without, with no
less force than fury. Whereupon the Duchess (fearing lest her sons should
come and find me) besought me to fly, which I would not, for not letting her
be slain unrevenged; till at length upon her assuring me, they would bear her
respect, I gave way to her persuasions. My resolution of obeying her, and the
bursting open of the door happened in the self same instant of time, so as they
saw the first steps of my flight: Upon this, leaving the rest, they hastily
pursued me, though their being unacquainted with the rooms marred all their
design; for, they believed, that my coming in was through the ordinary door,
through which they had entered, which also made them miss of me many nights
before, that they had spent in watching my coming; not without suspicion that
Cripasso, to revenge himself of me, had maliciously invented this slander;
whereupon some dispute fell between them, till he causing me to be searched
for in my chamber, understood that I was gone thence, though he was yet
confident, that I must needs have come in the right way through the lodgings,
(which indeed I did never) so as he made full account to pen me in; since
having (as he thought) but one way to enter, they had now left me none at all
to go out through.

The Dutchesse's withdrawing chamber butted on an arch, erected on a backalley
through which no man passed; it had anciently served for a passage to another
house, which (till it happened to be burnt) was a member of the Palace, the
arch remaining ever sithence unusefull, and its door shut, and so covered with
the Arras-hangings, as there was none but her self and some of her ancientest
servants that knew there was any such: On the outside of this Arch stood an
old ladder to get down by, which wanted in some places one, and in other two
rongues; the room was very low, full of filth and rubbish, and o're-growne
with brambles, weeds, and briars, having two other rooms adjoining to it, the
foremost whereof was assured with a good lock and key, through which I secretly
came and returned without any danger.

Those that pursued me were four, Cripasso, the two brothers, and one servant;
but the foremost of them was Cripasso, who came running after me with sword in
hand; feign as live would I have turned to strike at him, but doubting to be
overtaken by the brothers (whom I had no will to injure) I went fairly
onwards, fortune favoring me beyond either my expectation or imagination; for
being slowly pursued, because of their conceiting to pen me up in the farther
chamber, where-hence they saw no way for me to get out; I had leisure to
descend the ladder without any danger; for in drawing only the Arch-doore
together after me, I deprived them of the time (although it were but shut with
a latchet) of hindering my descent.

Cripasso marveiling to see me gotten so low down, unacquainted with the
place, but much more with the defects of the ladder, (the torch which the
servant carried not sufficiently illuminating all those darkesome by-corners)
and he withal seeing but very little for being very weake-sighted, tumbled (for
the extreme haste that he made to pursue me) headlong down from one end of
the ladder to the other; whereat I resolved now neither to lose any time, nor
to fail to kill him as I did the other time before run him (for making the
surer work of him) at two thrusts through the neck and breast; in the later
whereof, I ran my sword up to the hilts, conformable to my desire, whilst
the rest of his company stood immovable spectators from above for fear of the
precipice: This done, I went my ways, keying fast after me the door that had
the lock on it, to hinder them from pursuing me, and so hying me to the City
walls, I got me out without any great ado, and then (during all the rest of
the night) traveled a-foote the speediest pace I could toward that part of
the country where its territory was narrowest, for I thought my self safe
enough in any other dominion.

Continuing this my journey, I chanced to meet (by good fortune) a Knight with
whom I had been acquainted at Parthenope, who by occasion of certain lands
was a great enemy to Cripasso; to this Knight enquiring the occasion that he
saw me so a-foote, I unmasked the whole business, save that in steed of the
Duchess I made him believe, that I went to enjoy her woman, and was feign to
save my self with Cripasso's death; Whereupon the Knight affectionately
embracing me, told me, he was much bound to me, inviting me withal to his
Castle, where he assured me, that I should not need to fear or doubt of any
thing; I thankfully accepted the invitation, but desired (for his safeguard
as well as mine own) to abide there undiscovered, whilst he suddenly
dispatched away a discreet Gentleman, to go learn if Cripasso were dead
indeed, and how slain.

The Gentleman after a few days returned and told him, That fortuning to be
entertained and lodged by a Knight who was an intimate friend of his, and a
bosom one of the brethren, he had not only been informed, but was also by
him favored to see under the seal of secrecy the whole truth of the fact;
which was, That Cripasso was dead for certain; That the brothers having
dragged the Dutchesse's Gentlewoman to the top of the ladder, had tumbled her
down headlong over it, and then slain her upon Cripasso's corpse, martyrizing
her with so many wounds, that her body was seen all over pierced through with
stabbes: That the Duchess could neither with authority nor entreaty obtain
life for her, but was (oh unnatural cruelty!) her self the day following by
them-themselves cruelly strangled; and the Coffin happening to be too short for
her, one of them stepped up on her legs that reached out of the Coffin, and
with his feet crushed them to pieces, that the Chest might contain them; and
all because she was taken with me, they having been before advertized by
Cripasso of all the particulars by me related.

Now though they had not published the case to be as it was indeed (they
giving out, they had surprised me with the Gentlewoman, and that the Duchess
extremely affrighted to see her slain before her face, died in the place for
mere fear) yet had they (for all that) imprudently communicated the truth to
most of their friends, so as the people came to know it by having their
conjecture in that behalf confirmed by the coffin's being nailed up and
pitched, ere any body was suffered to see it; That Cripasso's corpse were
embalmed up, and solemnly sent to his own barony, (upon a chariot of black
velvet, drawn by eight horses covered and trapp'd with the same down to the
ground) accompanied with two hundred Gentlemen, clad they them selves and their
Coursers with their headstalls plumes and trappings all in black, with unbraced
drums, sordine trumpets, trailed standards and mournful music.

On would Coralbo have proceeded in his story, but here interrupted with sudden
sobbings he was forced to reiterate by the dropping of a few great pearle-like
tears his (in this manner many times re-solemnized) funerals of his beloved
Crisanta; Polimero therefrom not diverting him, for his conceiving the not
giving way to just griefs to be a thing too far distant from humane putty:
but soon after the water being soaked away with the drought of reason, stopped
of it self; and then he blushing to see himself (according to the opinion of
some) contrary to a manly spirit o're-mastered by his affections, after a short
pause thus spoke on.

Of the two hundred Gentlemen which accompanied (as I told you) Cripasso's
corpse, fifty solemnly vowed, to spend one years time in the search of me, and
in case they found me out, to bring and sacrifice me on the slain Cripass's
tomb; And missing to light on me in that years space, though they were
thence forwards freed from further seeking after me, yet remained they (in case
they ever fortuned to meet me) still tied to the same obligation. Understood
that I had these unhappy news, I would needs part suddenly, all persuasions
of retaining me any longer proving dissoluble and to no purpose. Having then
procured (of the Knight my host and friend) the favor of furnishing me with
complete Arms, and refused those he would have had me take for being too
superfluous, contenting me with those I now wear, I caused to be pourtrayted
on my shield the Impresa of the swan, stamped in the internal part of my
imagination ever since I was a child, upon the occasion of the old disasters
of my poor home, whereunto this new one in my conceit came near enough.

It was my luck to meet ere I embarked my self, with eight of the fifty
Gentlemen, of whom understanding the oath they had taken, I had the fortune to
absolve them of it, by from some taking and to others giving their lives. Come
to Taranto I met with the ninth, without either knowing him or he me; We
embarked both of us in the same ship, where, upon his telling me whom he
sought after, I could have found in my heart to have fought with him then
instantly; but (considering the ships being full of passengers) I forbear till
we arrived in Feacia, and then made my self known unto him, where gone
ashore, Mars favored my cause with the death of the pursuer. And then passing
over into Creete, I came thence to Egypt where you found me, and by your valor
saved me from my second murderers. My intent now is, to cross over hence to
Arabia, there either to recover my kingdom or lose my life; or if neither this
nor that, yet shall I (at least) see with my own eyes the reasons that exclude
me from all further hopes thereof, that I may then return me thence to the
Island my nurse, and there spend and end the residue of my days.

The noble Polimero was so taken both with the relation of these passages and
with the person that related them, that (embracing him with an affectionate
respect) he thus bespake him. Prince Coralbo, I crave you humble pardon if in
any thing I have failed to tender you the honor due to your quality,
whereinalthough my not knowing you might (in some regard) serve me for an
excuse, yet mean I not to steed me therewith, because my not discovering in
you those indelible marks of a Prince stamptin you by nature, merits just
accusation. But sithence it cannot now be otherwise remedied, I shall endeavor
to make my future service become in part an amends for my past miscarriages,
and will besides (so you but favor me with your courteous leave) be a
fellow-sharer in your adventures; for the being of both of us strangers in
Arms and language will secure us from all dangers, so that you shall not need
to make your self known to any other than such, whom (for your affairs sake)
you shall reveal your self unto.

This courteous proffer Coralbo could not but accept of, acknowledging him no
small obligation for this his so highly-engaging favor. So traveling toward
Arsinoe, it grew to be twilight ere they were aware that they had straid out of
their way, yet even then and later too the clime of Egypt is canoped with so
bright a sky, that there the night (though deprived of its greater light) is
yet very brightsome and clear, the golden splendour of the stars being of
themselves (for not being clouded with any foggie vapors arising from below)
sufficiently lightsome to illuminate that portion of the earth: the air also
enjoying there a fair open horison (for not being damm'd in by any near
bordering mountains) glories in having no other shade save only such as are
merely accidental.

Thus in darkened light or lighting darkness continued these Princes on their
intended journey till almost midnight, without meeting with any one, of whom
they could enquire the way, so as now imagining they had lost it (as indeed
they had) they were much perplexed in mind, their Steeds being well nigh quite
tired and fainty with extreme thirst, when of one side of them they might
descrie glimmering a little light; yet not certain of its being really such
(the interposing trees not suffering them to judge whether it were indeed such
or no) Coralbo desirous to be cleared of his doubt, and at length through his
accurate observing infallibly assured it was no star, told Polimero, that for
certain there were houses near at hand; riding then toward the light, they
saw it vanish them in an instant, yet holding on their way directly
thitherward, they were soon gotten into a fair large green, encircled with a
pleasing row of palme-trees orderly planted; about the which in an artificial
channel rolled over a bed of snow-white pible, a little crystal brook most
pleasantly murmuring; from thence they discerned (fast by them) a house with
lights in many of its rooms; whereat they no sooner knocked than they were
courteously spoken unto; but yet the porter would (ere he would open the
door) needs first go know his Ladies pleasure, which was not needful;) for
she appearing her self presently at a window, courteously asked them who they
were? Two stranger-knights of a remote Country (answered her Polimero) who
being out of their way, pray to be either favored with a nights lodging, or
directed where they may get one; which he (endeavoring to express in that
country language) uttered with such difficulty, that seeing the Lady return
him no answer, he persuaded himself that she understood him not; till upon
his returning to repeat his former speech, she told him, that she had
already understood him, howbeit she praid him to tell her what contrymen
they were? We are (said Polimero) Ausonians; how Ausonians (replied the Lady)
your pronunciation (me thinks) and accent has but small affinity with those
of that Nation? Yea Madame (answered her then Coralbo in the pure Etrurian
tongue) we are indeed of Ausonia, and now go traveling abroad through the
world, to find out wars and adventures.

The Lady now bethinking with her self, that she should know that voice and
accent, commanded the gates to be presently opened; so then the Knights
(demounting off their Steedes in a fair courtelage) were with a pair of
torches lighted into the hall, where they were courteously received by the
Lady, accompanied with a most beautiful damsel her daughter, the near
resemblance she had with her confirming her to be such, both of them as well
in gesture as countenance discovering an incomparable majesty: They entertained
these two Knights not after the manner of country gentry, but with a stately
grave deportment as the most accomplished Ladies of the Court, presenting them
(in expression of their welcome) with a glass of fair fountain water
deliciously tempered with Sugar and the juice of Lemmons, to qualify their
internally distempering heat, and then commanded supper to be speedily made
ready: But the Knights already infinitely satisfied both in the way of welcome
and sweetely-grave aspect of the noble Lady, besought her to forbear the
incommodating her family for them, it being so late as they wondered they found
them not all a-sleepe, telling her, that a dry crust with a little fruit, and
that most delicate water should suffice them to their exceeding content.

To this the Lady smilingly replied, that she had not as yet supped herself,
but seeing them admire thereat; It Is my custom (said she) to satisfy my
hunger at the summons not of the clock but of my stomach, and therefore I now
mean to suppe, for I only eat when my appetite invites me, a custom that I
have ever observed, and ever found my self the healthier for it; This the
Knights did well approve of, instancing the like in a Queen and a great Prince
of their country. But the Lady desirous to be informed of their occasions,
with a gravely-limited boldness asked them; Whitherward could any affair of
theirs lead them that way, seeing they could not travel on any farther,
without first crossing the seas, whereunto Polimero endeavoring to make
answer, but expressing it with much difficulty. Sir, said the Lady (in a most
sweetly-respective manner interrupting him) I am loath to prove so unmannerly
troublesome unto you, as to put you to speak a language you cannot readily
express. Be therefore pleased (I beseech you) that this other Knight your
companion ease you of that trouble, by speaking in his own native tongue,
wherein I having got a little knowledge (out of the curiosity I formerly had in
bestowing sometime in the reading of it) shall understand him very well, and
his accent too far better than I can yours; which she said, because
beginning now to grow yet more suspicious that he was Coralbo, she was desirous
to be cleared of that doubt. Polimero glad to be easied of that burden, with
willingly obeying her, assured her, that his companion was excellent in that
tongue.

Coralbo thanked him for his good opinion of his language, and then
submissively inclining to the Lady, told her, that he received her commands as
especial favors; and that touching their journey, they intended to cross the
seas, to see the Kingdom and Court of Arabia Foelix, which in the last
deceased Kings time was famed to be very great.

The Lady greedily peering him in the face, and then suddenly glauncing her
eyes on her daughter, made no answer at all: In this often translocation of her
looks she so long persisted, that she gave Polimero occasion to take notice
thereof, who doing by her example the like, perceived she did it not without
very good reason, considering the affinity of favor she might observe
between the Knight and the damsel; which later when he had well observed
together with Coralbo, favored both of them very much the Lady her Mother; who
(with that) espying his left arm hung in a skarfe, asked him, what hurt he had
there; he (not as yet cured of the wounds lately received of the Arabians)
answered, It was nothing but a slight scratch; whereat she seeming to be
sorry, told him, she would then presently cure him her self, being provided of
the best wound-balme that ever Arabia distilled; But he replied, that he durst
not so far presume to trespass on her goodness, as to repute himself
worthy of so great a favor, and that she needed not trouble her self about
it, since he could very well make a shift to dress it himself as he went to
bed: To that she agreed not, but taking in her hand a golden vial (that her
daughter had by now brought her) she dropped thereout two or three grains
weight, which yielded so pleasing an odor, that all the senses and spirits
were thereby exceedingly comforted and recreated. And then it behoved Coralbo
to suffer himself to be dressed, the Lady casting (the mean while) her eye on
that hand, to see if he had there a little half moone-resembling scarre, that
he had once cut with a knife near the root of his thumb, which she
espying, remained (though she made no show thereof) the joyfullest woman
breathing.

Supper being by this time laid on the table neatly furnished, with napery and
service surpassing the quality of a private Lady, they sat down to meat,
she (all supper-while) ever-enquiring something of Ausonia and Etruria; But
when she named Nepa and the Island of Capraia, Coralbo could have bitten his
fingers for mere madness thereat; which observantly perceived by her gave a
supplement to her content. As soon therefore as the cloth was taken away and
the servants departed the room, she thus bespake them.

Gentlemen, ye are much bound to fortune for being so favorable to you, as to
conduct you hither, ere your passing over into Arabia, sithence when you had
been there known to be of that country whence you are come, you would have
incurred the danger of being unrecoverably undone, especially you (Sir Knight)
being Coralbo, or another in his shape indistinguishable; whom if you be, as I
am well assured you are, let me then tell you, that you cannot repose trust in
any, that either more dearly loves him, or can perhaps in some respects better
advise him in the managing of his affairs than my self; fear not therefore
to discover your self to me, for (howsoever) I certainly know you to bethe
very same.

Here seeing them gaze with admiration one upon the other (as though they
summoned all their wits to counsel how they should best devise an answer for
her) she proceeded: You need not stand gazing so strangely each on other, nor
yet fear or any thing doubt of the presence of this my daughter; for she
desires more to see in happy state Coralbo, than does any other wight living:
At which words the damsel wept, the Mother after a long restraint
accompanying her with her tears.

By this time Coralbo was so distracted in mind as he knew not what either to
say or think, imagining, that being so soon known by a woman, he must
necessarily be sooner sitted out and sounded by any man that he should happen
to converse withal; and that it could not otherwise be, but that some private
mark of his was made manifest by some secret spies. Considering therefore with
himself, that his intended journey could not but prove dangerous unto him, he
thought it his safest course to commit the discovery of his person and being to
the trust of that noble Lady, who by her words and tears could not choose but
love him, and be of the Queen his mothers faction; yet amidd'st all his fears
and doubts he had (though the worst that betide might, betided him) this one
comfort to encourage him, that he was as yet in a country free from all
dangers, and remote enough from any power of his enemy: Polimero likewise grew
to be thereat exceedingly confused in mind, till lighting on the self same
reasons, he beckened unto the other to discover himself.

The Lady having (the mean while) dried her beteared eyes, boldly took him by
the left hand, and smilingly observing it, For certain (said she) you are
undoubtedly Coralbo; To this he now o're-come with the confidencie of her
affirmation, answered: I cannot imagine (noble Lady) what should move you to
say I am he, what marks (I beseech you) descrie you in me that denote me to
be such? What marks (said she) mary the age of seventeene years as has
Coralbo, a face shaped and favored like his, when he was as yet but ten years
old, and this scarre that Coralbo cut in his hand at table, his mother being
present, when she came seven years sithence to visit him at Nepa; other
marks too I yet know besides, but will not tell them you, unless you confess
that you are he: Coralbo now looking on his hand, and therewithal calling to
mind that cut, and how his own mother had dressed it and bound it up, remained
more astonished than ever, so as he now could hold no longer from saying:

Much honored Lady; the marks and description which your goodness and noble
courtesy have vouchsafed to impart and particularize to me, are so punctual
and unrefuteable, that I cannot deny me to be Coralbo; whom if I were not, I
would yet heartily wish to be, were it but to serve you: At these words she
rising off the table with her daughter, and embracing him about the neck; Since
you then (said she) are my son Coralbo, behold here your disinherited mother
and sister, not altogether unhappy, since their eyes are once more blessed with
the now heart-extasing sight of you: Coralbo who at their first motion of
rising up, was risen with them, at the instant of his hearing these words
prostrates himself on his knees to her, whence she raising him up, stood some
while embracing him with a motherly tenderness; Nor had she so soon freed
him from out the weak prison of her arms, but that reason commanded her to
communicate him to her daughter his sister, the affects thereon ensuing proving
such as even Polimero himself was so o're-mastered with an extreme
tenderness of a fellow-feeling compassion, as he could not refrain from
bearing a part in their weeping consort. The Mother afterward understanding
who he was, and wherefore come thither, could never be satisfied in manifesting
by most lively affects the gratefulness of a royal mind obliged. But seeing
that the night was (by this time) far spent.

Right noble Prince (said she) it is not convenient that my joys become
discommodious to you; the present reason requires repose, and Coralbo's wounds
ease and rest; To morrow is a new day, and then we will confer together at
better leisure: With that, she leading him on to a withdrawing chamber there
hard by, consigned him to the care of certain Gentlemen to help him to bed.
Whilst Coralbo, not having the power to part from her, would needs know of her
the manner and occasion of her coming to reside in that place. But she
differring it till the ensuing day, got him at length (with much ado) to go
to bed; where sleeping little or nothing, by reason of such alterations of
affections, he got up earlier than his passed toil would have another time
permitted him.

The day being come, there needed no consort of Music to summon them to come
together, their several desires being sufficiently powerful to effect that
office. The Queen finding Polimero just as he had made an end of clothing
himself, entertained by Coralbo who was already dressed, leads him into the
garden, to take the benefit of the fresh air; when seating her self between
them both under an arbor of Gelsomine, and her daughter close by her brothers
side, she thus framed her speech.

I know that I cannot well defer the relation of your affairs (Coralbo)
though I would gladly do it, since they cannot but prove unpleasing unto you;
yet since it pleases the heavens they should so be, we must not repine at
their unresistable predestination. I persuade my self that you came hither in
hope to make trial of your valor: But (alas!) such a trial should be of the
fortitude of the mind, and of other virtues thereto correspondding; the
strength and valor of the body coming now too late any way to steed you.
This much I thought good to acquaint you first withal, for preventing of those
passions which Nature and Reason might administer you: And now to go on with
your story.

At my coming to Nepa, I left in Cardamina (the only residing-place I had
then left me) Dariacan a servant once dear to your Father, who having sent
secret intelligence of my departure to King Bramac my sonnein-law, capituled to
yield him up that Hold, on condition that all the treasure there found should
be his, Bramac made a show of being well contented for the treasure, but not
for the rest, pretending to have delivered up into his hands together with
Cardamina your person, imagining (it should seem) that I would at my return
bring you back along with me, which induced him to defer the effecting as
then of his first complotted treachery, for the assurance that he had of
putting in execution at the self same time both the one and the other.

Faining then to have believed that I was gone to the Oracle, he commanded the
bordering Governors to have a care of my estate, that it were not incroach'd
on, nor prejudiced by any whatsoever; making by this seeming-good office a show
of being not only alienated from any evil intention, but also tenderly
careful that no other should offer me any injury. So that at my return I had
cause to give him tharkes for it, he then also making a show of honoring me,
by sending me Ambassadors, who under pretext of congratulating my return,
came to epsy whether you were come with me or no: But getting afterward out
of- Dariacan all my secrets, he bade him counsel and persuade me your return,
as being the request of the greater part of the Barons ill satisfied with the
present government; I simple woman, believing him, taking his having conserved
me Cardamina (whereof I ever doubted) for an assured testimony of his
inviolable fidelity, resolved to send you Cogamar the brother of Stelinete your
Squire, him whom (from among a number of others) Sotiro had chosen for your
service: which happened the self same time that Sotiro (for not having heard
any news from me since my parting from Etrunia) had sent to me Stelinete: And
as fortune would have it, the brothers met by the way, and reciprocally trusted
each other with the sum and privity of their several commissions: There
Cogamar (through the intelligence he held with Dariacan) being acquainted with
the Kings designs, and consequently corrupted, imparts it to the other, not to
make him the instrument of remedying or preventing it, but rather a means to
content the Tyrant, by effecting his desire; showing him, how all our hopes
were quite extinct, Bramac possessed of all, and they in the way of being (for
such a masterpiece of service) advanced to great honors and special favor;
objecting unto him on the other side, the poverty and miseries of so long an
exile, the irksome tediousness of a solitary life in an Island, (especially in
a Country so remote from their native clime) without any likelihood of ever
expecting (after all these sufferings) from our exclusion and poor condition,
other than poverty, exclusion, dangers, and a miserable and unhappy end.

The wicked Stelinete who till then had continued honest, merely for the hope
he had, that you (restored to your royal state) would richly reward him;
seeing now the effect (to his thinking) impossible, presently turned coat, and
that (as you shall hear) a most villainous way too; for reasoning with himself
upon other men's infidelity by the argument of his own, he concluded it a
point of wisdom to prevent the uncertain rewards of Princes, but more
particularly of Bramac, knowing there was no reciprocal relation of any virtue
(especially of that of gratitude between the Tyrant and the Traitor) with a
certain one, whereof he might besides'be himself his own carver; So being
first persuaded by his brother to one arch-plot of wickedness, he now
persuades him to another more base, if not more wicked.

For he tells him of the treasure reserved and trusted to the guard of stones
in the Island of Capraia, and buried under the fained ruins of a slender
cottage, with letting him see, how the taking it away would prove a service
very steedable to Bramac, for thereby depriving you of the principal means of
recovering your kingdom; especially now that I (for being deprived of the
treasure I had in Cardamina) had not wherewithal to maintain my self, much
less such an Army as were requisite for so long and expensive an enterprise as
this of ours was like to prove.

This design of Stelinete was partly conformable to Cogamar's avarice, though
he could not suddenly approve of it, bethinking with himself, that being sent
to put one plot in effect, it lay not within the reach of his brainepiece to
form thereof a second. But at length the eye of his judgment becoming dazzled
with the certainety of lucre, made him blind to more wholesome considerations,
so as dispencing with the express commission first given him, he resolved to
follow Stelinete's counsel, who fraighting a ship of purpose, steered from
Paphos (where they had met) by Creete, Feacia, and Parthenope to the Elbe, and
thence in a good fishing-boate to Capraia, where they alone (having first
easily removed the rubbish that stopped up the passage to it) took thence away
the treasure, packing up such things as they had picked out for Bramac in the
same manner that they were brought thither, a trade that Stelinete was well
versed in, this not being the first time he had done it.

They had once determined before their going to Capraia, that Cogamar should
pass over to Nepa, and having there executed his commission should then
return to Stelinete who was to expect him: But the difficulties that opposed
that proposition were many, and among the rest one, that he could not so part
thence without ministering subject of jealousy to Sotiro, who in case he
believed him, would (as was presumed) have come along himself to conduct you,
which he could not have done, neither, ere he had first gone to Capraia;
where, upon missing the treasure he would have smelled out the treachery: On
this confideration, then they concluded, that the one could not be handsomely
effected, without leaving the other altogether unattempted.

Being come to Zambra, they there found the King, where Cogamar known by some
(who were altogether ignorant of the Kings stratagems) was laid hold on, upon
suspicion of being sent by me as a spy to the Court, and upon this conjecture
laying a thousand criminal matters to his charge. Bramac commanded him to be
brought before him, as though he would have examined him himself; but finding
his command unexecuted, he caused both him and his brother to be first gagged,
and then cruelly tormented to death, giving out, that they were sent thither by
Sotiro to corrupt with the treasure of the Crown the Subjects loyalty and
States quietness. At the self same time he commanded Dariacan to lay hands on
me too; but I (being by some of my more trusty friends advertised thereof)
saved my self by flight, taking on me to go to Are a neighboring Island, to
take the air, carrying along with me a small part of the gold, but well nigh
all my Jewels.

Dartacan having presently after my departure received order to arrest me,
caused me to be pursued in vain, I being (by that time they had traced me to
the kingdoms limits) got (out of all danger) over hitherward on the shore and
territory of Egypt.

Bramac hearing the news of my escape, not imagining that I could be
advertized by any in a matter so secret, but believing (or at leastwise making
show of believing) that Dariacan himself had been the isntrumental mean of
my flight, went in person to Cardamina, upon the walls whereof he caused him to
be hanged up, so giving him (as he had before done to the rest) the guerdion
due to their treachery.

I (trusting on the King of Egypt's royal protection) retired me hither, where
in this private manner of life I could live more contentedly than ever, were it
not for the consideration of your person, whose ill fortune is the only thing
that makes me miserable and unhappy. Upon this she surpised with two fugitive
tears, but repelling their followers with a more than womanly constancy of
courage, thus proceeded.

Now upon this state of things it remains, that we see what resolution we
were best to fix on; whether to tire our fortune or no, or whether or no the
very trying it be not dangerous to our weakness. I know there is no man can
better counsel us herein than your Highness, Prince Polimero; yet I hope you
will hold me excused that I beg not that favor of you; because I persuade my
self that you being come hither in favor and furtherance of Coralbo, will
think it unbefitting your great spirit to advise otherwise than for the
enterprise: at the Queens thus hitting the very white of the truth Polimero
blushed; But she not staying for his answer spoke on.

I shall herein desire no other than Coralbo's opinion, whereunto I will (so
his reasons convince mine) willingly subscribe. He after a short pause with a
demurely-resolute aspect, made her this answer.

I pretend not to convince you (Madame) but only in humble manner to express
my self, seeing it is your will to command me so to do. Many things there are
which out of reason and honesty ought to be done, and yet are not done for
being thought unexpedient, which I believe bears a great stroke over you in
the consideration of this our case. I (for my part) was borne a Prince, and am
by Order a Knight, it behooves me then to dye like whom I was borne, and do
like whom I am; if dangers had wherewithal to bind our hands, there would
then never any thing be done in the world, Besides, that security and danger
sometimes so nearly resemble each other, and are in humane actions so confused
(as it were) that they glide through our hands undistinguished; in so much as
we often take (or rather indeed mistake) the one for the other, so as if
reason will that we take hold of this, the selfsame commands us not to
despair of that.

How many from out of loathsome prisons (hourly expecting the deadly stroke of
the executioner) have been happily transferred to the possession of honors
and crowns? And how many again swaying Royal Scepters have by their own
guards (in whom they reposed the safeguard of their lives and persons) been
cruelly butchered and inhumanely murdered? A Prince's heart therefore should
never be either elevated with felicity or deprest with misery, but ever
indifferent though in far different fortunes; never believing destiny to be
grown so powerful, that valor backed by discretion can no more countermand
it, and though no other benefit could be reaped from it, yet will it in all the
seasons of his age be for a man's honor and commendations to dye valiantly a
fair death. His mother observing he had thus set a period to his speech, with
a gravely-sad smile thus replied.

I see then you answer me not in jest (Coralbo) since in steed of reasons you
give me sentences; yet (alas!) did you but know, how easy they are in their
explicating, and how hard in their experimenting, you would then (I am
persuaded) have omitted the reading them. Action and speculation, doing and
speaking, are as nature and pourtraiture; the one really makes what the other
but visually represents. And although those first real bodies be not in that
degree of perfection as the exactness of the unfallible Art of the
Mathematics would require, yet are they nevertheless both lively and
necessary, whereas the second being either merely imaginary, or at the best
but the brats of fancy, are but inanimate and superfluous.

The Philosophers (humanities picture-drawers) have indeed drawn many
pictures of her, without being (for their hearts) able to add to her other
beauties, than such as are apparent in her face, covering the members
(whereunto they knew not what proportion to give) with side garments which they
called habits; but if Nature had not her self given them their true
proportions, which are good inclinations, bootlesse then and vain were their
habits, well might they veil but never take away their imperfections; a Mask
(we know) may well cover a face, but never clear off it one little mole, or
scarre; and the bodies habit (by the self same reason) cannot by any means
take quite away the halting of a broken leg, though it be never so neatly
rejoined and knit together. I could therefore wish, that virtue were considered
by you (Coralbo) not according to the imaginary abstracts of the theorick, but
real experience of the practick. These ideall transcendent virtues are proper
solely to God, and such men as, abandoning humane actions, pretend to seize on
them by maine flight, come tumbling down with them to the earth, where they
burst their necks with the fall.

The world has its general rules, and with honest men, profit and honesty go
hand in hand. Let us then square our case by this rule, and by it examine our
resolutions.

To this Coralbo knew not well what he were best answer, for that he before
thought his mothers words would prove to be such as might by some critic (had
they been a subject to a poetical pen) have been censured for not observing
a decorum; as though there could not be among women either that hight of
subtilty of spirit and wits acuteness, as to apprehend things well, or that
supreme degree of copious and sweet language as were requisite to express
themselves in the best and most elegant manner; but she standing so seriously
attent to her conceits, that she nothing heeded her sons admiration held on
her speech.

I once (said she) in my happier years knew a decrepit Prince (whom both the
graces and heavens had endowed with the best gifts that lay in the power of
their bestowing (a memory which of me shall be ever honored though
unpleasing) this Prince gave for his devise a Leopard, his motto [I either take
or surcease] taken from the propriety of that beast, which as soon as he
conceives that he cannot overtake the beast he has in chase, gives over his
pursuit; so could I wish, that you (without a bandoning your swan) wear that
Leopard: For applying of whose sense to our occasions I say, That if to suffer
ones-selfe to be carried away to great but possible enterprises be greatness
of spirit, then surely to attempt things impossible is mere temerity and
presumption.

If the kingdoms title were to be tried by a suit in Law, and we withal sure
to have justice, then needed we not doubt of its recovery; or though the title
were uncertain, yet should we do well to try if the uncertainty of the
Iudge's own judgment, his inclination toward us, or some other humane affect
in him might any thing avail us; for then without hazarding either our selves,
our honors, our friends, or servants, we might well adventure (being at the
very worst) the hazard of the better. But (alas!) who can hold plea with a
tyrant Prince, who being entered into our possession by fraud and force,
thinks he deals fairly enough, though he say he will have no other Judge
than his own conscience? a judgment in Law unreversable, since (for having no
conscience at all) he has no Judge to condemn him; this way of justice to
private men open, but to us (...) up, inforces us either to retire us, or to
pass through a way so full of the thorns of dangers, as we shall wish we had;
for who-so would recovere kingdom, should have at his devotion, first some
strong Hold for a reiltring-place, and next supplies of men, money, and
munition, together with a strong faction of friends, interest in neighboring
Princes, and dependence and inclination of its subjects. For the first alas! we
have been already treacherously expelled from Cardamina; for money, you have
been robbed of the treasure in Capraia, and I bereft of that in Cardamina,
save only the more unfit for such employments; the gold remaining there, which
for its weight and massinesse I choosed rather to leave behind me, than to be
with it made a prize my self. Friends we have now no more, the old friendship
being now changed for a new, with the altering by a new potent Prince of the
old into a new government; Besides, if we duly consider the present state of
things, we shall then clearly see, they could not, were they ever so willing,
any whit aid us; nay more, that there is indeed none to help us.

Our Arabia environed on all sides with the sea being secured him by Susiana on
the one part; and that Susiana by the ruin of the Parthian King your
Grandsire, who this day in his extreme decrepit age lives worse yet than we,
in extreme poverty and misery, statelesse and hopeless. For the others, those
petty Kings bordering on the two Arabia's stand in fear of him, out of the
doubt they have of being themselves one day oppressed by him; which is like
enough to be fall them whenever he has but a will to do it; he having in
his own hand the forces, and wearing the Crowns of Parthia, Susiana, and of
the three Arabia's, that are the happydesert, and stony.

Now for the great Monarchs, as the Persian and Egyptian, they are pieces not
to be moved without certain gain: besides their not residing near enough
these States, sithence the seas disunite them, but more than all a secret
reason of loving both of them to have one Prince between them, who though
inferior to either of them, is yet such a one as can subsist of himself; for
in case he were so weak as he could not, then must he of necessity be feign to
put himself under the protection of the one or the other of them; which would
cause not only troublesome wars, but also dangers and rebellions in their
own States and Subjects; who for being composed of differing laws and
languages, and desirous to enjoy their liberty and privileges under their own
peculiar Kings, would not lose the occasion of rising up in Arms; it being the
policy of such (whose ends are Monarchies) to be ever in war, but yet to be
sure that it be but with some one feeble enemy or other; since many small
forces united in one, become apt and able not only to gaul, but in time to
subject even the most potent Princes.

Then for servants, I cannot now name you one that depends on us, Bramac having
but too cunningly won them to be all at his devotion, besides that he has
not a Governor in any place of importance that is not a Susianian. And for the
Arabians (which is the last of the conditions I spoke of) he has so handsomely
screwed himself into their good opinions with an outward show of justice and
liberality, as there is not one of them that desires any change, especially now
that they see him blessed with a goodly progeny, ever present in the eyes of the
people, and nursed up by those who once loved and honored us more than all the
rest. This is the contents of all that which with more words, reasons, and
examples might have been produced against your propositions in general,
whereunto I will notwithstanding for your in that behalf more ample
satisfaction, answer in particular.

First you allege, that all honest and reasonable things that are not done,
are lest und one merely by reason of inexpediencie; as though inexpediencie
were not a reason sufficient enough: why? I know no reason why all things
should not suddenly decay and fall to ruin, but that it is not expedient they
so should. Again you seem to believe, that your being by birth a Prince, and
by Ordera Knight, obliges you to attempt ought beyond your strength. For the
first, do Fortune what it do can, you shall dye a Prince howsoever; the Title
is Natures gift not Fortunes, and he shall ever be a Prince that is borne of
Princely parents. And for the other, to do the acts of a Cavalier, I both
advise and entreat you, but would feign know of you first, what you conceive
them to be? and whether a Knight be bound to attempt any enterprise whatsoever,
wherein is required courage and strength? As for example, if singly to affront
an Army, if at a leap to skippe over from the Egyptian to the Arabian shore:
Likewise if neither to fear Neptune in his tempests, nor Jove in his
thunderbolts, be a quality befitting a Knight, or rather some impious brutall
villain given over to execrable despair, I would gladly know?

For the rest, you hear not me say, that you ought to leave any honorable
enterprise unattempted for fear of dangers, or suffer your self to be
trampled down by misfortunes, or that virtue cannot do more than Destiny, or
that you should in a just and honorable occasion shun a valiant death; God
forbid I should give you any such counsel, only my wish and desire is, that
all your actions be squared out by the rule of reason. But yet admit, that I
approved of your designs, to assault Bramac, and take from him the State or
dye: I would feign know how we shall do it? whether by us four, two women and
two Knights, or with forces of men? if we alone should attempt such an
enterprise, I then fear me the world will say, that none of us either did or
died like Knights, or discreet personage: If with Armies, where shall we leavy
them? In Egypt, the King will not permit us, nor has he indeed any reason to
profess Bramac enmity without any ground or foundation of quarrel. Shall we
promise him in recompense all our States save only Arabia? well I am willing
we so do, yet tell me, dare you trust him? or in case we did, where (I
wonder) are the moneys to leavy those Armies? nay admit we either had or could
make shift for them too, where will you make up a Fleet to transport them?
We Will conduct them (you will say) by land through the deserts: content, but where
are the provisions? will they rain down (trow you) from heaven on us? or will
the rocks distill waters for us to drink in those sands? No, no, the Gods
work not such miracles, but when they please, nor can we expect that they will
do so for us, since they are not ministers but avengers of humane avarice and
ambition. And though in our case we have (indeed) justice which they are
accustomed to favor, yet shall we be never the better for that neither,
because it is not Justice that p^^^ you on; no, it is Ambition, the avidity of a
Crown, the desire of revenge, and the vanity of making your self eminent and
famous in the world; venue is but only the shadow, for vain affects are the
solid body of your design.

This sharp redarguing of the truth pricked Coralbo nearer the quick than the
truth it self; well could he have found in his heart to have replied, (though
weakly) rather than have yielded the field at the first assault; but
considering with himself, that so doing could not any way steed him, nor
indeed work other effect than bring him within the censure of an obstinate
and indiscreete disputant, he answered her with silence. When she bethinking
now with her self, that she had held them in too long a discourse, turning
her self with a sweet respectivenesse toward Polimero.

Renowned Prince (said she) I doubt I have abused your noble courtesy in
troubling your spirits (contrary to the terms of civility) all this while
with our tristing affairs; for which I humbly crave your benign pardon; let
us therefore now (so it please you) walk forth to recreate our selves a little:
and though you here find nothing worthy of you, yet I shall beseech you to
take in good part such entertainment of me as may be afforded, not by a Queen
to a Prince, but by a poor disinherited widow to a benign and courteous
Cavalier. To this Polimero having first done her humble reverence thus answered.

Royal Madame, you need no such preventions, for virtue has supplied
fortunes defects with such an extraordinary liberality, that there is not any
participant there of but must therefore remain your eternal debtor; And for
the house, although it be not worthy your Royal person, yet is it such, as
with its conveniencie might give as good satisfaction as a more sumpteous. Yet
were there no other consideration, its very homeliness would argue the
malignity of the Harbinger that so lodged you. But I hope to see you one day in
another-guise-state.

No; no, (redoubted Prince) said she, comfort proceeds not from imagining an
alteration in misfortunes (because in case the same succeed not accordingly
the pain becomes greater) but rather by arming ones-selfe against them, and
correcting the venom of fortune with the antidote of patience; which if I have
not yet constantly observed and wholly performed, yet do I every day more than
other profit somewhat in that to me so necessary Philosophy.

Which divinely-philosophicall speech of hers was indeed evidently
demonstrated by the irrefuteable theoreme of her deportment and actions, for
she nothing less expressed the greatness of her spirit within the narrow
circuit of these private walls, than she had at other times done within the
spacious cloisters and comportments of her royal palaces; since she wanted
nothing save the superfluity of Nature, without which Art can hardly show the
hight of her excellency; conducted she had through some small channels of the
River Nile a great quantity of water, wherewith she not only watered her
garden, but also nourished curious fountains and spacious fish ponds, wherein
were, as well for delight as conveniencie, bred and fed a great number of
choysest fish and daintiest waterfowle; whence the spectators eye was variously
attracted to diverse statues of Marble (in stately order erected about those
well-contrived ponds) so as succeeding ages took models of them, which added
to the skill of the most famous modern Sculptors. She made a trial also
(though not with a success answerable to her expectation) of planting the
weeping balmetrees, and cultiving the seeds of the other Arabian odours, the
only affect now lest her after so many losses, but the obvious clime rejecting
(out of a discourteous antipathy) those her labors, frustrated that her so
noble design.

Now she had (the first day of Coralbo's arrival, and at the very instant of
his discovering himself) asked for Sotiro, and could not (when she heard of
it) reflaine from bemoaning his death, an affliction by her judged to be far
greater than any loss or cross she had sustained either in her own person,
or those of her children; construing her being thus by degrees deprived of all
means of comfort, to be an evident sign of heavens continual wrath; he
being that only one, among so many, that faithfully stuck to her till his
dying hour; preferring the interesses of others before his own, and
contemning honors and riches, for becoming in a ruined State, a singular
example both of flourishing loyalty, and of a most constant, and till then
unheard of fidelity.

The Knights continued there to repose themselves well-nigh a month, in which
time it was resolved, that Coralbo should not, without good foundation, assay
any impossibility, nor yet make his abode in Egypt, for not hazarding the
danger of being made known to his brother-in-law; where the one enjoyed the
benefit of a discreet mothers counsels, and the other the royal conversation
of a peerless woman; nor had they then parted so soon neither, if she (well
knowing Polimero's occasions) had not her self expressed, how sorry she would
be, that their stay there should any way prejudice them.

And though her daughter (fond of her brother, and hopeless, for ought she
knew, of ever seeing him any more) earnestly besought her to detain him there
somewhat longer; yet she would often tell her, that it was a folly to think
to cure one grief with many, and that the privation of things dearly loved
were less insupportable after a long than after a short fruition of them; and
that when Coralbo had sojourned there a whole years time, she would have
been then more loath to part with him, than if he had staid but a day,
instancing for an example a fever, in the hot excess of whose burning fit,
the more a man drinks, the more he thirsts, and yet the gain that the
patient reapeth thereby is enfeebling of his stomach, and prolonging of his
fit; considerations all of them though undoubtedly true, yet (for all that)
insufficient to extirpate from a tender heart the roots of a
naturally-affectionate remorce.

Their parting day being come, the Queen went to visit Polimero, to whom
(after having in most lively colors expressed the obligations she owed him) she
recommended her son, therewithal presenting him with a box of gold full of
most precious Balsome, on whose out side was with curious artifice formed the
face of a woman weeping, her tears represented with rich orient pearls,
sprinkled with artificial ornament here and there one, on the anterior part of
her countenance, the rest being all over richly beset with Diamonds of an
inestimable value: A present (as she told him) unworthy of so great a Prince,
but necessary for such a Cavalier, whose heroike spirit might by spurring him
on to great enterprises, bring him dangers, and those dangers wounds which by
that precious liquor might in a few hours be cured: Her son she both
enriched with precepts, and accommodated (for prevention of adverse Fortune's
incommodity) with her richest Jewels. She once thought to give him a squire
too, till upon calling to mind the infidelity of the others, she conceived it
safer for him to be served with such as knew him not. The last charge she gave
him, was, to think sometimes on her, praying him after a while to come again,
that she might see him yet once more ere she died: With that word (after
dressing her face and eyes at the looking-glass of constancy, and giving him
a farewell kiss) she parted from him, and left him to begin his journey,
accompanied with his sisters eyes and tears.

The two Princes rode on their way diversely affected, the one being melancholy
and pensive, the other blithsome and merry; the later being now resolved
(leaving the way of Ammon's Temple, whither he once purposed with himself to
go) to return directly to Athens, his heart telling him, that he should
shortly light on some unexpected good accident; Coralbo he comforted more with
offers than reasons, an argument of an unfeigned comforter; and he (knowing it
now bootelesse to contrast with the will of Heaven) having his mind fortified
with generous resolutions, stoutly trampled under the feet of his courage both
want and fortune.

Both these Knights being desirous to see (by all means) the great Court of
Egypt, put them selves on the way to Memphi, where the King then resided,
faring sometimes well, and other timesill, conformable to the quality of their
lodgings.

Phoebus now hastened to bathe his swealtry Steeds in the foaming Ocean, when
they might descrie a-front of them a Grove of Palme-trees, and in it might
hear a great rumor of voices; whereupon, lacing on their helmets, they spurred
onwards as fast as their horses could gallop, where come, they might see two
knights and no more, busied in slaughtering their assaulters, at least forty in
number, who seemed rather to turn tail than to fight; observing (though)
their time of charging and wheeling about altogether in such an orderly
disorder, that the fight seemed to such as beheld it from a far off, rather a
show than a skirmish.

Polimero suddenly started (as one amazed) at the sight of one of them, whom he
thought he should know by a black Eagle which he wore on his crest, and was
assured thereof when he saw his Squire, by that time beaten off his horse by
six of those thieves that presently fell a-stripping of him maugre all his
struggling to get out of their mischievous clutches; and full ill would he have
fared (they being already fully bent to butcher him) but for the timely
arrival of Polimero, who sacrificed their cursed lives as an oblation due to
the infernal spirits; his well guided sword so conforming to his heroike
spirit, that he struck never a blow without expected success, for doubt of
coming in too late to the rescue of the other two, who bravely maintained the
fight against a strange squadron of these raskals. Coralbo seeing them skirmish
in several divisions, affronted one of them, charging it with so resolute an
arm, that he disconfited it in a moment, and then without lofing any time set
upon the second, which with as much facility was rowted by the same valor:
upon this the third fronting to their flanckward spurred toward him, which one
of the two unknown Knights perceiving, he (leaving his companion, to make good
the field against such of their enemy squadron as survived their deaths-right
usurping blows) resolutely spurred on all alone to encounter it; whilst
Coralbo seeing his assistance so well employed, turned to second him with as
brave a resolution.

Of a great number that the enemies were, there remained now but the hardiest
of them, the rest lying all scatteringly grovelling about the palme-trees, as
the trophey of these four Knights valor, so that the remnant of them, knowing
they were not able to make long defense, dispersed themselves upon their flight
into several ways, which occasioned the separation of the four Knights also
in their pursuit; Polimero and the Knight of the Eagle went together, and
Coralbo with the other followed by the Squire: never was chase so obstinately
maintained, nor hunted Dear so fleetly pursued, as either of these couples did
these fugitive villains, which was the cause that they lost sight each of
other in the confused order of the wood, massacring (all the while) without any
remorse those, who remorselesse and void of pity or humanity lived on the
blood of innocent travelers. At length Polimero with the Knight of the Eagle
being left (though well-nigh tired) sole Masters of the field, speedily ran
to embrace and take acquaintance each of other, the twilight having by that
time surrendered his dominion to his elder brother [Darknesse] whilst the Sun
plunged in the depth of the Ocean, left sight-depriving night in her full
possession. When Polimero lifting up his beaver thus greetes his companion.

I know not whether or no mine eyes or imagination deceive me, but if you be
not Eromena my Lady and Princess, Angel of what Hierarchy (I beseech you) be
you then of, noble and valiant Cavalier? The other instantly knowing him by his
voice, impatient of any delay embracing him with his Arms about his neck, made
him this answer. If I then be her, for certain you are my Lord and Prince
Polimero. Delightsome it was to see, how readily (without any more words) their
amorous affects adapted their nimble hands to unbuckle each others helmes, that
the wounds of their kisses might have the deeper impression in their
love-enflamed faces. Nor had they been so soon weary of this as they were of
the other battle, had not Eromena's telling him that the Knight her companion
was Landadori, put him in mind to go seek her out, whom accordingly they
rode a whooping and hollowing for, overall the wood (though in vain) till
their horses in the end grown weary near a homely house that stood in the
open field, they repaired thither to repose themselves; he freeing (by the way
thither) Eromena from all fear of her daughters miscarriage, by the confidence
he had of Coralbo's valor, seconded with the assistance of Carasio (who was
the Squire) and order before hand taken to meet at Memphi, in case they
happened to loose one another.

Come to the lodging, after replied embracements, the first thing that Polimero
desired to know, was, the occasion that moved her to come through so many
dangers into those so remote parts. Whereupon she having told him as much as
he had formerly understood by Coralbo, said on.

That after the Count of Bona's departure the King her father was fullen into
another far different but better frenzy, upon considering with himself,
That the Count being now (good man) grown decrepit and of a crasie
constitution might fall sick by the way, and so find him either not at all or
too late; and that upon proposing therefore of sending some other, Lindadori
offered (to the passing content of her Grandfather) to undertake her self that
service; and that whilst the business esteemed but a jest, passed unthought
on, a great many that were named (fearing the girle's humor) made their excuse
with confessing its occasion, but the consultation of dispatching her,
appearing to her at length to be but in jest, she inwardly fretted thereat,
and boldly told the Council, that she was now in years to bear Arms as
well as any other whatsoever; and that in respect she could not be dissuaded
neither by hers nor by the King or Councel's persuasion, she was forced (out
of the tender care she had of her welfare) to become her self her companion,
and that so leaving the King rather appeased than satisfied, they had departed
to seek him out: That understanding at Athens what way he had taken, they
(without hearing any news of the Count) crossed over into Egypt, where meeting
(by good fortune) Carasio, they traveled toward Memphi, where they were by
the way set upon by those villainous Robbers in manner as he had seen them.

Excessive were the joys that Polimero conceived at the relation of these good
news, rejoicing withal, that he was so fortunate as to be an eyewitness of
his daughters valor, though sorry he heard no good tidings from the good
Count, doubting his Father-in-law had not in vain presaged some ill that might
since have betided him, which (if any such should happen him) he would have
been as fully or little less sensible of, than if it had befallen his own
Father.

The morning being come, they returned again to their search, but hearing no
news of them they enquired after, they put themselves on the way to Memphi, to
meet them, as was formerly concluded on.

Donzella Desterrada, for her part, gave her runne-away villains the chase
with such an intentive eagerness, that she thought not of as much as what
concerned the security of her own person, so intently were all her thoughts
busied in chastizing them. She had under her an Andalasian Courser of such
surpassing speed, as was able to beat one after another all the horses that
ever drew in Phoebus fiery Chariot. And such a one had she indeed need of, to
conform with the velocity of her fiery humor, now also exasperated with the
eagerness of her resolution of not leaving one of them escape her avenging
hand, conceiting that she added edge to her blade, and nerves to her arm by
this her maiden hand-fight, and first encounter.

Coralbo on a passing fleet Arabian Steed, given him by the Queen his
mother, speedily followed her; well might he have out-stript the wind for
swiftness, but not overtake her; nay he would have lost sight of her, had not
her staying to fight and kill given him time to get near her.

Carasio in the mean time solicited his horse with the sharp Rhetoric of
his spurs; but losing sight of her, he followed as fast as he could drive
Coralbo, whom he might see Northward of him, till at last he overtooke them
both glutting their swords with the blood of those slaughtered caitives; A
strange marveile, that two generous young spirits inclined to piety, nay that
seemed to breathe nothing but compassion, should in their fights show
themselves to be (or at least seem to be) so merciless, inhumane, and cruel;
unless the reason thereof be, either that true compassion springs not from any
soft disposition which sensibly feels in himself another smart or
sufferings, for such were not virtue, but rather faint-heartednesse a brat of
imagination; Or, that those virtues depending on Justice (their true nurse)
hold compassion in the punishment of the wicked to be merely vicious.

But to go on with our story, Of all that mischievous squadron there remained
unslaine but two for the two knights to deal withal, nor had those neither
survived their fellows, but that by their wily dexterous shifts and favorable
situation of the close-growne Palme-grove they found a way to save themselves
a while maugre the fleetnesse of the pursuers horses, so as watching their
time, and retiring from one tree to another, they made a shift to recover (hard
about the waxing brown of the evening) to the mouth of a grot, whereinto they
being suddenly entered, used all possible diligence to damme up its entrance
with great stones, logges of wood, and such like heavy materials.

The two Knights thus mocked and o're-reached by the wiliness of these
villains, amazedly staring each other in the face, knew not what to resolve
on, when Carasio with a modest smile thus bespake them.

I should under favor (Gentlemen) conceive it requisite, that valor sometimes
cede to discretion, these fellows are safely lodged, whereas we are shut out
without either supper or lodging; leave them (I beseech you) with a mischief
to some others chastizing hand, since we must either leave them, or hazard the
losing of our company. But Lindadori after having patiently heard him, as
impatiently answered; that she would by no means part thence, without first
chastizing them, they well meriting it, were it but for fooling her so long as
they had done; bidding him (with that) go seen out for their company, whilst
they would expect him there without stirring thence.

Carasio obeyed, but seeing after a short gire that his light was turned to
darkness, he hollowed till he grew hoarse again, and then considering with
himself, that he might both miss those of his company that he looked for,
and hazard the losing of the rest too, he returned and found them in the same
place he had left them, busily endeavoring (though in vain) to force open the
entrance of the den, and had no small ado to persuade them to a short truce,
upon hope that he would (so they had but a little patience) fire it open; taking
then from off his saddle-bow a portmanteau, and out of it some victuals, he
got them to sit down and fall to, necessity being in such a case of all other
the best persuading Orator.

Their helmets being taken off, they marveiled each of them at the others
beautiful youth and youthful beauty, so as (without speaking a word) they
gazed each other in the face, either of them expecting that the other should
speak the first word; when Coralbo thinking it stood him upon to sweeten the
envenomed fury of the maiden, whom he took to be a man, thus broke first the
ye of their silence.

Sir, me thinks we should do well to follow this gentle Squices discreet
counsel, though (in case you dislike it) I shall be most ready and willing to
obey your commands. She without making him as yet any answer, stood with her
eyes ever fixed on the den, so fired with disdainefull anger, that they served
for a candle in the pitchie darkness of the night, made yet more horride by
the interposing shade of the thick grove: only mutter out at length she did
in answer to him some few halfe-pronounced words which could not be understood,
she having peculiar to her self alone one unexpressible quality, which was a
pretty pleasing kind of displeasure, and now she was sullen and swaggerd
though it could not be discerned why, or with whom it was: But Coralbo
continuing still his courtesies and she her silence, he held it more
discretion to excuse her for the tenderness of her age, than accuse her of
small discretion. And though he well observed how richly she was armed, yet
judged he her to be of some great quality, not so much by her Arms as by her
face, wherein her magnanimity and native greatness, though veiled under a
maiden simplicity and exceeding green years, showed by her disdainefull and
haughty gestures more than common merits of reverence and love, being no kind
of defect, sithence such a generous affect in a Virgin, is (to my thinking)
haughtiness of spirit, that like a fierce mastiffe in the garden of honesty
secures her from the presumption of either too lustful or over-bold lovers.

Her forces being refreshed by the meat she had eaten, inflamed her choler;
up then she rises, and bundles together whatsoever comes to hand of her, every
bough, shrubbe, bramble, and stick, here or there (wheresoever she could
light on them) would serve her turn: Rend off and gather she did all that
she found either dry or green; of the later whereof there was good store, the
thieves having the day before (for their own use) lopped many trees: All that
Carasio did (to that purpose) could not please her, so as snatching the
tinder-box out of his hand, she her self would needs, and did strike fire;
which well performed its office, by kindling in a few hours the matter it fed
on into such flames, that the defenders unable to endure its violent heat,
left the field of the denne's entrance free for their assaylers.

The hot-spirited Princes, having not the patience to stay to see the (though
short) course of that sufficiently furious element, assayed by all the means
and ways she could imagine, to force an entrance through the caves mouth, by
thrusting by the logges that stopped it (without considering that for not being
acquainted with the perhaps many entrances and windings of the cave, she could
not without light do there any good) but could not possibly move them (for
their being so unwildy and massive) till such time, as they being half burnt
dissevered and fell down of themselves; so making a narrow though dangerous
passage, to such as had a will to enter; which the Princess would instantly
have done, and had (twenty to one) spoiled her self for ever, if Carasio by
entreaty, and Coralbo by persuasion had not for a little while restrained her,
by showing her both the danger of the fire in entering, and that of the place
within being entered, where she might (by very probable conjecture) rest
overcharged in the dark by the desperation of these two (by her unseene)
enemies; but she not approving of this their cautelous consideration, bethought
her of a strange invention to lighten her passage; for, finding among many
stocks half burnt, one fit to be waved circlewise, she went onwards waving
it in her hand to the inmost part of the grot, Coralbo there easing her of that
labor, by doing himself that office, till come to the farmost part of it,
they found the fugitives prepared for their defense: But little availed it them,
miserable caitives, to oppugn (unarmed as they were) the unresistable valor
of these now with just anger enflamed warriors. Coralbo hand-fasting his, with
fase got him under him, now trembling with fear of seeing his dagger at his
throat-pipes, whilst the maiden had already slain hers. And there being
provision enough, and among the rest chains and cords to bind such as they
retained to be ransomed, Carasio takes one, and therewith binds his hands and
arms, so as he could not stir to help himself, whilst he lay mumbling out
many words understood by none but him, which was to beg his life; for ransom
whereof he promised him both riches and prisoners: The Princes being told of
this, would feign know where those prisoners were, that they might free them.
And being answered, near a Lake not far off thence, they granted him what he
craved.

Come forth to the air, they put off their helmes, Lindadori soon after
settling her self to her rest, and sleeping as soundly as if she had been in
her own naked bed, whilst Carasio watched for doubt of some sinister accident,
till such time as Coralbo awaked, persuaded him to go sleep, with telling
him, it was now his turn to stand centry: But upon Carasio's holding that
inconvenient, they fell into further discourse, whereby the Squire perceiving
that Coralbo knew Polimero by his right name, and was withal very desirous to
know the other two unknown Knights, he thought good to reveal him their
names; whereat the other became so astonished, as he knew not what to say of
it, expressing himself infinitely sorrowful fot having lost them; till upon
hearing how they were to meet again at Memphi, he was somewhat consolated,
but would without any gainesaying, when they had ended their discourse, that
Carasio should (by all means) lay him down and sleep.

In the morning as soon as the Princess awoke, they put themselves on their
way, arriving to the Lake in a piece of an hours space, where (having passed
through a plat of marish ground thickly over-growne with bulrushes and canes)
they found in an uncouth by-slad a slender Barge that ferryed them over to a
small I Will, where having among thousands of thorns and brambles descried a large
cottage, they thence heard a pitiful murmr of voices and lamentations.

The Princes had upon their coming into the Bark caused the thief to be
loosed, whose being seen in liberty by the villain of a Boatekeeper, was the
occasion that he threw not himself into the water for fear of the two Knights.
Entered the cottage, the first thing they did was loosing the prisoners, which
between men and women were some fourteen in number, all pale, lean, and
weak; and among these her, who was found wounded in the Piramide and dressed by
Carasio, and who ere she was fully healed had fled away by night, to the great
discontent of him, who for her had been left there, and forbidden to follow
his Lord Polimero: And now she well knowing him, was more confused in mind to
see him, (whose presence so upbraided her ingratitude) than joyful of getting
out of so loathsome and miserable an imprisonment. She stood with neavy
downe-cast eyes, not in seeing her nakedness appearing through her tattered
rags, (sithence who-so has once lost her honesty, stands not upon such
terms of modest shamefastness) but for having before her eyes him, who by
replicated good-turnes proclaimed (in being silent) her faults and ingratitude:
Being then asked, why she parted from him ere she was thoroughly cured, her
answer was silence and weeping: But the Princes knowing nothing from this
business, causing the cottage to be emptied and searched over all its
corners, found therein more than ordinary riches in Jewels, Coin, and
aromaticall odours and spices, all which the Princess (Coralbo having resigned
to her all his authority of disposing them) shared among the prisoners, not so
much for defraying their charge to their own homes, as for recompense of their
past sufferings.

Causing afterward the Cottage and the Boat too (when they had past the
water) to be burnt, she gave, though unwillingly, to the two thieves their
promised liberty, she imagining that promises should not be kept with such
mens-names-usurping Canibals, to the damage and prejudice of the weal public.

Thence going altogether in a company, they got to a channel of the Nile,
where they shipped themselves all save the fair woman of Carasio's
acquaintance, who would by no means imbarke her self, but yet would for all
that (a fool as she was) follow the Knights; who for being there surprised by
the night, resolved to make it their lodging, with intention to take the
ensuing day the right way to Memphi.

By this time the noble Coralbo had his mind taken up with new thoughts, for
being caught with the graces of the fair Princess, without daring to manifest
it, upon examination with himself of her tender years and customs, both
those and these being incapable of any such affect. And withal (which seemed
most averse to him) of a nature far from an amorous inclination, a contemner
of men, and a mortal enemy of such of her sex, who for conforming to their
lovers passions, showed themselves any thing pliable to their loves: And though
he hoped that time might alter her, yet did the suspense of the selfsame
time also torment him, for being unable to suffer the agony of such
long-expecting and uncertain hopes, he being but a traveller without either
state or means, deprived of any certain place of abode, yea and of all power
to resolve of any thing, excepting such as fortune might favor him withal.
But being unable to contrast with heaven, upon re-examined deliberation with
himself, he determined to serve her in a somewhat more than usual manner,
and withal to smoother his flames, by assaying if approached her, they could
by any means without her knowledge warm her. Or in case naught else come of
it, yet should he not need to despair wholly, were it but for the content
that he hoped to receive from her most lovely presence, and yet more lively
(because unparalled) gestures; and though the worst that could happened, yet
should he not be the first that for nourishing his amorous hopes, had been
voluntarily deceived, for not yielding himself up to deaths tyranny.

The princely Maiden on the other side, far (God wot) from any such thoughts,
beheld him with an indifferent eye, only fretting her self for his being such
as she could not hate. Her youthful spirit ruminated on naught else save
war and death, with cruel revenges of wrongs, which poor women every day
(as she conceived) received from men. She held the subjection of her sex to be
tyrannical, and conceived, that both Nature and the Law were therein deceived,
and that only for being abased by tyrant custom, it showed not its native
virtue: That it was now high time to let the world see it, and (by reacquiring
their lost liberty) to make the so inured female sex, if not superior, equal
and companion to the other, in favor whereof she was egged on by examples.
Well knew she, that in Egypt (where she then abode) the Kings had effeminated
the men, put them to domestic services, to the distaffe and spindle, to free
themselves from dangers and suspicions; she had also read the Amazon's
valorous enterprises, and thereupon, contemplating the greatness of her own
spirit, was confident of accomplishing the full of her intentions. Wherein she
perceived but one sole difficulty, which was, to deprive women of their
natural fears, though she believed them to be rather habitual than natural.
Her self she knew to be valorous, not so much by the force of her body, as by
the courage of her heart; she comprehended, that valor consisted, in being
neither careful of ones person, nor encumbered with the fears of death: That
the sensibility of wounds enfeebles the forces and blunts the edge of courage,
seeing it is the sole cause that makes it effeminate and backward in assailing,
and disadvantagious and slow in defending: She therefore concluded, them only
to be more valiant than the rest, in whom had taken deepest root the
indifferency of either living or dying, confirmed in such an opinion by the
nature of irrational animals, whereof the fiercer are not the stronger but the
more courageous. Since that for being endued with more force than men, they
would merit the title of fortitude rather than they, if such virtue had its
seat in bodily force; that then since women were equally capable of the
conceits of the mind, wherefore then not of their effects too? Such were her
internal discourses, which if they sometime took a turn about any passages,
told her of diverse effects of love, she then ever sparkled out disdain
against the shee-lovers, and could have found in her heart to have torn in
pieces such of her sex, as being rejected or slighted, tormented themselves
with love, an affect (to her thinking) neither necessary nor necessiting, but a
simple proposition of free will, an incompatibility by consequence unnatural
to love one that hates the person loving, which if it be not (conceived she) a
frenzy, must needs be an infirmity of the brain to be cured with penance and
fasting.

The day being come and the horses saddled, the young woman there waited in a
readiness, with her coats gathered up for the better trudging a-foote, which
the Princess abhorring, and failing to persuade her to make use of the benefit
of the channel, was therefore feign to consent that she came along with her,
upon the importunity of her entreaties, accompanied with such a quantity of
tears, that never mother shed so many for the loss of her children. Causing
her therefore to be put on horseback behind Carasio, she asked her who she
was, and whither she meant to go; having already understood how she was
found, and runne-away from Carasio, she (considering that no evasion could any
thing steed her) resolved now (though not without being thereof ashamed) to
recite in the terms of truth the story of her self in such like words,

I (redoubted Sir) am the most miserable woman that ever was yet borne, since
whereas others miseries proceed from fortune, mine spring merely and wholly
from my self, so as though but too unworthy in all other respects, yet in this
above all I deserve to be pitied of no man, in so much as if the unfeigned
repentance of my faults had not enabled and prepared me for supporting the
penance due for them with an intention to impose on my self others somewhat
greater, I should then not only find my self to be in a desperate case, but
should also have together with a perverse mind a lying tongue, that in steed
of faults and dishonor would blazon my merits and honors, not so much to
conceal from your knowledge my dishonesties, (which should indeed be buried
in the center of the earth) as to find pity in you, and to gain your better
opinion. At the hearing of these words, the Princess, kindled as fiery-hot
embers, was about to make her hold her peace, till upon her becoming more
pliable because of Coralbo's expectation, and shortning the longsomnesse of the
way, she gave way to her relation.

My name (said she) is Diatistera, by Nation a Grecian, and by birth of the
noblest blood in Chio, not because my Father possessing himself of its
liberty, became tyrant thereof, but for that no other one Family in all Ionia
is of more ancient memory than ours, nor any ancestors more remarkable for
virtue, nor renowned for trophies than are our Forefathers. I was conceived in
a private estate, my father then (conformable to the styles of republiques)
being himself but a Citizen, and though in greater estimation than the rest,
yet marked with no titulary dignity of apparent greatness or eminency above the
other prime Senators: This cockarrice of ambitious Sovereignty was then but
a-hatching in his brain, for acquiring whereof, he with more than common wyles
and subtilties made a show of those virtues, which indeed he never owned,
concealing those vices, which being borne with him, were both his nurse and
nourishment.

He fell enamoured of my mother, not for any great beauty of hers, but because
the malicious subtilty which he discovered to be in her, pleased him
extremely; a thing ordinary to the worst people, to have an inclination to
such as live by quillets and inventions, choosing and indeed loving to be
rather deceived by such, than well served by better: Now Nerca my mother in the
beginning of this their love was married, and wife to one Rotildo, a personage
of conditions most noble, (and to praise them well) quite contrary to hers.
Many times had she tempted him to bring his Country into servitude, with the
favor of the Persians, who then ruled (as they do also to this present day)
all Asia. She would always be a showing him the facility of the enterprise,
by him rejected without making any account of her words, which being sharpened
on the whet-stone of ambition, endeavored to foine him, as if generosity (a
royal virtue) would be lodged with tyranny and treacheries. But seeing it
nothing avail her, and considering withal, that though she could have
persuaded him in time, that yet he was not (for all that) to be trusted (seeing
that a mind fast cleaven to virtue cannot be from it dissevered, without
danger of repentance) she cast an eye on Pridale my Father, the state and
nature of whom being well examined, she thought by his means to withdraw her
self from equality by her so much hated, and to be reduced to principality
which so impatiently she longed after, taking for example the Tyrants of
Mileto, Epheso, Colofone, and Pirene.

The first step to the enterprise was Adultery, wherein they found such
sweetness, that the avidity of enjoying each other waxed so insupportable, as
they began to think of the making away of Rotildo, and then of the subjection
of Chio, and climing to the right of their pretended greatness. 'Twas strange
if not marveilous, that they should have (as they had) both of them ere ever
they knew one another, the self same design, and after being acquainted, that
this second (which I now told you of) should serve them for a reciprocal
instrument: And yet a man (when he well considers it) may see, that both these
make no greater matter of marvel, among the good, and yet less among the
wicked if their thoughts strike all in one white. She judged him to be the
prime and most ambitious man of all the Citizens, and he knew her to be of
great parentage, which might afford him matter if not more apt for servitude,
at least less difficult, for being less subject to envy and dangers.

But Rotildo's death must not be effected by violent means, his Nobility and
power accompanied with the favor of the Laws suppressed their principal end;
sithence the very suspicion of being his murderers had been as much as their
lives were worth; by so much the rather that (he being endowed with no less
mild than amiable conditions, and having no enemies) no man could miss of
conjecturing the truth. So as the most favorable sentence that could be
denounced against them must have been banishment, which would burst the neck
of their principality, whereunto they could never aspire as long as they were
exiled persons, and deprived of their estates, goods, and fortunes. The best
course then they could think of, was to cause him to be put to death legally,
by laying to his charge that crime which he most abhorred, and which was
indeed particularly theirs, by plotting the treachery with malicious
accusations so subtle as might deceive the world, the Magistracy and the Laws
themselves.

Now my Father had a bastard-brother named Timocle, more mischievous yet than
himself, to whom he had no sooner communicated his design, and what he had to
do, than he picking (against all reason) a quarrel with one of the principal
Citizens slew him, and then getting a-boord a Vessel for that purpose manned,
passed over into Asia, and thence to Susa, whilst his brother (then chief of
the Magistracy) seeming to detest more than all the rest both the foul fact,
and the guilty actor, banished him (under a capital pain) for ever returning
again to his Country for any occasion whatsoever, subjecting to the self
same punishment all such as should but propose his recalling.

The infamy of so enormous a fault was in a loud cry suppressed by the justice
of his brother, for which the people adored him as a restorer of the ancient
integrity, and as the true Idea of a just Citizen in a well-governed republic.

Timocle arrived at Susa, laying aside the popular Greekish arrogance, adored
the King after the Persian manner, and told him, he was rent from Pridale a
brother of his and the prime Citizen of Chio, not concealing the abominable
murder committed expressly to shadow the plot, and offered him the
Sovereignty of the I Will under the principality of Pridale. He proposed, for
bringing the affair unto a head, that under pretext of demanding a revocation
of his banishment, the Persian King should send thither an Ambassador, because
in case they did not (as he knew they would not) grant it, they should then be
constrained to send him another, to acquaint his Majesty with the reasons why
they did it not; That then Pridale would cause to be chosen the most potent of
them, to the end that taking occasion of calumniating him as corrupted by the
Persians, he might be put to death, which succeeding, the City would then rest
wholly under his brothers authority.

This was not the first time that the King had treated with other Grecians of
the like affairs, so as their legeritie and inconstancy were already known to
him, though he would never have believed them to have been so mischievous: But
the insatiable desire of domineering, having no regard to either virtue or
vice, he being already possessed of the greater part of the Cities of Ionia in
the Continent, deemed the occasion most opportune for getting footing in the
sea. And therefore accepting of the proffer, after being sundry ways (but more
especially by Pridale's Letters) assured, that Timocle's relations were no
false alarums; he wrote to Farnabazzo his Lieutenant in Asia, to execute as
much as by him were proposed him.

Farnabazzo readily obeyes, sending a Captain to Chio, to demand on the Kings
behalf, the revocation of Timocle. To whom Pridale making a show of being now
a more irreconcilable enemy than before, cried out; That such favors from a
King so long since a pretender to the subjection of Greece could not be
obtained of a Timocle without conventions dangerous to both the State and
Liberty; and though it so were not, as it could not but be so (since he would
not have the boldness to return with danger where he was hated without the
security of some secret forces) yet should he not at any hand be so gratified,
were it but for not shaking the foundation of the Laws; an example apt to
minister occasion to other Princes to require the like, which in effect was to
bring under the free dispose of stranger-princes both the liberty and
republic: Declaiming afterward against the case, he was so loud on it, that
the very walls seemed to shake thereat; particularizing withal, the
circumstances, to make him appear so much the more unworthy of clemency: But
seeing the most part of the Council rest ambiguous, for not knowing how to
deny the favor without injury, he proposed the Embassy in designed terms. To
him it was easy to obtain all, yea they would that he himself propounded the
Ambassador, which was even all that he desired; he obeyes, and (after many
long and tedious excuses, carried with a no less artificial than
counterfeined modesty) he at length names Rotildo, with a fair encomio of his
praises, saying, he did it not for his Nobility and riches, but for the
amability of his conditions and carriage; and also because he being of an
incorruptible goodness, and already gracious with the Persians, would with
universal satisfaction obtain as much as he required or desired.

Accordingly Rotildo was (conformable to the wished desires of all of them)
created Ambassador, he (harmless Gentleman) not repugning it, for being
desirous to do his Country any good service. But on the contrary, expressing
an obligation to Pridale for having done him the honor of making choice of him
among so many, an election for the which he came to be declared (and not
without envy) the best and worthiest of all the Citizens. Nor failed he to
thank him also apart, taking with the public instructions his counsels; (by
the direction whereof he believed he could not err) and with them the company
of two young Gentlemen, not only a kin, but also partial to Pridale.
Arrived at Susa, the King took on him to be beyond all measure incensed at the
negative, so as he was feign to stay there above three months, to work out
of his mind the apparent misse-impressions; the King suffering himself to be
(in that while) gained by little and little, in so much as placing him (at
length) among the number of his friends, he did him all such favors as could
procure him to be envied, and ill-spoken of the Courtiers, by sending to him
oftentimes (contrary to his custom) the greatest favorites of his Peers and
great ones, making them stay and fall into private conference with him, as
though they had treated of some affairs of exceeding great consequence.

Timocle on the other side (who at the first made a show of being his enemy, by
saying and doing against him all the ill offices that such an appearance
required) showed himself now in the self same time more mild, and afterward
honoring him with the favor of his often visits, would style him the light of
Greece, the honor of Chio, and a personage worthy to be for his virtue
honored, nay adored even of his very enemies. And because all this was true,
his words were taken to be really and truly spoken, and his fained courtesies
to be friendly offices to the Ambassador, who afterward parted gratified and
honored to the joy of all his retinue, who returned triumphant, for bringing
(to their thinking) along with them to the republic both peace and the Kings
favor.

In the mean while of this his stay abroad I was conceived, so as my mother
doubting lest her husband should take notice of the effects of her adultery,
solicited my father to the precipitation of the business. But he (who would
save all) contented her, with assuring her, that the time should work out her
safeguard without disordering any thing.

Two months were not passed after Rotildo's return, when Timocle passed into
Ionia, with order from the King to leavy in the neighboring Provinces such
forces of men as he should think fit, and by faining the order to be secret,
caused its fame to be spread overall Greece. The Governors shipped the leavies
of men and sent them him from all parts, he keeping his rande-voo at Ephesus,
to make up there a Fleet of Ships, whilst all the Isles and Cities of Greece
prepared themselves for defense, each of them standing in fear, this
warlike-storme would fall on her; only Chio secured by Rotildo never thought
on it; In so much as the people astonished that she thought her self so
secure, showed her her ruin so palpably, as if they had pointed at it with
their fingers, arguing it from the presence and authority among enemies of an
injured and banished Citizen, who for the denial given to the Kings Embassy
on his behalf, could ruminate no other than affects of anger, discontent,
revenge, and despair.

There chanced to be then in Ephesus one Chirito of Lisbo, who whilst he lived
a young man at Athens, was a very intimate friend of Timocle, (both of them
having not only lived under one roof, and for a long time dieted at the self
same table, but had also in common (together with their studies) their
pleasures, commodities, and incommodities) and was now come to Ephesus to a
sister of his, who being left a widow, had sent for him to take order for her
widow, estate and children. This Chirito as he was a lover of liberty, so was
he an enemy to the tyranny of the Persians in particular; for seeing them on
the point of subjecting Greece, as was not unknown to Timocle, whom the other
wonders to see now side with them, but more at the authority he there
exercised, which was much for such a man as he to attain unto, under so great
a King as that of Persia, which he imagined could not but be to the prejudice
of either Chio or that Country. The newly-conceived hate therefore more than
the old friendship made him desirous to go see him, merely to epsy his
actions, and get what he could out of him, whilst Timocle, who desired nothing
more than to be espied, made as though he took no notice of it. After
reciprocal salutations Chirito tells him, how glad he was to see him near so
great a King in so eminent a degree; for which Timocle courteously thanked him,
with telling him, that his fortune should not yield a barren return to his
friends obliging favors, since the chief end of his desire to be advanced to
any eminency, was to be able to gratify and serve them. But as concerning his
enemies, he would let them see, that he knew how to make use of it to their
smart and prejudice. So afterward in his further discourse, complaining of his
Country and brother, he vowed he would so work his revenge, that the world
should have somewhat to talk of.

Chirito purposely fallen on this proposition, stood watching the opportunity
to draw out of his mouth his intended design, whereas the other on the
contrary faining that he did all he could to keep it in, expected but the
occasion of telling it, making now a show of being heat with anger, and that
the fury of his choler had made him thus vomit our his secfet; And with that
he praised heaven, for having changed unto him Greece for Persia; pride, and
the disdainefull Citizen into the gentleness and contentsome delights of a
great Court, and the tyranny of an inhumane and cruel brother into the
favors of the greatest and most courteous King of the Universe; who missing to
restore him by any fair means, bad given him forces, thereby both to restore
himself to his liberty, and also avenge him of his enemies. But Chirito with
counterfeit chariness showing him, that the Fleet he there saw was not
enough for his turn, Chio being strong of it self; besides that in respect of
the confederate Commonwealthes contributing all of them toward her defense,
(as he might be assured they would) the enterprise would not prove to be so
easy, especially considering that they would perhaps have sought with him ere
his arrival in Chio; To this Timocle in a despising manner answered him; That
before the Fleetes could join together to offer him fight, he would have
hanged up without the Walls upon the Gate of Chio that Traitor his brother. And
for the rest, that he was not so foolish to stir in it without being certain
of the enterprise. Chirito (with shrinking in his shoulders replied) that he
conceived not how that could be, without secret intelligence. To which Timocle
smiling answered; But admit I had such, what would thou say of it then? I
tell thee then I have, and such too, that little shall my brothers malice or
some others presumption avail them. Here he named Rotildo, and then taking him
by the hand proceeded. From hence forwards thou may know Chirito how much
ancient friendship can do, I have now committed to thy trust the greatest
secret that is this day in the Court of Persia: see therefore (I pray thee)
that it be safely locked up in the secret cabinet of thy breast: If thou will
continue my friend, I will further thy advancement, and do for thee; if
otherwise, yet shall thou have no cause to think hardly of me. Come along
with me in this expedition, and I will give thee (over and besides the merit
and favor thou shall gain thee in the Kings eyes) a worthy place of command
among the chief Captains. And that thou may see that my proceedings are
grounded on a sure foundation, I Will tell thee all. Know then that Rotildo, upon
promise of the Principality, agreed with the King to sow at my arrival
sedition within the City, and to bring me in with his faction; which may be
easily done, by assaulting Chio both within and without.

Chirito remained at these news struck to the heart: Rotildo he knew
wondrous well, but the treason was so handsomely contrived, and the apparances
thereof so correspondent, that the argument of his goodness conceived to be
now overcome by his ambition, had no force so to conclude for him, as Chirito
punctually believed not all that he had heard; and then without staying to
hear any more, commending him for grounding his affair upon such sure
foundations, accepting the offer of going along with him, and infinitely
thanking him for honoring him with such a favor; he thought every minute a
year till he returned to his lodging; where writing a letter thereof at full,
he sent it to Chio by a trusty friend of his, forbearing to send it by any of
his servants for fear of being discovered. The sea was then free, for though
the suspicion of the war was great, yet was there not (for all that) heard of
till then any hostile effect.

The messengers with most prosperous wind arrived in Chio, a little after that
my fathers two kinsmen that had been with Rotildo in Persia, deceived or
suborned, presented themselves to a certain Magistrate of supreme authority in
State-matters. An accidental branch of whose office was to keep inviolably
secret both the accusers and testimony of witnesses. There they exposed and
deposed, That they never had since their return from Persia had the heart to
believe, much less relate that which they had with their own ears heard
against the person and faith of Rotildo; but that seeing the pass whereunto
things were now brought, and understanding for a certain, that Timocle was in
Ephesus with an Army, they moved with the love of both their country and
themselves, accorded to be no longer silent, now that the said apparances made
them believe that to be true, which till then they did not: This preludium
ended, they said on.

That fortuning to be locked up in some of the Royal lodgings of Susa, near
the chamber where sat the privy Council, who were wont to shut themselves up
when they were come together, they heard them serious in discourse about Chio
and Rotildo, these two names being all they understood, (the Council speaking
in their own language) till they heard Timocle called for, and a little after
asked in Greek, if Rotildo had power enough to give up Chio to the King; and
if also having gotten the principality thereof he would prove faithful and
loyal to his Majesty? He answered yes, discoursing with that a long while
upon his Nobility, riches, and train; That for his faith they might well be
assured of it, because of his being a marveilous upright and honest Gentleman,
and such a one as would not have accepted of any condition that prejudiced the
liberty of his Country (he being not naturally ambitious) but for the
exceeding pride of the Citizens becoming extremely insupportable. This said,
there was no more Greek spoken, nor Timocle any more heard speak; and we
being besotted with Rotildo's famed integrity, firmly believed, that Timocle
had maliciously caused us to be locked up there, to make us believe what he
had made us hear. Upon this deposition, the good Rotildo was suddenly shut up
in close prison, so as no man could come to speak with him: And whilst upon his
examination he called the Gods to witness of his innocence, thither came
Chirito's letters: Whereupon without being any more suffered to speak for
himself, being so accused by two, and now convinced by the third, he
(unfortunate Gentleman) was miserably and injustly strangled.

Timocle understanding of Rotildo's death, seeming to be then apparently
desperate, as if by it all his designs had been frustrated, and the neck of
all his projects broken, made a show of licensing his troops for returning to
Susa, but yet entertained them howsoever, having by his former seeming-reall
fame dissolved the conjunction of the Greekish forces, whilst my Father (not
without being therefore censured) espoused my Mother, she telling such as
thereof spoke to her, that she would have married not only Pridale, a
personage so eminent, but any base man whatsoever, rather than hear her self
called after the unlucky surname of a wicked Traitor; a resolution, which as it
attoned all my mothers kindred, so was it the occasion that those of Rotildo
retired for absenting themselves from the City the time of that marriage, to my
Fathers exceeding content, for being so secured from any more contrasting
until the full accomplishment of his design.

Timocle being advertized of what he had to do, parted one night, arriving at
Chio so suddenly, as her Citizens had not time to shut their Gates. And my
Father gathering together his old and new kindred and alliance, and guarded with
a great squadron of armed followers (as himself was too from head to heel)
he bade them cheer up their hearts, since that Fleet was come thither at his
request: Here without staying for any answer, they being bid follow him, did
so, nor had they indeed time to consider of a denial. His Brother he met at
the Gate without the City, who accompanied with many Captains salutes him by
the title of Prince, pitching with that the colors royal of Persia on the
Walls of the City and public Palace, wherein the new Sovereign immediately
lodged, expelling thence the Magistrate, and altering the Orders of the
Government, over which he placed Timocle President.

Inexpressible was the amazement of the Citizens, seeing themselves baffled
with the most malign and envenomed hypocrisy that ever was heard of; the
justest, honestest, and most zealous among them, having bin under pretext of
justice and zeal betrayed and put to death; whilst the other complotted such
a business by ways twice as wicked as wily, who yet had made them believe,
yea and see too the contrary in the contrary, and gotten himself to be deemed
the best, whereas he was full of all imaginable wickedness and villainy, and
was whilst he took on him to be the sole vindicator of the Commonwealth's
liberty, a-mounting up to the throne of his tyranny at the cost of their
simplicity and folly. And yet their evils had been less, if they had here
ended. But the Persians being departed, after having first left him secured by
a strong band of their old milice, he called before him the Citizens, the
greater part whereof he caused in diverse Temples to be put to death by sundry
torments. But I will pass over this relation serving now no more for my
purpose, it behooving me to come to the story of my self.

I was borne the fourth month after that the Matrimony was contracted by my
Parents, they adding to the sum of their former hatred and infamies that of
adultery, before not publicly known; which (for declaring me theirs) was by
them themselves most shamelessely published. The Gods were pleased to show in
me their Omnipotency in my creation, by giving me the fairest body and the
foulest soul that ever creature in this world was composed of. I grew in
beauty, and with it in the worst conditions, my parents having no other aim
than to please me, nor I other examples than their dishonesties. At three
year old I was mistress of shamelessenesse. Grown to sixteen, my brother
(borne a year after me) was my sweete-heart and lover; but we had both of us
rivalls, I my mother, and he my father; we therefore had run away together,
so worried were we with their importunity and hindrances that they brought us,
if they perceiving it, had not given us way: I conceived almost presently the
occasion of providing me for husband the Tyrant of Samo's son, who a few
years before had also usurped that Principality by my Fathers means.

The young man came and married me, with an intent to bring me home
immediately; but I for being gone by then five months of my time, would not
assent to go, for fear of subjecting my self (in case I were discovered) to
the dangers of any man's passions. The first night that we came together I
showed my self a daughter worthy of him that had begotten me; There was not
any species of simplicity that I counterfeited not affectately, nor tears
seconded with sobbes and skritches, that I seemed not to shower abundantly, and
act to the very life: The toil and ado he had to possess himself of me
were sufficiently manifested by his sweating and weariness. There was not the
least mark nor symptom of untouched virginity to be desired in me, that I had
not sufficient to beguile the best experientest living in that kind. Nay I was
not ashamed with my crying and frequent skritches to turn the house
topside-turvie: In runs my Mother (as was before between us accorded on) to
act her part of the tragicomedy, and showing how I was (forsooth) swounded,
she revives me by besprinkling me with vinegar and odoriferous waters.

My time of childe-birth being come, as I was laid a-bed, upon the very point
and instant of my delivery, in came my husband, so as I was forced with
compressing my cries and tears, to bring forth my burden under the quilt in
his presence, smothering the babe with my knees, lest its crying might bewray
me. I called my disease fits of the Colic. And the very fame night supped (as
I was wont to do) out of my bed, and had (so impudently bold was I) layne with
my husband too, but for my mother, who said she would sleep with me her
self, to help me with medicines if my fits returned.

He in the mean time all enflamed with love of me, could not endure the want
of me, nor believe me to be his as long as I abode among my own kindred.
Every day would I promise to go along with him; but the incestuous blind love
of my brother had mored my anchors so fast, that my ship could not be loosened
from those shores; and my husband impatient of my stay, did the more importune
me, for conceiving this brotherly affection to be of another sort than that
of them which were borne of one and the same womb: He therefore began now to
open his eyes better, though better it had been for him that he had not; For
chancing to come suddenly into a chamber, and finding us there together in an
act not of the honestest, he drew out his sword, my brother doing the same
with his, and so (there being no body to part them) miserably killed one
another in my presence; my brother dying suddenly, to whom I ran, and
affectionately kissing him, reviled my expiring husband with such injurious
language, that had (but for my being in the highest degree impudent) been
capable to make me for a third dye for mere shame. But being used to care for
nothing, this disaster being past, I cared little for it, and less for my
brother, whom I had loved merely for my pleasure, which failing with him, I
was to supply by others.

This disaster was (as others were) masked by the subtilty of my father and
mother; who considering how prejudicial my presumption might in time prove,
began to hate me, upon the aggravation of Timocle's persuading them either to
curb or kill me. All affections in him, though in all vices extreme, ceded to
that only one of reigning; so as though inclined to all kind of mischief, he
became to be in outward show virtuous, for not falling at the fall (or decease)
of his brother, from that state wherein he (in his conceit) lived happily. And
my father knowing, that as he was the instrument of his greatness, so he
might be also the like for his depression, stood so in fear of him, as he
doubted he would be angry if he followed not his counsels, having a perpetual
eye to the good opinion the King of Persia, and many great ones had of him, to
whom he was become gracious by his nature, pliable to all humors; so as
Cameleon-like he with the good would appear in the best colors, and with the
wicked in the worst.

Nerea my Mother an hundred for one more malicious and mischievous than my
Father, and that for her own ends, had esteemed his brother more than he,
entertaining him with the carriage rather of a strumpet than a sister-in-law,
and salving her husbands jealousies with the self same cunning; endeavoring
to make him believe, that so she must have done to save them both from being
undone: Reasons (at first) perhaps good, but no longer now after the disaster
of his son; doubting, and with reason too, that she carried her self
toward him as she had done toward her other husband; observantly therefore
examining her demeanor toward his brother, he considered it to be the fabric
of his danger and ruin.

All my Mothers wit was after the death of her son employed in expugning the
interessed continency of Timocle, which being once battered, she hoped to be
whole directresse and commandresse of all. Much ado she had in assaulting it,
but at last she won it. Timocle as wily, malicious, and mischievous as so
many more, subjecting himself by degrees to the web of the ill-warpt thread
of a worser spinster. The business went not far onwards, because my Father was
now resolved to make sure work of them, who considered that the Principality
being to him and his heirs, took from all others all pretext thereunto, as
long as he and I stuck together; not without forethinking, that women's
disability to tyranny (an engine to be managed with forces and terrors,
conditions far distant from the nature of their sex) and my being horribly
detested of every one, would have brought him no small disadvantage: Yet
howsoever having no other prop to lean upon, he choosed this for his present
ends, any shade serving his turn that lies scorched by the Sun. And though
that innovating might go near to spoil all, and move on to a certain end
uncertain perils, yet thought he it not his best course to put it in doubt,
since preventing a mischief and surprising the mischiefe-plotter is better
than to be prevented and surprised. He therefore began to honor me, using me
(as presumed heir) with much respect, by participating to me his affairs,
calling me into counsel, and giving me a Family, and among them, some of the
best reputed and honestest Matrons of Chio, persuading me to virtue, good
conditions, and more especially to a modest and honest course of life, framing
himself also to the same in outward appearance so punctually, as he now
seemed to be no more that first Pridale: And to the end that Nerea and Timocle
might prove the authors of their own ruin, he seemed to be hoodwinked at
their actions, by cherishing and making more of them now than before, making an
account, that their becoming odious unto the world would preserve him in his
Principality, for doubt of a worse, if not for choice of the better.

Timocle penetrating his brothers thoughts by his behavior, considering how
the government had won him many, all favors having been done either
mediately or immediately by him, and all rigours and injustice imputed and
conceived to be Pridale's, although his conscience told him, that he was ever
hated but in an equal degree with himself, who was a murderer, a betrayer of
his Country, and good men, a complotter of tyranny, an adulterer, and an
incestuous miscreant; abandoning therefore all domestic hopes, he fastened on
foreign, better founded and more certain. He wrote to the Persian Court,
and complained of Pridale, not in terms of enmity, but as a well-meaning man,
proposing the dangers of sedition in the people, who were like enough (so they
but once recovered their liberty) to break the hedges not only of Ionia, but
even of all the Provinces of Greece. That therefore order should be given for
some number of good Soldiers and Galleyes to keep the I Will in awe: He
obtained as much as he desired, upon a conformable letter of Farnabazzo
Lieutenant General in Asia, an ancient friend of Timocle's, and conserved
such by presents, and by the common opinion of the Peers, that he was rather
a Persian than a Grecian.

My Father looked pale at the hearing of the order of sending him Galleyes and
Garrisons. And seeing himself in such a straight, resolved to clip his
brothers ambition's wings, by having him guided to the precipice of his
downe-fall. He surprised Timocle and his wife together on the fact, or as we
say with the manner, whilst they were more carelessly licentious, for thinking
themselves secure enough from him; and showed them in the act both to the
Principal of the City, and to the Persian Captains and Officers, and then
speedily convicting them, put them to death; the most welcome accident that had
befallen Chio, since she had lost her liberty, which she judged to be a very
good beginning: Feign would my Mother have seen me before her death, but that
last boon of hers was not granted her.

Having stepped this irrevocable pace, my Father not knowing how to refuse the
destinated milice, bethought himself of sending me into Persia, that I serving
for a silent hostage might more handsomely excuse him thereof, hoping that my
beauties were sufficient to obtain of the King and Court all that I knew how
to demand. Having received my instructions, we gave out (to veil with a modest
pretext this till then unheard of feminine embassy) that I went to be
entertained in the Queens service, till I married again.

Come to Asia accompanied with a Noble Family of Knights and Ladies, I came to
speech with Farnabazzo; I stood not to praying, but commanded him (so much
authority conceived I to have over him in an instant) to forbear to send the
forces either of men or galleyes destinated for Chio, till he had further order
from the Court. I was obeyed, passing afterward from place to place without
any expense, besides my being gratified by all, even till I came to Susa,
reserving (all the while) apart my natural conditions, to the end the coin of
my beauty (being conserved in its full weight) might be the more current to
steed me where I went to spend it; I arrived in Court, with a noble conduct
of such as beyond any expectation of mine came to meet me by the way,
although indeed I strongly relied on my winning qualities. Being presented to
the King, I carried my self Courtier-like, having in three months time
learnt the Court-customes and phrases, of such as had honored me with their
company and attendance, so as I now knew well how to convert the Grecian
demeanor into that of the Persian, and the odious popular audacity into
venerable adoration; insomuch as I cannot tell you, whether the King remained
thereat more amazed or taken. I superficially passed over the faults of my
Uncle and Mother, and enlarged my self upon their conjuration, giving it such
colors as pleased me best, I showed him that my Father could not display
before him any more evidently visible ensigns of his devotion, than by sending
me his only Daughter and heir, to do him obedience, and put my self at his
feet, to the end, that she being formed after the Idea of his royal will and
pleasure, might give him certain assurance of our loyal subjection, for
obtaining the favor of conserving those branches, which by the favor of his
Majesty and our good fortune were grafted to the stock of so high and noble a
Monarchy.

The King listened to me with great attention, and then without suffering me to
kneel any longer, raised me up, and put me to sit on a cloth of Tissue
Cushion, himself being seated upon a Throne of pure gold under a large canopy
chased all over with pearl and precious stones, adorned with fair banners
enriched with deep fringe of finest gold. He sat environed with his Peers
divided into two wings, with that semblance of humility that comes nearest
adoration. His answer was short, his joyful countenance and smiling garb
partly expressing his intended speech, which was, That he was glad of my
coming, and that Pridale could not think of a better means to free him from
blame; whom, to gratify me, he received into the number of his friends;
whereat I being risen up to adore him, he took me by the hand, and amorously
beholding it, asked me if I were not weary after so long a journey; whereunto
(I submissively kneeling down, and kissing his unawares of him) answered; that
wearisomnesse had no place in such, who were honored with enjoying the
paradise of his celestial presence. So pleased was the King with my action and
adulation, that raising me up himself, and kissing me, he said to his Peers,
that he had never all his live's time seen either a fairer or a discreeter
woman; giving (with that) order to the Lord high Chamberlain to assign me
lodgings; which was soon done, for he accompanying me out, consigned me the
richest Chambers, and nearest the King of all the rest.

I cannot express unto you the joy that I conceived from so good a beginning,
not that there stuck not in my heart a certain internal doubt of the issue of
the enterprise, upon laying before the eyes of my consideration womanish
envies, from which (for all that) my heart would have given me a free issue,
if mischievous subtilty could have done it. But what I doubted of was Fortune,
a thing above the reach of humane will.

Scarce was I possessed of my Lodgings, when I pretended to go see the Queen,
a favor rarely granted to strangers, the women being there ever retired, not
stirring abroad, but veiled and waited on by Eunuchs. But to me any thing was
easy to be obtained of the King (who was disposed to will even what I willed)
and of the Queen too; because she being informed of my coming, and of the
graces and favors I had received, had an extreme desire to epsy out some
imperfection or blemish either in my face, body, or demeanor; I found her
indeed of rare beauty, though insipide and livelesse, of a mean spirit, and
that little poorly pieced up with simplicity and an ill grace; so as it was no
wonder, if the King grown weary thereof became enflamed of me, rather for my
garb or carriage (as I perceived) than for any excelling beauty of my face,
for that I confidently believed (and that without mistaking too) that the
Queen was fairer than I. Beyond measure then remained I consolated, when I
comprehended the advantages I had of her; I had now therefore no more fear of
my self, since I was assured to bring the King subject to my beck, for that I
was to encounter with a Genius inferior to mine. I formed nevertheless (with
my seeming foresight, and penetrating the unexpert craft of those women) an
ocean of jealousies and absurdities; because who-so means to beguile another,
must make a show of conditions incapable of beguiling any. I should be too
tedious in recounting unto you all the particulars of accepting and
entertaining me in her service, the grace I thereby acquired, her ill will
being changed into liking, and her envy into well-wishing, trophies little
esteemed by me, otherwise than as they served to my principal end.

The enamoured King, thinking to gain me with the smoke of his favors and
presents, remained astonished to see me so deceive his expectation, and asking
me the reason of my (as he termed it) cruelty; I answered him; That it was not
the use of Princesses in my Country to serve for Concubines, nor could I with
my honor be such, though to so great a Prince; so as he was excluded from
enjoying me otherwise than as a wife. But the plurality of women not of wives
being accustomed in Persia, gave him by my words an inkling of either repudying
or making away of his present wife; he that conceived well enough my meaning,
extazied with excessive love answered no.

That he had no other occasion to put her away, than for her barrenness; and
then again to take another without being assured of having issue by her, was a
thing he could not do, because in case that that other proved barren, it
would behoove him (for his States satisfaction) to follow the first example, a
point that troubled me much, so as I thought upon it many days with my self,
till seeing that my consideration hammered ever on the anvill of the selfsame
conceits, I was forced to condescend to his desire upon his royal promise,
that as soon as I were known to be quick with child, he would make me his
wife. But tasted that he had once the sweetness of my embraces, and seen the
difference between a woman of frost and one of fire, he became so transported
with the exceedingnesse of his content, as he thought of nothing else save to
rid himself of his wife. Now he never thought of making her away with poison
as I would have done (the easiest way for him,) nay I was a good warrant to do
it without asking him any leave, if I could, but that I wanted the simples and
means to effect it withal; so that there now resting me no other hopes than
from being quick with child, I quite despaired thereof, after five or six
months time, wherein I tried so many experiments, as went near to cost me my
life, by endeavoring (as much as in me lay) to prove my mothers prognostics
false; who upon my delivery of childe-birth told me, that I should never suffer
any more such pains, my incommodious delivery having so bruised me within, and
its soreness so augmented by my natural heat, as deprived me of all
possibility of conceiving any more.

I made many trialls of my self according to my Physicians direction,
especially of certain suffumigations of Mirh, Incense, and Storax, which
passing from the inferior parts of the body to the mouth and nose, denotes a
possibility of conceiving, but through me (to my but too great discontent) they
passed not, though upon experimenting it on one of my Gentlewomen, I found a
different effect.

Missing thus of the Direct way, I turned to the Oblique, and to the supplying
with cunning the defects of Nature. For, I caused to be laid wait for in three
several places, three women great with child little or nothing differing in
their time, my Physician serving me faithfully in that employment, and making
each of those women believe, that he would rear it up as his son, in
performance of a Vow he had made to Esculapio. And my will was, that they
should be three, out of the likelihood that one of them might be a boy, and
that I might (in case one of them died) have my choice of the other two; so
then I took on me to be great with child, to the Kings so great pleasure and
joy, that he went near to grow wild thereat; I wanted (you may well imagine)
no symptoms, being therein helped by certain vomitive pills, which by me
swallowed down in the morning wrought on me at so measured a time, as they
began their operation just at my rising off the table; In the night time
likewise (by taking half a glasse-full of certain water, privily laid by one
of my women at my beds head) I awakened with my vomiting the King, who
forgetting what he was, served me for a servant and waiting-boy: That which
beguiled him, others, and (well near) my self too, was the coming no more of
my ordinary visits, and the appearing of milk in my breasts within two months
after; insomuch as I believed that I was with child in good earnest; but my
Physician soon lopped off that pleasing branch from the tree of my conceit, by
letting me see, that the veins being over-stuff'd with blood, which should
have run elsewhere, had transmitted it up into my breasts, where it converted
into milk; which in case it (for my not purging my body) continued, would
occasion me a dangerous and violent disease.

Delivered that one of the three women was by night, and by good fortune of a
goodly male-childe, he was brought me by the Physician, and handsomely
conveyed under my coats, close to me, with all circumstances needful for
keeping the plot undescried; my Midwives and nursekeepers I had ready at hand,
and one Lady that the Queen put with me to see me delivered, by me long
before so beguiled, as she now no more doubted of my being great with child.
For, I having lately caused to be taken away from too kitlings newly littered
the claws and tongues, and handsomely fitted them under my smock, made them
feel thereabouts with their hands, whilst they made just such another motion,
as babes do in their mothers womb.

No sooner was my Physician departed, than that I shriked out such loud cries,
as waked all the Palace, I hastily roame to my bed, where I lay in such a
plight, as they took me for dead, so handsomely did I counterfeite my self
for such, by my fast-grasped hands, and eyes so rolled up, as nothing but the
white of them appeared. They all-to-be-rubb'd me over, and kept such a do
about me, as they had killed the little creature, but for the moistness of the
blood that discovered it. Lifting up the bed-clothes, they found nothing
wanting in me for manifesting my being delivered.

The King hearing I was on the point of death, came running into my Chamber,
the same did also the more than me dead Queen, it behooving her in spite of
her heart to make a show of gladness on this birth, which pierced her very
heart, and of sorrow for that evil, which would have proved the supreamest of
her joys, if this had been the last and extremest disease that ever I should
be sick of: The babe being washed escaped hardly the being smothered by the
Kings hugging and kissing it: At the news of this adored birthday the night
was turned into day, every body stirring abroad, and all the City with lights
in all their balcons, and bonfires in all their streets, though not before that
my Physician (to whom alone I would needs give the honor thereof) had with his
counterfeite medicines cured my counterfeite disease.

Up risen that I was from childe-bed, my first business was to hasten the
repudiating of the Queen, and next my wedding not as yet obtained; because
wise (though potent) Kings will not at all times do what they both can and
have a desire to do. They have their own ends, and yet will give the people
satisfaction, and discreetly wait for the opportunity of time to put in
execution such things as they are sure cannot please them: Yet well might I
upon this occasion have been married, if the Gods had been pleased to have
permitted my wickedness to have rested perpetually concealed.

The King had near his person a great Lord named Gobria, his contemporary for
age, bred up with him from his infancy, and his companion in Arms in all
enterprises. This Lords integrity was never shaken with those infernal blasts,
Avarice and Ambition; for the King never gave him so much, as that his
liberality gave him way to enrich himself therewithal; neither did ever his
dignities and favors make him either so proud or discourteous as to neglect to
any man any respect due to him. He was naturally a mortal enemy to all
corruption, ill-speaking, and illspeakers, but above all things to dissembling
and treason; never saw he the King incensed against any man, that in an humble
and prevailing manner he excused him not, so he but thought he deserved it. Or
if at any time he seemed to accuse any man, it then was but to second his
Prince's nature, which he knew to be more apt to pardon upon confession, than
excuse of errors; so as it is not known that ever he did any prejudicing
office against any man, but upon great and sound reasons, he being in all his
deportment more satisfactory and familiar, than indeed befitted either his
greatness or the stateliness of the Persian customs. And yet he that never
in his lives time had harmed any body, was nevertheless the isntrumental
cause of my utter ruin.

My Physician had infore-speaking the women (as you have heard) made every of
them believe, that (because he had no children of his own) he would bestow
nursing and breeding on what they should be delivered of, so it were a boy, so
as the first that was delivered, observing how hasty he was to disburthen her
of hers, and how that without as much as binding up his navell they had borne
him away, with leaving her in his steed a great purse of gold, she first
doubted that it was to make use of him for some ill purpose; seeing that if he
had a mind to breed him up, he might well have had the patience to stay till
he were weaned; But afterward upon better consideration of the business, and
of him, me, and my being with child, she conceived the case just as it stood;
which though she liked not very well, yet joyed she that her son should
run the carriere of so great a fortune, keeping in mind a mole she had
taken notice of under his left pap: But grown desirous now, (since she could
no more get a sight of him, to know what was become of him) she went to Court,
where renewing her acquaintance with an under-maide-servant that served the
Queens wash-woman, (an ancient acquaintance of hers) she saw her weep, the
occasion whereof she understood to be, that by reason of the Queens being
repudiated they should be all of them turned out of service. For in respect I
had brought forth a male child, the divorce was concluded on for my succeeding
her, to the end the heir of the Persian Monarchy might be no bastard. The
woman (glad of being so easily assertained of what she was come thither of
purpose to be informed of, more desirous (as it should seem) to have her son
though poor to be hers, than a King and another; or else hoping, that she
should not only by discovering the truth satisfy her conscience, but also
reap therefrom both reward and preferment, which in the other state could not
(as she conceived) befall her; for that she imagined, that she should never
come to be known of her son, (and by consequence must have led a discontented
kind of life) bethought her self of some course of remedying it, and having
made means to come to speak to Gobria, she began to count him up the story,
when he penetrating its substance, interrupted her with telling her, that he
would have her speak what she had to tell him in the Queens presence, and
with that, leaving her in his own Chamber, with order that she stirred not
thence; he a little after returning, took her along with him to the Queen,
where having sent for some of the best and prime personages of the Privy
Council; Gobria in presence and hearing of them all, thus gets out of her the
whole business.

Good wife (says he) you were telling me of a certain passage of business,
which for some convenient respects I would not then hear out, I pray you
therefore come out with it now boldly here before this noble company, who will
vouchsafe you a benign audience.

The woman beginning again her relation, punctually accounted the importunity
of the Physician, her delivery, the sudden convaying away of the child, the
gift received, and the mark of the mole.

I leave you to think whether the Queen were a glad woman or no at these
news. Taking then the woman aside, commending her for her good conscience, and
promising her large rewards for her discovery; they fell to consultation of
what was best to be done, the harmless Queene's shallow brain furthering it
no otherwise than by her tears and supplications: when the no less discreet
than true-hearted Gobria shows the rest, that reasons prevailed but little with
lovers, less if they were great men, and least of all if Princes. That
therefore truth should be instilled into the ears of Kings seasonably and by
little drops. Accordingly then their consultations were at length reduced to an
agreement. That every of them should impart the secret to some trusty friend or
other. But a full hours time was scarce expired, when all the Court was full
of it; so as penetrating to the ears of my Physician, me, and my retinue, it
put us all to our wits end.

The King marveiling to see me so troubled in mind, never left me till he had
drawn me to tell its occasion; and I thinking it would advantage me very much
to be the first that should speak of it, set on the bold face to tell him:
That the Queens servants had spread abroad some malign rumors which could
not choose but vex me extremely, beseeching him to free me thereof speedily,
if he desired that I lived. Upon this he asking me of whom I had understood
them, and I telling him that I had heard them of such a one, he found the
relations thereof so entangled, as he could not possibly find out the source
thereof; willingly would he have whosh't them up, but that the importance of
the business permitted him not so to do, considering the difficulty of the
divorce, because of the opinion of the child's being but my supposed son.
Therefore thought he it necessary to convict thereof the Queen, and punish
her, and in such a determination sent for her.

My trouble of mind was in the mean time augmented long of the babe, who
seeming to be at first a goodly well-shap'd child, was now grown
hunch-back'd, by reason of the becoming crooked and shrinking up I know not
how of his Cheine-string, a natural defect (it should seem) in him that had
begot him. Now neither the King nor the rest knew nothing thereof; howbeit it
grieved me, that after having (as I conceived) accomplished my intent, there
should yet be added to the sum of the rest this other affliction, hard to
evade, if by ill fortune together with the general relation of the case, this
particular of the child's father were also published. I suddenly sent my
Physician to the mother, who missing her, and hearing that she was some four
days since gone to Court, without being yet returned home, comes running to
me like a man half distracted, and hastily rounds me in the ear, that all
the affair was discovered, and we undone; this said, he slipping suddenly out
of my sight, and fetching some moneys that he had in store, got on horseback,
and rode away with intention to save himself.

The Queen came (in obedience of her Lords command, clad in a lugubrous habit
with a side-traine) supported under the arm by Gobria himself, and
accompanied with most of the Lords of the Council. A sight that struck the
King to the heart more than all the rest; for knowing Gobria to be of a mind
so upright, and disposition so well tempered, that passions could not any way
sway him. They prostrated themselves all of them at his feet without speaking
a word; when seeing the King mute, upon his spirits becoming amazed with the
object: The Queen animated with Gobria's friendly support, sighed out these
words.

Behold here (Royal Sir) your Majesty's most humble hand-maide, who in all
humility beseeches your royal goodness to vouchsafe to open unto her the
oracle of your Sovereign will and pleasure; I am come here sent for by your
Majesty's command, not daring to presume to present my self otherwise before
your royal presence. The King somewhat mollified at the sight of those rare
(though mortified) beauties, told her, There was broached by some of her
servants, a most malicious calumny, which was; That the son borne him was not
his, whereof in case she proved the Authresse, he could do no less than
inflict on her some exemplary punishment, since it concerned together with the
interesses of his mother, that of the kingdom, whereunto the babe was borne
Prince. And that therefore it behooved her, either to show her self innocent
of that calumny, or dye the death. At that word the poor simple Lady sunk
down in a swound, and had therewithal by her so falling hurt her self, but
for Gobria's sustaining her. The King unable to endure the sight of her,
committing her to the charge of her women, leaves the room, commanding his
Council to follow him, out of a desire of hearing their opinions in this case.
Gobria thereupon being beckened unto by the others, in a most
submissively-humble manner thus bespeaks him.

My Sovereign Liege, that which your Majesty has intimated to the Queen
might be as well intimated to all of us here present, she knowing in this no
more than we, nor we no more than she: Therefore, if what is reported be a
calumny, your Majesty shall then have the calumniator at his mercy; but if
there be no such matter, then I (under pardon) hope, it were special service
done to your Majesty, that the truth were manifested, and the faulty chastised:
Here he relates him the whole story, and then calling for the woman, made her
both confirm the same, and show him the purse of money given her. Which he (to
my ill fortune) finding to be the very same that he himself had given me,
presently knew it, which was the only impression of truth in his mind;
insomuch, as he that at first had cast an ill eye on Gobria, sent (now that he
saw the passages prove true) in all haste for my Physician, whom (seeing he
could not be found) he imagined to be fled away; he then sent posts after him,
who overtooke and reconducted him: But yet calling to mind (for all that) how
dearly he had loved me, he came unto me (as soon as he was parted from the
Council) and told me, how aggrieved he was in himself, that I had so abused
and fooled him; whereunto I (supposing he was now too well informed for me to
stand either on my own justification or denial of the truth) answered, that
my fault was but an effect of love: since that for enjoying him solely and
securely to my self, I had found out this invention, without any intent of
harming the Queen, which therefore was both pardonable and excusable. His
reply was, that he was sorry to leave and lose me, since it behoved me either
to fly or dye: I must confess to you, that at that word my spirits fainted;
yet he as though the last minutes time of our being together stood on the
moment of its expiration, with a hasty-greedinesse taking me up in his arms,
threw me on my bed without speaking ever a word, where having taken of me his
pleasure, he charged me to get me gone that very night: But upon my answering
him, that I knew neither how nor whither; he replied, he would give me a guide,
wishing me at no hand to fail to be ready to follow whomsoever should restore
me that Ring; and with that, slipping a Diamond Ring off my finger, away he
hyes.

I as soon as my women were laid a-bed (trusting not one of them) clothed my
self in man's apparel, when just as I had packed up in a fardle all and naught
else save my Jewels, I might hear some body knocking gently at my door, which
I no sooner opened, than that a young Gentleman ceremoniously kissing my
Diamond restored it me, with saying, that the King had commanded him to come
and serve me; I took the Ring, and instantly followed him; and then mounted
that we were on Steeds for their speed advantageous, I (having even from my
childehood been bred up, as in many other manly exercises, so in this of
riding in particular, which was one of the many linkes that formed the chain
of the Kings love to me) left that Country which I once hoped to be Queen of,
galloping with incredible speed that remnant of night without any whit
reposing me: so as the ensuing morning with our horses dropping wet with
sweat, we came to a Castle, where (showing the Kings order signed by his own
hand, and under his Privy-seale, requiring that fresh horses should be speedily
delivered us) we remounted, continuing thus our changing of horses and
riding-poste until the evening.

I profess to you I never till then found my self so weary; yet reposed I
that night without any kind of fear, for being assured by the Gentleman my
guide, that the King would not cause me to be sought after, save on the Rode of
Asia, under color that he thought I was fled to Greece. Howbeit that it stood
us upon to ride post, lest any others sent by the Queen happened to light on
that way. He then likewise tells me, that the King had commanded him, to
conduct me as far as the Persian creek, being the narrowest and nearest
confine of his Empire, to the end my toil of riding and danger of being
overtaken might the sooner come to an end. 'Twas my good fortune, that before
the arrival of this accident, the King had occasion to come (for some
important affair of his) to Perselope, a place distant from the sea, little
more than ten days journeyes of such as we made; since if I had taken the
direct way to Greece, I must then (after I had gotten out of Persia) have
crossed Assyria and Armenia, ferried over the Euphrates, foorded the Antitauro,
and measured in its full length all Asia minor over, ere I could have arrived
to either Eolide or Ionia: which to do, a whole months time (alas) had not
been enough for a post to run without any intermission. Again, if I had gone
to Susa, I then (neither) had no other than the selfsame way, unlesle I would
as soon as I was entered into Media have furrowed the Ircanian Sea, and thence
passed the Caucasus, Iberia, and Colchis, re-embarked me on the Eusin, and so
stricken homewards over the Bosphorus and Obelespont, with many dangers, these
ways being yet more pestred with Scythians, than those other with Arabians.
But when I saw my self in the midst of the Persian Gulf, I then (and not
till then) thought my self indifferently secure, but much more, at my arrival
in Arabia; where I soon regained my wonted vigor, nature, and customs: And
thinking then no more on the Persian King, who had (as I by that time
pretended) against all right and reason put me to shift for my self, I being
(as it is an ordinary thing in women of my humor and quality) more excelling
in that of ingratitude than in all other vices, fixed my eyes on the Gentleman
my conduct: whom for all his being as modest again as trusty, I at length
corrupted, it being too difficult for him in respect of his too raw years, to
escape the being ensnared by me.

During all the time of my abode in Persia, ambition had made me patient of the
Kings cold embracements, (he good man being of fifty years of age if not
upwards, without thinking of others) but now freed of that affect, I returned
to my ordinary and former contents: Now my loves were ever in their ingresse
very vehement, and full of jealousies and vexations of spirit, which made those
I loved believe, that I could not turn my affection to others; wherein they
were much deceived, nay the selfsame in the end beguiled me too. For, come to
Memphi (rich with what I brought with me, but far richer for what the
Gentleman presented me withal from the King in Jewels of an inestimable value)
we forgetting our journey, staid thereto enjoy each other in that City in the
hight of luxury and lasciviousness, without wanting any thing requisite to the
fullness of our contents; for satisfying whereof we every day sought out for
new devices and inventions. Here by the news that flew from one Court to
another understood we my own story; and that my Physician was found, and in
the ground buried alive up to the throat, and that being exposed to the sun
and flies with his face all-to-be smeared over with honey, he in that manner
miserably died. That the King having by my own servants understood my passed
life, (ashamed for having suffered himself to be so grossly beguiled, but
much more of having so loved me) had commanded Farnabazzo to take from me the
Island; and in case he found me not to be hanged, to take and hang up my Father
for me; which (with other news we a little after heard) was executed:
whereupon I suspecting that disloyalty in others which I knew to be in my
self, bethought my self how to rid me of Ariobarzane (for such was the
Gentleman's name) fore-thinking, that upon my rejecting him (as I was already
taken with a new love) it was likely he would requite me with the like or as
great a discourtesie; especially considering he had lost his Prince's favor,
and forsaken his Country, fortunes, means, and all for love of me.

This Gentleman having been borne and brought up in Court, knew not how to
lead any other than a Courtly life and conversation. Whereupon in
often-frequenting it he got acquaintance enough to draw on him by my means
his utter ruin. He gave himself out to be of Susiana, lest his professing to
be (as he was) a Persian, and my being with him might make us known for what
we were, for better concealing whereof, he always called me wife, and I him
husband. We gave out, that we were come to pass to the Oracle of Jupiter
Ammon, and that the reason of our sojourne there, was but to stay for the
season of the year. He often brought along to dine with him a valiant and
proper young Gentleman called Ersemeo, one favored of the King, and highly
esteemed of all that knew him; his qualities conforming with those of my now
supposed husband, especially in suffering himself to be corrupted by me, as
the other had been before. Ariobarzane was no whit jealous, but loving both
his friend and his company, favored him with such liberty, as he would many
times, when he found him not at home, entertain himself with me, to stay for
his coming. I that lived by (or at least loved best) often change, grew soon
to be amorously enflamed of him, and found ways to let him see it too: But
he, though he well enough conceived it, being honest though, and loyal to his
friend, either did not, or would not understand me in the right construction of
my intent. Strange seemed it unto me, that he being a young Gentleman, an
Egyptian, and a Courtier too, should (or could) be so continent; and therefore
because I durst not in plain terms unbosome my self unto him, for doubt of
either his not consenting, or bewraying me, I bethought of a way of making him
entrap himself thus.

I would take on me (if it were in the fore-noone that he came) to begin to go
dress my self, and would, at the instant of his coming in, be sure to be
unsmockt, letting him see my breast and paps in their lively colors and true
proportions, able to change both proportion and color in Saturn himself. If
in the afternoon, I then would be putting on my stockings or shoes, the
border of my coats and smock-hem being the while lifted up so high, that
though I with making a show of being surprised, would with a counterfeite
bashfulnesse clap them down, yet did I not so before he had seen and
conceived enough to make him languish with an amorous desire. In the sweltry
hot noone-tides, I would be little better than naked, bare-foote and
bare-legg'd, naked-breasted, with an exceeding fine and sight-penetrable
Camrick smock, lasciviously discovering what it not hid but veiled. From the
waste downwards, I wore a Kirtle of slight cob-web laune, from under which
appeared two relevated flanks, accompanied with those parts which had (as they
should) their proportionable risings. Nature having given me a body that
needed not the common helps of rectifying its proportion, by bombace or the
like: And for my hair I wore it dishevelled in a careless fashion, without
either hair lace or crisping-wyre.

At these taking-objects the poor Ersemeo freez'd and burnt at one and the
same time; whilst Ariobarzane glorying in my beauty, thought himself happy
merely out of the conceit he had that other men did for it esteem him such:
young men's felicity being thought to consist more in other men's opinions than
in its proper substance. Such as say that naughty women bewitch men, are not
otherwise mistaken than in the manner, for the bodies are wasted away by such
things as can naturally wear away or consume them, but the Will only fears
the Magic of an advantageous beauty, endowed with craft, and enriched with
taking qualities.

After that the poor Gentleman had layen a long time tormented with the flames
of an intolerable passion, and that friendship was forced to give place to
concupiscence, he ventured to proclaim himself (in a silent way) my
to-death-enamoured servant, but yet with such fair terms, as I could not
without proving too-too discourteous make any show of being in the least manner
therewith displeased. So as at our next meeting we concluded on the time and
place, where we were to enjoy each other; I being for my own part in such
affairs a mortal enemy of irresolutions. Ariobarzane soon spies out our
false play, and so indeed desired I he should. Never was there snake or serpent
wrythen up so suddenly as he; he grew pale, lean, and hoarse, and all in an
instant, there was not a member of his that wasted and pined not away, only
his bigge-swollen eyes flowed with the streams of a perpetual river of
brinish tears. I could have found in my heart to have pitied him, but that
cruelty is the first oath taken by an infamous woman; the worst for him was,
that he (unfortunate Gentleman) knew not with what looks to eye me, or what
words to bemoane himself, sithence to get him gone lay no more now within the
power of his free will, despair and injury not having as yet loosed him from
my fetters: Which admit I had, alas! where or whither could he have gone? To
Persia he durst not, his conscience accusing him, and his long sojourne
convicting him before his Prince to have been entangled in my love. And
again, elsewhere he had not wherwithall to live, for not having carried with
him more than was necessary to defray the charge of his return: Yet could I
not (for all that) hold from asking him the cause of his melancholy; whereupon
he re-assuming an hearty courage, spoke to me in passionate angry terms,
thinking thereby to terrify me; I (that desired nothing more) omitted not the
opportunity of such an occasion, but told him, that his suspicions were malign
and false, that I had done him too much favor and honor, in daigning to love
him, and that I was now right sorry I had not known him sooner; that if I
could recall what was past I would most willingly do so; since instead of
acknowledging me the obligations he owed me, he was become so ingratefully
insolent, as to threaten me; and that but for the regard of my honor, I would
make his suspicions prove true, were it but merely to spite him: Not
forgetting to stand up on my points of being a Princess, and therefore
privileged to walk in the fair field of my content, without being
countermanded by any man: replying a thousand times the selfsame words, to
vex him the more. Whereupon he, being of a generous spirit, and of as noble a
progeny as most in Persia, having first craved me humble pardon, kneeled down
before me, begging of me with tears and conjurations to grant it him; but
seeing all nothing avail him, he suddenly starts up all-enflamed with choler,
and reviles me with the basest injurious terms that could be given the
arrantest common strumpet of the Universe, concluding them with spitting in my
face, and fretting, that he could not in respect of my being a woman take a
more ample revenge on me.

I know not whether by then my disdain were not greater than his jealousy at
first, which if it were not, yet sure it could not be less: In the end away
he went, without making any outward show of being any whit grieved, to the end
that despite and madness might touch me nearer the quick. No sooner was his
back turned, than in came Ersemeo. I will not stand a particularizing on this
business any longer, seeing that I have already but too much encroached upon
your noble patience. Briefly then; I, having informed him of those passages,
and how that Ariobarzane was not my husband; and withal that he now was gone
a-reviling and threatening of him (which, God wot, was nothing so) he parted
from me for the last time, and found the other at Court whither he was gone
expressly to seek him out, thence with a joint consent they went where they
had pointed field, which was a little without the City walls, where with single
sword-fight they ended their quarrel, by dying both of them in the place;
which as soon as I heard of, I in this hight of my cruelty clothed my
countenance with a griefe-expressing compassion, in a solemn mourning weed,
celebrating the funeral of Artobarzane my reputed husband. Where I both
allured and entrapped a thousand silly young Gentlemen, not sparing to favor
the desires of such of them as best liked my fancy; finding change more
pleasing to me, than diversity of choice cates to an Epicurean palate: But
such was my luck, that grown to be at length enamoured in good earnest, I was
misused and impoverished by a young spendthrift of two and twenty years of
age. From whom as I thought to withdraw me (his prodigality lavishing my
goods, menacing my utter undoing:) I was by him (under color of walking to
solace us) conducted all alone to see the Pyramides, where he left me in the
manner I was found by your Lord and you Carasio; with an intention (I believe)
to rifle my house, and seize on the few Jewels he had left me unlavished. And
this was the reason that made me slip away from you, for doubt of coming too
late to prevent him. But I by the way fell into the hands of those Arabians,
whence ye of your noble goodness have freed me, humbly beseeching you, that
as ye had that compassion of me that I deserve not, so you would be benignely
pleased to permit me to go on constantly in my determination; which is to go
and end the remnant of my days among those who retired from the world, are
devoted to the service of Ammons Temple.

Such was the woman's story, diversely affected by those that heard her. When
upon Lindaaori's returning her no word of answer, (she having listened unto her
all the while, she was relating it with a more than passionate disdain, that
for not discovering her sex, she must have heard her out) Coralbo told her,
that the Gods called sinners diverse ways; and that therefore repentance (so it
were unfeigned) absolved the delinquent, and assured him of his calling. But
come by this time to their Inn, they resolved to rest there that night, and to
follow the trace of their company the ensuing morning.

The end of the second Book OF Donzella Desterrada.
Cavalier Gio. Francesco Biondi DONZELLA DESTERRADA. THE THIRD BOOK.
THe Count of Bona provided himself in Feacia of a both strongly-mann'd and
well-rig'd frigate, for having her arm d and prepared as well for becalming as
blustering weather; the tediousness of the voyage being shortened by the noble
conversation of Don Eleimos, who voluntarily accompanied him out of the longing
desire he had of becoming acquainted with Prince Polimero, whose virtues were
the sole attractive motives that drew him on so long a journey. Steerd on they
had near the Taenarian Promontory in the Messanian Gulf, when they descried a
Galley, which (as if she had been hurried onwards by the impetuosity of a
tearing gale of wind) came scowring after them in the great calm of a
scortching summer-noone-tide. But losing sight of her by their fetching about
the Promontory, they might within two hours after see her do the like, and
then soon after gain so near them, as the eye might distinctly see all her
proportion and gallantry; though that (excepting the men and fresh lively
colors of vermilion and azure) naught else could be seen save most curious
carved and graven work of Ebony and Yvory, most richly adorned with silk and
gold; the ears being (the mean while) entertained with the sweetly-shrill
music of many trumpets, half drowned with the harsh antique consort of Fifes
and Drumslads. By that time she was got within a mile of them, they might
perceive her stow up her Oars, (the force of her late stiff rowing
maintaining yet her course) and then might they behold seated in her rich Poope
adorned with waving streamers, a Lady and two Knights, all of them of a gentile
aspect, near about the same age, but of different complexions. The one was
extraordinarily comely, with such a complexion, as the Sun is sometime wont
(out of envy) to dye brown with its scortching beams; the other went
pompously triumphant with such beauties as Aurora takes oft-times pleasure, in
first frosting over with her canded dewes, and then painting with her more
lively colors the Rheineberry or full-ripe Cherry; the third not ceding to the
other two in blithsome livelihood and feature of body, came (for all that)
short of them in the rest, Nature seeming to be desirous by such variety to put
the diversity of her gifts in consideration.

By this time the two Knights might well perceive, that the Galley fetched them
up either to know or hail them; and observing the reverence wherewith a number
of gallant Gentlemen stood before the three, they ghessed them to be personages
worthy of their respective observance; saluting them therefore with terms
reserved for great ones, they were corresponded (though in a majestic grave
manner) with equal courtesy. The brown Knight was the first that in a
courteous language asked them whence they came; to whom the Count answering,
from Sardinia, he praid him to tell him, whether he had (as he touched
Parthenope) heard any thing of the Princess Corianna; but being told by the
other that he stroke not in there; he then enquired of him touching Polimero
and Eromena, whereunto the Count so framed his answer, that relating him the
truth, and satisfying him in all the particulars of his demand, he made no
mention either of himself or of the occasion of his voyage, save only telling
him, that they were bound for Athens. But the three desirous to entertain them
yet longer, and to be instructed in the affairs of the West, (with offering
them the towing of their frigate) besought them to come a-boord their Galley,
since they were to run the same course till they came to the mouth of the
Egean Sea: Whereunto they (not knowing well how to say nay) agreed to get up
a-boord her, understanding of those that on the ladder received them, that one
of the three was the Prince of Pontus, and the other that of Cyprus with his
Wife.

The two Knights therefore humbled themselves before them, and then after fell
to such discourse as best liked them; till such time as come a pretty distance
from the Meltacan Promontory, and about to take leave of them, they might
descrie on the Island of Cithera a great smoke, and soon afterward six
Galleyes, which launching from out the Promontory, came with maine force of
Oars a scouring toward them. Which seen by the Princes, they suddenly armed
themselves, commanding (the mean while) their Top-armings and Battlements to
be pitched, and their Standart of war to be marborated; feign would they have
licensed the two Knights; but they on the contrary, having caused the Frigate to
be loosed off the Galley, and commanded their Mariners to retire her apart,
protested they would by no means abandon the Galley in such an ayde-requiring
occasion. The Princess no whit dismaide (having first gathered up her coats)
armed her self with Guirasse and Helmet, and then girding her with her Sword,
she having commanded a Bow to be made ready for her, made choice of the Castle
of the Poope for her place of standing, with an intention to defend it her
self alone; till the Count and Don Elermos begged of her the favor of being
received as Guardians of her person, which upon her accepting of, she told
them, that such a favor was not worthy the being required with so great an
hazard, and that she was very sorry for having taken them out of their
Shallop, wherein they were not like to light on so dangerous an encounter: Upon
these complements, the Princes (who had been giving order for the defense)
returned with an undaunted resolution rather to dye than yield; and seeing the
valorous Princess so clad in glittering Armor, they earnestly be sought her
to retire her self, which she would not by any means condescend unto; though
some from the Maine-top shreeked out, that the Galleyes were of Thrace. The
Princes had between Soldiers and Knights little less than four hundred
fighting-men, the Galley of three and thirty banks, being capable of receiving
them all; besides, the Galley-slaves being well provided with stones and
slings, the Crossebow-men with all kind of shafts and shot, and the Poope and
Prow well furnished with Bows and Pikes.

All things requisite for their defense being in judicious order disposed of,
they might see the enemies separate one single Galley steering directly toward
that of the Princes, the others reduced into two wings, that so she might be
at one and the same time assayl'd at her Poope, and both her sides. At their
first disuniting they formed the figure of a half moon, a little Frigate
appearing in its concave rowing before the rest of the Fleet, they holding
water to give her time to pass before them. Come near that she was, there
appears in her an Herald, who with his head covered over with a veil,
accoasting the stern of the Galley with a loud and fearful voice cries out:

Give ear to me thou great God of War, hearken to me thou Ionian Cretan,
and Egean Neptune: Bear me witness ye Cithera and Epla, ye Stronds of
Laconta and Eurota, and listen to me thou Astrea. I am public Herald of
Prince Erpandro of Phrace, and come sent both piously and justly. Melianto
Prince of Cyprus has against all reason taken, stolen away, and in Himeneus
own presence ravished the great Princess Deodora of Illirio destinated Spouse
to the most noble Prince Erpandro my Lord and Master. By which act of his, he
has violated the bonds of hospitality, extinguished another funerall-tapers,
and dishonored a Virgin in contempt of all both divine and humane Laws. Of
thee therefore, I say of thee Melianto is required that thee not-befitting
prey, over thee is imminent a thee-befitting punishment, and against thee is
denounced blood, war, and death. Melianto was about to answer him, when
Deadora praying him to be pleased to leave that office to her, with a bold
voice and firm resolution returned him this answer.

Herald, go and tell Erpandro; that Deodora of Illirio was never any Spouse of
his, that the agreement of Fathers form not marriages, without the consent of
children, that by the privilege therefore both of Law and Nature she is wife
to no other than Melianto, with whom she voluntarily parted not for doing, but
for not receiving injury: that the Gods will prove favorers of his just
actions, and not punishers of those pretended faults which Erpandro falsely
lays to his charge. And as for his threats, tell him that Melianto has a
sword so keen and well tempered, that it will neither turn edge nor wax
blunt, though he made use of it against six times as many: that that other
dastardly Prince durst not have in any other manner affronted him, knowing his
inferiority to him in Arms, which he unknightlike endeavors to supply no
less injuriously than basely with the odds of men and Arms; yet let him
assure himself (spoke she on) that he has yet one enemy more than he ever
yet made account of; and that is I, who ere he shall be his death (as he
threatens to be) will kill him my self with my own hands; which if (through
fortunes disfavouring) it succeed me not, yet shall I not fail howsoever
either to take him prisoner, or dye in the attempt. And you (said then the
Herald, not knowing the Princess in that habit) that make such an answer for
Melianto, who are you to have authority so to speak? I am (answered him she)
Deadora, which sithence thou now know, and have heard and spoken enough,
return whence thou came, and that quickly too.

The Herald throwing toward the Galley a bloodied Dart, bidding his Oare-men
strike amain, returned crying, oh Jupiter, oh Mars, oh Bellona, ye Gods all
of Heaven, Earth, and Hell listen and hear: Let Melianto, an unjust Prince,
unreasonable, a ravisher, a violator of quiet and the Law, be this day
chastised and corrected by you. Come to his Lord, he relates unto him both the
Princesse's answer, and the habit he saw her in; whereat he was like to swound
for grief, conceiving, that if she were (as she professed to be) married, he
had then no reason to pretend right in her any more; but examining that such
considerations were secret, and therefore could not satisfy the world; whereas
the rape was a publicly declared injury, he thought he could not (without
prejudice to his reputation) abstain from revenge. Therefore he boorded the
enemy a-prow, causing him to be at the selfsame time boorded on both the
Starbur and Larbur-sides, and last of all a-poope by other five with a mighty
force. The assaulted ship bravely received the shock of the four that ran at
her sides, the poope being assured from being endangered by the beak of that
Galley which came to offend it, with many straw-mats that were hung down round
about it, which also served for a parapet to such as defended it.

The quantity of slaine-men almost equalized the number of the arrows shot in
the first assault; for the Thracians (having parted from out their Country in
Vessels fitter for pompous show than for fight) had not wherewithal to shelter
them from the shower of shot, imagining that in respect of their number, they
should not (in case they were necessitated to fight) encounter other difficulty
than boording their Enemies Galley; so as there flew not an arrow from out the
assailed Galley that either slew or wounded not; whereas her men on the
contrary were so well covered, as they could hardly be any way offended: The
easiest places of mounting a-boord her was her prow and poope, her sides being
defended as well by her own as her Enemies Battlements, and close-fights:
Besides, if any one endeavored to clime up that way, 'tweare of the two more
likely he should fall lower than get higher; the Prince of Pontus having taken
on him the care and charge of keeping the Enemy at distance off that part.

The Prince of Cyprus standing armed on the prow, received the Enemies shock
with a greater countershock, charging him with the full force of all his Oars;
The stemmes burst both alike, but with an unlike effect, that alone being all
the prejudice he received; whereas Erpandro deprived of the plankes (that being
laid athwart the prow sustained his combatants) lost by that wrack forty of
his company between Knights and Galley-slaves, whereof the greater part were
by the weight of the timber, and sudden falling of them one a-top of another
either maimed or wounded, he being thereat run thither himself to defend the
entrance, or to speak more properly, to issue out through it, thinking that he
had by reason of his great advantages the victory cock sure in his own hands.

Deadora hearing the terrible crash of their encounter, and knowing the Enemies
could not without great difficulty mount up the poope, (for its being bravely
defended by the Count and Don Eleimos, seconded by others of their own
company) hastily shifted off her gown, and then arming her self at all peics,
ran to the prore, where forcing Melianto to cede her the place, she put
herself before him; up she gets on the beak head with an half pike in her
hand, the Archers playing (the mean while) their parts from above, thence she
leapes over into the Enemies Galley, followed by Melianto, who was vexed at the
heart for this her over-rash boldness. 'Twas her good luck, that the
disorderly falling down of the plankes and timber-workes disordered the
Defendants, so as they could neither reunite themselves, nor stand to their
ground without treading on such as had been beaten down, who lying senseless
along and athwart the Decks and Hatches, became a ruinous impediment, otherwise
she had done enough, if (after making a proffer of her courage) she could
have but fairly retired without being wet, considering how the Enemies Galley
was manned with the hardiest and choysest Knights of all Thrace. But fortune
over furthers a bold resolution; for, forcing her passage onwards, she was
followed by fifty resolute Gentlemen, the greater part whereof abandoning their
pikes, conformable to the necessity of their enterprise, laid about them with
their swords, with such an undaunted resolution for gaining the Vessel, as
amazed the Thracians.

Deadora knowing Erpandro first among the foremost, furiously flew at him, and
after many maine active blows received and given, seeing him yet unwounded,
she gransh'd her teeth for mere rage of anger; Now she had one of the best
mettled and tempered blades that ever was forged or wrought, Vulcan himself
never made the like; it was formed hookedwise, of an edge somewhat thick, and
near three fingers broad; it would cut an armed arm in two, but with a blow
fetched by such an arm as hers, which made her wonder, that neither her blade
nor arm wrought now their wonted effects.

Erpandro was a stout Knight, tutered in a good School of Arms, and armed as
advantagiously as could be; since there was not a juyce-affording herb, whose
virtue the Artificer made not use of in tempering the Armor he was clad in,
only he was ill-provided of a Sword; for in warding of a blow, the one half
thereof burst off and dropped at his feet, whereby his sword-arme lay open and
wounded. Upon this the Princess was assaulted by such as were nearest her, but
by wounding three of them in an instant, she freed her self from out that
straight. And now seeing the valiant Melianto fiercely lay about him to guard
her, she goes to single out Erpandro, who with a new sword made toward her to
revenge himself of her; They aimed both of them at the selfsame time at each
others head, their blades fortuning to meet edge to edge with the selfsame
success, only that of Deadora lighted more dangerously on the Enemies helmet,
without any apparently wide gash, but yet with so terribly-smart a stroke,
that piercing his skull, made him fall at her feet, she therewithal
defending her self from such as endeavored to recover him with such a furious
dexterity, that even those of her own side stood in fear of her blows: here
after Erpandro's being suddenly put over prisoner, she with Melianto retired
themselves, giving order to the rest of her train to do the same, which
accordingly was without any disorder performed with the pikes in the
reare-ward, and the Archers continuing their shot, it sufficing them to keep
their own, since the acquiring of what was other men's in such a disparity
could not but redound to their prejudice, in respect it could not be done
without their dismembring themselves.

The conflict lasted well nigh two hours, their Galley not being fought now
withal a-poope and at her sides, save a-farre off, the example of one Galley
set on fire by a pot-full of an infernal unquenshable composition, deterring
the rest from attempting the boording the enemy, insomuch as they were forced
to retire them, to save such as threw themselves into the sea to escape the
devouring fury of the inextinguishable wilde-fire; and had indeed retired
themselves for good and all, if the Admiralls fighting men resolved now to dye,
had not for the loss of their Prince obstinately continued the fight;
whereupon the rest of the Fleet, having recovered as many as they could,
returned to fight, mounting up the Admiral a-sterne, to re-man her, whose men
to the two third parts and more lay slain; and taken too she had been, if
Melianto had but so resolved; who thinking it victory enough to have (without
losing many of his men) gotten the Enemy into his hands, caused to be thrown
out a certain fired liquor, which was no sooner shed abroad, than that with a
whizzing murmr it fired whatsoever it lighted on; suddenly spreading it
self, and furiously enflaming the matter it fed on, unquenchable either by
water or heaps of wet rugges; so as it soon set all the Galley a-fire maugre
all that endeavored to save her, the others having enough to do to save the
men, whom they transported with all the speed they could; But Melianto not
caring for them, held on his way, the fight being ended by the Princesse's
valor, and fires violence. Of all his men there were slain but three Knights,
and those too in boording the Enemies Galley, in attempting whereof one of them
was tumbled down into the sea, and there drowned. The wounded were many, among
whom were the Count and Don Eleimos both of them with arrows, whose wounds
were more troublesome though than dangerous; they had fought sometimes so near
as that they came to push of pike, and had burnt this third Galley too, had
she not after the example of the others timely retired her self, so as the
malign liquor falling, stinted not burning in the water till it was quite
consumed.

The Princess that had observed the valor of the two Knights, rendered them
infinite thanks; the Prince loath to cede to her in gratitude, was careful to
see their wounds speedily dressed, with an intention to take them along with him;
but they being bound for elsewhere, praid him to hold them excused; and with
that making signs to the Bark, which then rode near the Strond of
Peloponesus would needs part much against the will of the three, who could not
persuade them to accept (at their parting) two Jewels as a slender token of
their affection: Only they promised to come and see them as they passed by
Cyprus. Feign would Melianto have enjoyed their company at his going to visit
Erpander; but the Count fearing lest his voyage (being much hindered already by
reason of the fight) should be yet more delayed by occasion of this other
business excused himself (as soon as they were come where they were to steer
a different course) by assuring him, that the urgencie of his occasion would by
no means permit him to make any longer stay.

Gotten aboard their Frigate they coasted Laconia, where because of a fever
that seized on the Count, and afterward on Den Eleimos, by occasion of their
wounds they were forced to stop their journey; their disease so augmenting its
violence and enfeebling their forces, as they could not part thence for a whole
months time; their Frigate also being already for that respect licenced and
returned back; so as when they arrived at Athens they found to have been
there the Princess Eromena with her daughter, who were gone for Egypt four or
five days before, to the Count's such exceeding sorrow and trouble of mind as
his tormented thoughts could take no rest, conceiving that he justly now
incurred the censure of a negligent messenger, for having so lingered in his
voyage tending to an affair so important; now therefore he staid not an hour,
but boording a good Vessel parted with his companion, forced by the winds
violence to coast Creete, and then passing from the Capartian sea to that of
Cyprus they were constrained to go ashore in that I Will, where they understood
of the arrival of Melianto with Deadora, and how Erpandro affectionately
honored of all, was to be the hand-joyner of the wedding couple, without
knowing any other particular in that behalf.

Come to Egypt, they went to Memphi with intention, in case they found not
Polimero, to stay for him there, being directed to a Merchant, whom he was of
necessity to have recourse unto; but hearing no news there of him, much less
of the Princess, he remained thereat exceedingly confused in mind; since
being parted from Athens so long before him, they should (by all probable
conjecture) have been there before his coming, and addressed themselves (for
further intelligence) to the very same place: But this his anxiety of mind
lasted but a little, for he no sooner went to Court, than he there found them
come the day before, though without Lindadori; whereat the good old man was so
exceedingly joyed, that (but for their preventing him) he had kneeled to kiss
their hands, with suddenly asking for Donzella Desterrada his Lady and
Princess, whom (as they stood relating the accidendall cause of their
separation) they might see enter accompanied with Coralbo; her Mother presently
taking her by the hand, and receiving Coralbo with the affects of a respective
esteem, (having already understood by her husband the story of his disasters)
and then (for being left to themselves) they retired them altogether thence to
their lodging, with a longing desire to be informed reciprocally of each others
adventures, where the Count was for his necessitated tardance excused, and Don
Eleimos affectionately respected of all of them, but more especially of
Eromena, for her extraordinary affection to Eleina, of whom he had well
deserved. They resolved to entertain themselves there three or four days, to
see that great Court, and then to part suddenly out of the impatient longing
they had to return into Sardinia.

The Court of Egypt was (at that time) one of the most flourishing of the
Universe, frequented by brave and doughty Knights, drawn thither formerly by
the lasting and victorious enterprises of King Ptsemitide, and at the present
by his liberality, and by the free carriage and beauty of the Ladies of that
Court. Never was there Prince that joined greatness with familiarity, or
familiarity with gravity better than he; the mere ordinary Guard of his body
formed a sufficient Army; he had five several orders of Soldiers, and among
them three of Nobility and Gentry: the first composed of four fallanges of
Knights and Gentlemen's younger sons, the firstborn in Egypt as in many
other kingdoms, bearing away the whole faculty. Here, as in Academy, in the
most tranquil and calm peace, was exercised Martial discipline with as
strict order and rigorous observance, as others use in the ardor of the most
dangerous war. They were constantly removed and changed every three months;
the novices of them being usually spread over the neighboring Garrisons, and
the other three Regiments in Memphi warding the City and Palace royal: From
this Seminary sprung Captains, Camp-masters, and sometimes even Generals
themselves. Of the other four, two were Knights, the one of the new and the
other of the old Band, who gloried to have recommended to their loyalty in
peace, and valor in war, the sacred person of their Royal Sovereign. The
fourth of Halberdiers clad with the Royal device, and so many in number as
reached divided into two files on either hand along the stairs, and all the
way from the grand portall to the great Hall. The last of Light-horse-men
covered with coats, enriched with Embroyderies of a color and form suitable.

Through these Guards was the way to the Kings withdrawing Chamber, and thence
into a Gallery a quarter of a mile long, of a breadth and hight proportionable,
with its lights toward the Nile, adorned between its stately balcons with
lively pictures of the most noble and fairest Cities of the world. Here
entertained himself the King thronged with a great concourse of ennobled
Cavaliers, insomuch as it was (many times) hard to know which of them was the
King; the Egyptian Nobility might easily be discerned from the rest by the
pomp and curious inventions of their habits, delighting more in the sight of
their Prince, than does the Eagle in beholding the Sun; never was the Court
seen so solitary, that it had attending it less than three thousand Nobles and
Gentlemen, sumptuously apparalled and completely equipaged. The Queens side
(on the other part) being no less numerous and frequented, her Chamber of
presence never empty, to Cavaliers and Ladies never shut, so as the whispering
noise of so many softly-speaking tongues might be aptly resembled to that
humming the Bees make in their Hives at such time as they are most busied in
working of their Honey.

Ptsemitides was grown all hoary, but yet in full vigor with lively spirits
and an indefessible able body; and withal though matched with the fairest wife
that that part of the world could afford him, yet was he almost continually
employed in some new love or other; his Queen being reserved merely for use
of childe-bearing, and for that cause beloved. That Court then was (in respect
both of it self and the nature of its Prince) the most joyful and amorous of
as many as ever were; many sons had he, but by wedlock only the Prince then
a babe, and one daughter, whose towardly nature and sweet disposition was not
equalled by any in that great Monarchy. She passed not much fifteen years of
age, yet had she an aged-seeming (because well experimented) spirit in the
more worthy perfections, sucked almost with her brest-milke by perpetual
conversation of refined wits, and her only delight of various reading, wherein
she consumed her hours with a gust that exceeded her age and sex.

Polimero and Eromena had already seen the King, but so had not Lindadori nor
Coralbo, who coming likewise to see him, were met by the others, and so left
the Court to be private together, as was told you. There dwelt near to their
lodging an ancient Knight, who observing the two couple, (that though unknown,
manifested yet their greatness by their exterior qualities) would needs
(courteous as he was) go visit them; conceiving that their being strangers
obliged him thereunto; for his quality, he was a great Soldier, favored by
the King for his valor, and therefore highly esteemed of all the Court; and
understanding that they knew no body, he would needs present them before the
King, who received them without any distinction, taking them all for Knights,
observantly eying (though) their youth and beauty, whereof he saw no paragon
in all the Court: He stood discoursing with them in Greek for a good while,
and (as one quick-sighted in discerning of persons) suddenly judged the four
younger to be of no ordinary quality; which made him very desirous that the
Queen might see them; nay more, he would needs bring them in himself, an
unwonted favor done to none save Princes; and so taking Polimero by the hand,
he drew all the rest after him, those Lodgings being so full, that two could
hardly pass a-brest through them.

The Queen was seated at her beds-feete with her daughter by her side,
accompanied with four Princesses of the Blood-royall, encircled with many
Lords standing about them; when Eromena presented her self before her,
Polimero dexterously drawing back to give her the honor of precedencie. They
were by her received all of them with royal courtesy, Elitrea the Princess
following her example in honoring them, but exceeding it with Lindadori. She
liked well those like-her-owne tender innocent beauties, and a well-becomming
careless carriage of hers, which made her so heed her, that superficially
passing over the rest, she taking her for a Knight, desired to entertain her
alone, whilst the Queen enterchanged complementall courtesies with Eromena,
with the very same both belief and affection.

The King (after having jeasted a short while with some of the Ladies) retired
him thence, and the two indeed Knights, (observing the Queen and Princess
their prodigious inclination toward the two maskers) withdrew themselves
apart, as it were, for good manners sake with the four Princesses of the
blood, who received them with exceeding great courtesy.

Eromena upon discovering of the Queens mind, knew not well what countenance
to frame; she answered to the demands she made her with that extraodinary
grace, which the Heavens had with extraordinary privilege granted her above
all other women. Lindadori being simple, and in such affairs a novice, (not
building on others fancies, but altogether intent about the well-representing
of a man's person) marveiled at the customs and carriage of the young
Princess; in whom besides a more than ordinary courtesy, she observed a more
than usual freeness and else-where-unknowne liberty, gravity in that Country
being reputed an imperfection or defect, or at least taken for a dependant if
not a sister of sullenness, pride, and subjection. The presence of so great a
Queen, which elsewhere would have closed up all lips with silence, and
engraven in all hearts a modest mellancholy, was here a motive to apparent joy
and discourse. Benign Mercury diffusing himself in their mouths, and showing
himself here as prodigal as elsewhere sparing, and withal sending where
he was not himself some of his false ministers with his winged shoes, and
rode to be taken for him and his impes, though indeed they were nothing such.

Returned to their lodging, there was no small ado to imprint the
pleasantness of their conceits in Lindadori, who held it ill to nourish under
a counterfeit habit the fiery thoughts of an harmless Girl, so ignorant and
unexperimented in all wiliness and cunning artifice in her demeanor as to
discover her love, not only to the more apprehensive, but even to her in that
behalf dimme-sighted eyes; whereof she making her moan to her mother,
canestly besought her to bring her no more thither, whilst her father and
Coralbo could not refrain from laughing at both the occasion of her dislike,
and her manner of expressing it; yet at length she was (though with much ado)
pacified, by being informed, that the Nobility and Gentry of that Country were
wont (though indeed they were far otherwise inclined) to take on them to be
ever in love, only for good manners sake; because not knowing how otherwise to
entertain or court Ladies, they had recourse to the Articles of Love; being
assured, they could not be better pleased, than to see deserving men so
deceived, as to believe and style them beautiful, though they were nothing so.

The two Princesses that with others had entertained in discourse the two
Princes, (whereof the one was of Bernice, and the other of Cirene) remained
beyond measure taken with their noble carriage, upon considerate observation of
their merits, and passing liking they had to a certain cold reservednesse, by
them judged to be an enemy to presumption and daughter to respect, only to
Eromena this complementally-amorous way of courting was nothing pleasing, who
though happy in a husband worthy of other women's loves, was yet unhappy long of
that passion of love, which (by a cold name contrary to its fervide effects)
the vulgar call Jealousy, which she had long before victoriously fought
withal; and at length more by the confidence of her own merits, than with any
force of her natural inclination; being assured, that he might well enjoy, but
not possibly love other women than her: which (between jest and earnest) she
had many times told him: And now considering her being past the fair Meridian
of her youth, and his being not yet come to that of his, and his now having not
only a likely but also (to her thinking) a near occasion and fair
opportunity of enjoying, she could not shut the door of her mind against
imagination, which being lubricke and invisible, penetrated (ere she was
thereof aware) into the closet of her heart, so as she could no longer
refrain from thus briefly expressing her self unto him.

My indeer'd Lord, we are all of us fortunate in love, but in an unequal
degree, mine cannot but make you pastime, nor yours choose but displease and
trouble me. Lindadori she frets and grieves, and so do I too, she for
overmuch simplicity, and I out of overmuch practice; let us wend therefore
hence, I beseech you, since we have seen already enough if not too much: Which
it much behooves us to do, were it for nothing else, but to shun the
adventuring her in loves school, wherein who-so studies in jest, may learn in
good earnest. This Bernice likes me not for you, nor this same Queen for me,
both which will (I doubt me) prove dangerous sports, since you cannot but
injure me, nor I choose but deceive her; mean while my father finds the want
of us at home, where for being aged and solitary, he takes small joy of
himself. If we stay lingering here to prosecute our commenced practizes, we
shall not rid us thereof a while, and then too not without disgust-giving,
and therefore the sooner the better we end them; fastidious and unprofitable
creatures are for the most part by nature endowed with short life; so our lives
for being of the selfsame quality, deserve to be no longer lived, than are
the wind-flies that live not above a days space; and could we ere their
birth-time be abortively delivered of them, for certain we should be the less
hurt by them.

Polimero smiled at these reasons of his beloved wife, whom (after having
affectionately kissed her) he thus answered: Let us do (dear Lady of my life)
what please you, not because the case with us so is, but because you seem to
conceive it so to be, why? think you that your beauty is so slightly imprinted
in the memory of my affection, that any other woman's can raze thereout the
obliged respects I bear you? you (alas you wrong) by so conceiting both your
self and me; your self, because your merits are such, that not the Princess
of Bernice, but as many Princesses as are in the world cannot merit what you
alone deserve; and me, because this suspicion of yours loades me with
infidelity and ignorance. There is no choice without some kind of equality,
how then can I make choice of any other in your presence, without notable
stupidity and weakness of judgment? Or admitting you were not present, do
you hold me to be so freed from the obligation of your love, as that any other
canallure me? I know it stands us upon to wend us hence as soon as we
conveniently can, so as I stand indeed upon thorns (as it were) all the while
I stay here; but alas! how can we yet go for shame? shall we sneake away
like fugitives, ungrateful to our courteous entertainers, and not without
being suspected that such our resolution sprung from cowardice and fear of
trying our selves in Arms with these Knights? For Lindadori your reasons were
indeed considerable, if the nature whereof she is composed were like that of
other Girls, for you know, that she is an inexorable Enemy, not only to such
a School, but even to all mankind; so as I pray God that we may ever
persuade her to like of any husband; all which Eromena knew to be most true:
Wherefore it was between them agreed, (as soon as the next Tourney was ended,
which the Knights of that Court used to exercise twice a month) to go on
their intended journey.

But among all the actors on this amorous scene, Coralbo (good Prince) was that
only one, who in appearance free, was yet more than any other muzled and
puzzled with the occult love that he bare the fierce Desterrada. Pass there did
many an amorous complement and pleasing discourse between him and the
Princess of Cirene, whom he well perceived to be well inclined toward him;
nor would he have slighted such a fortune, but that the finding himself under
the lee of those three, with whom, for his pretensions sake, it behooved him to
comply, made him abhor that congresse, for doubt of irrecoverably falling.
Now Coralbo never loved but in one sole place at once; and being oncetyed, he
could never more loose himself; yet was he never (for all that) so overshot,
as to offer his body to pine away, or sympathize with the consumption of a
captivated spirit, as being no whit ambitious of loyalty in love, a virtue (in
his conceit) mellancholike, and beseeming such whyning fellows as take a
pleasure in sighing; or such Poets whose blunt fancies must be whetted with
grief, ere they can pitch on a well-relishing conceit. For his part, he
enjoyed where he could, holding in that behalf more choyce-worthy the
cunningly-carried evil than the foolish-reputed good; an opinion though bad,
yet more practiced, and (it may be) more prized than better. But the accident
that now (as you shall hear) happened, rid the rest of their pain and him of
his trouble.

Bramac had corrupted a servant of Coralbo's Mothers, by whom he came to be
advertized of all that ever she did, delivering his letters unto a post that
came clad in rags and patches a-begging to her door for Gods sake. This man
discovering him to be Coralbo (though somewhat too late by reason of the
Queene's concealing him as long as possibly she could) avertized thereof
Bramac, in a time that he could no way harm him: who now hearing that he was
to part suddenly, speeded away instantly certain choice men to murder him,
and with them a Knight, with order to go (in case they lighted not on him) to
Memphi, and there demand him in his name of Pisemitide. They accordingly came,
but yet a day after Coralbo's parting, so as making yet sure account to
surprise him by the way, they followed him with all possible diligence. But his
meeting with the two Princesses, the fight, and his pursuing the runne-away
thieves that led him out of his way, was the occasion that they both missed and
came to Memphi before him.

The Knight that had the letters and charge of Embassy, thought the delivery
thereof bootlesse before he were ascertained of his being there; but not
finding him (whom he was persuaded he should know both by counter-signes, and
by his likeness in favor to his Mother of him very well known he imagined
that his losing of the way was the cause of his so long tarrying, which put him
in a conceit of remounting on horseback to go meet him, assured he should
do his Master a more acceptable piece of service in so murdering him, than in
requiring him of Ptsemitide; yet this his determination was hindered by two
obstacles, which were the disserviceablenesse of his own horses (that lay
distended in the stable so tired, as they were not able to stand on their
legs) and the doubt of meeting him by the way: Whilst then he thus stood
irresolved whether course to take, sending in the mean while to enquire after
him over all the Innes of Memphi, (a bootlesse diligence for a private man in a
City peopled with five millions of men) he might two days after see him with
his companions kiss the Kings hand, knowing among them Polimero by the
counter-signes given him, though none of the rest, wherefore at the instant of
Ptsemitides return from the Queene's to his own lodgings, he with presenting
his letter, opens him his Embassage; whereupon he (the most generous Prince of
his time) enflamed with anger, thus bespeaks him.

I will (my friend) excuse thee for being but an Ambassador, in discharge of
whose office thou may not but obey him that sends thee, but for which I would
inflict on thee such a chastisement, as might serve for a deterring example to
all such as dare require of a Prince of my quality, things not only unjust,
but also unworthy. Tell Bramac that I was borne King of Egypt, and if I
acquired other Crowns, the world knows I usurped them not, but both won and
hold them by the imperial Law of my victorious blade, ever an enemy to guile
and treachery; which I never elsewhere read of than in the legend of his life
and actions. And that therefore Coralbo (natural and true Prince of Arabia)
shall be by me not only denied him, but also so protected, as that I will for
his sake declare my self his enemy, both to chastise him for his rash
judgment made of me, and to restore to the true and rightful Queen and to
her son apparent heir thereof, the kingdom which he so injuriously and
contrary to all Laws usurped. Now for thee, get thee from out our presence and
that quickly too, nor allow I thee any longer time to abide in Memphi, than the
unexpired piece of this day. This said, he turns his back and goes toward
the Queene's lodgings thinking to find there Coralbo with his company; but
finding them gone ere he came, he caused to be made ready two sumptuous
Chariots, commanding the Lord of Pelusio to go fetch them to Court, without
making any speech of the Ambassador, but telling them from him, that in
respect of their being strangers and of Countries thence far remote, and
residing now in a Country where the Greek tongue was not elsewhere spoken
than in Court, he would be their host himself.

The four Princes were even a-going to sit them down to supper, when the
Embassy arrived; which they construed to proceed from the Queen and two
Princesses of Bernice and Cirene, rather than from the King; which
notwithstanding Polimero yielded such humble thanks, and used such reverent
language, as befitted so great a Monarch and courteous a Prince, with
beseeching the Lord of Pelusio to tell him, if the command were dispenseable
till the following morning; but he protesting he was sent thither with
express order to come and conduct them to Court presently, they willingly
obeyed.

The Noble man thought to give Coralbo the first place, as knowing who he was;
but seeing the respect which he in his demeanor bare to the other three, he
imagined that either they were also great Princes, or else that they knew him
not; this conjecture of his being confirmed by his observing the same all the
way, and withal in the two women-signes that bred in him a doubt whether they
were men or not. Come that they were to the Palace and ascended the stairs,
they marveyled at the glorious sight of the number of Nobility they there saw,
the King having sent to meet them the greatest Lords of the Court, and coming
himself from out his withdrawing Chamber in person to receive them: To whom
Polimero was about in a respectively-complementall way to express their
grateful engagement for so high a favor and great honor done them; when he
taking by the hand Coralbo, whom by the counter-signes given him he knew, thus
smilingly bespake him.

And is it thus indeed, that you without any safe conduct come into my
Territories my Lord Prince of Arabia, and think to be here unknown? At these
words Coralbo (good Prince) remained astonished, for not knowing in what sense
to interpret them, and had (but for his mothers having that authenticke
protection which she had) made the worst construction thereof; although the
fame of the Kings generous disposition and noble-mindednesse made him conceive
them somewhat nearer their right sense; yet stood he a good while musing what
answer to make, irresolved whether he were best confess himself to be such
or not: which Ptsemitide observing; You need not Prince (spoke he then on)
conceal your self from me, who will be to you not only a friend, but a
father too, which you shall see by real effects. Coralbo at these words
kneeling before him, would needs have therefore kissed his hand; but he not
suffering him to abide in that submissive posture suddenly raised him up, who
having by this time regained his breath and courage, returned him this answer.

Royal Sir, I deny me not to be Coralbo, but well affirm, that your Majesty
has in two words so obliged me, that I am so far from denying you my name, as
I Will not deny you my life, so fortune made me so happy as to spend it in your
Majesty's service. The King upon this (after having again embraced him)
reaccounted unto him openly Bramac's embassy with his answer, and then
proceeded. I will endeavor to re-acquist you the kingdom or dye in the
attempt; the deferring whereof shall be no longer than till the getting
together the forces necessary for such an enterprise. Coralbo was so confused
in mind (or rather so transported beyond himself) at this so unthought of
good fortune, as he could not hit on language suitable to his beholdingness.
When the King observing that his companions comprehended with no symptom of
strangenes this title of Prince, withdrawing him aside, asked him who they
were. Coralbo (to whom denying the truth seemed a term of ingratitude, and
again the discovering it (he knew) could not but disgust them his
highly-honoured friends) answered: I cannot say (Sir) that I know them not, but
I well know that they would not be known; therefore I refer it to your
Majesty's discreet consideration to command me what your royal pleasure is I
should do; I pray you (replied he again smiling) tell it me howsoever, and I
promise you it shall be from all else kept as secret as if you had never told
me of it. But then at hearing it, his astonishment was such, as it almost made
him break his word: Willingly would he have known then presently the story
and occasion of their coming thither, but that doubting of their taking notice
thereof, he remitted it till after supper. And now whilst the Courtiers ran to
kiss Coralbo's hand, he thence retiring himself with the two Princesses and
Polimero, thus greetes them.

I doubt me (worthy Sir) ye have judged me discourteous, for having (by being
so long in presenting my honored respects to the Prince of Arabia) neglected
my observance to you, for which I beseech you to excuse me, and withal to
command in this house such entertainment and service as best likes you.
Polimero who at first upon Coralbo's being discovered was exceedingly confused
in mind, but afterward at his hope-surpassing good fortune beyond expression
joyful, answered him: Mighty Sir, your Majesty cannot be moved to say thus to
us otherwise than by your royal courtesy, whereby you have obliged all that
knew you; the favors and honors we receive so exceedingly beyond all degrees
of exceedingnesse surpass the meannesse of our merits, as they argue that your
Majesty's benignity after a long contestation with your greatness, is become
in every respect its equal: Besides, that the favors you do the Prince of
Arabia is so well employed, as your Majesty could never confer them on a
more deserving personage. The King steadfastly beheld the two shee-warriers with
great delight, affecting naturally both beauty and valor; nor was it now
difficult for him by the inkling before given him to discern their sex, which
taking on him he did not though against his will: Your aspects (answered he)
are such as speak you worthy of my more respective observance, I should be
loath to one past error to add many greater; and therefore I pray you tell me
who ye are, that I may the better know how to suite your entertainment to your
quality; your endeered friendship and intimate familiarity with the Prince of
Arabia, and your having known him for such before (as I am induced to believe
by your not marveyling at my naming him by his title) persuade me, that you are
his equals if not superiors. At this Eromena blushed, and doubting lest her
husband should by importunity be wrought to tell him what they were, she
answered:

Be your Majesty (we beseech you) pleased to lay apart so high an opinion of
such mean Gentlemen as we be; we are ('it is true) Knights errant, and that is
the greatest quality we can assume or ever aspire unto: If upon understanding
what till then we knew not of the Prince of Arabia, we made no present
demonstration of our joy and duty, it was not because we knew him before, but
to afford others the more ample commodiousnesse of doing him congratulating
offices, which (we presumed) we could not miss of at his more privacie and
leisure, our traveling together and long conversation having (we thank his
benign goodness) made us somewhat familiar.

The King well knew the Princesse's mind, and as one that never displeased
Lady, would not displease her; but turned his discourse to another subject. And
then as soon as Coralbo was rid of his complementall cumber, he led them all
to the Queen; who already informed of Coralbo's being, expressed much joy
thereat, all the other Princesses doing the same, but that of Cirene more than
all the rest. And then after supper (where their bodies were not so much
refreshed with food, as their minds sollaced with mirth and pleasing
discourses) they were accommodated with Lodgings conformable to the quality of
the host, and greatness of the Inn. And in the nightime their Chambers
being near adjoining (as they desired they should be) Eromena persuaded her
husband to a sudden departure, showing him, that to stay for jousts was but a
reason vain, and capable of entangling them in endless affairs.

The day being come, Polimero renewes his congratulating joys with Coralbo,
that fortune had declared her self so favorable unto him for the recovery of
his state, with expressing how sorry he was that he could not be in his own
person a partaker in that service, the affairs of Sardinia, and his
father-in-lawes infirmity necessarily requiring his speedy return home.
Coralbo (that had beforehand been fully informed of all) answered him. That
on the contrary he was right sorry, that he could not serve him in Sardinia
according as he had once purposed; howbeit he hoped (upon fortune's favoring
him, with a little vacancie from his affairs, to which he was for the present
necessitated to attend, more for honors satisfaction than for any great list
he had thereunto) to find a time to come in person to make a real expression
of his mindfulnesse of the obligations he stood bound to him in. The courtesies
were of both sides reciprocal, entertwyned by those of Eromena, who earnestly
besought Coralbo to procure them speedy leave to depart, which conformably
followed to the amazement of all the Court, and passing sorrow of the Queen,
her daughter, and Berenice. The King privately informed by Coralbo of the
urgencie of their occasions, without making show that he knew any thing
thereof, was content to let them go on their way. Only Coralbo above all
others felt extreme grief at this separation; I make no mention of particular
affections, of the words and offers of the three pretended-she-lovers, of the
promises of return and well-carried dissimulations of the two shewarriers,
accompanied a good part of their way by Coralbo, who had past on further too,
if they had permitted him. Stammer out then he did some service-intimating
complements to Lindadori, by her rather heard than conceived. From Polimero and
the rest the period of his parting-farewell was rather silence than any
complement. Come to the Seashore, they embarked themselves for Cyprus, a
Course though somewhat more giring, yet more secure than the shorter cut;
whereof the Count of Bona was very glad, making an account of informing
himself there, of the particular successes of Prince Melianto. But there was
thereof no need, there fortuning to be aboard the ship they were in, a
Gentleman of that Court, bound thither, who being asked what news stirred in
those parts, answered; that Cyprus was now the joyfullest kingdom in the
world, sithence that alliance which was thought to prove the occasion of bloody
war, was now grown to be an indissoluble knot of unexpected friendship.
Whereupon Eromena seeming to be desirous to understand the particularities
thereof, the Gentleman courteously corresponds her desire in these words.

Illirium a most warlike kingdom has for King one called Ormando, a Prince
many degrees above his predecessors both virtuous and excellent. The feats of
Arms he performed whilst he was a young man, afforded rich matter both to
poesy and story; And now that he is become old, his prudence and justice give
yet a greater light to Statesmen; who gathering from out this one Prince's
life, so many cases to judge by, and so many examples to govern by, apparently
saw, that the world had now no more need of any other exquisite pattern for
the well-governing of Commonwealths, and Idealty of Princes; his kingdom
being such a Commonwealth, and his person such a really-formed Prince, as
others endeavor to form imaginarily. Acquired he had (before his coming to
the Crown) an infinite number of Countries, which (for being far remote from
our parts) have names that never came to our knowledge, excepting some of the
less distant and more famous of them, as those of the Misians, the Dardans,
the Triballs, the Sarmats, the Bohemenians, Russians, and others in the
large-extending Territories of vaste Germany, to whom he gave both Princes and
liberty; content (in memory of his Victories) only to tie them to speak for
ever the Illirian tongue. He fortuned (whilst he was a Knight Errant) to
become enamoured of Arnelinda Princess of Cyprus, who (though already promised
in marriage to Arbon King of Pontus (a fierce young Prince) could not yet
choose but love him, whose gestures, disposition, and presence were means but
too potent to force her will. But she (being among all the Virgins that ever
Minerva nursed the most constant in good actions) one day that he made bold to
speak to her of love, thus wrothfully checked him.

Your words (Prince Ormondo) make me now perceive, you are not that good Prince
you are taken for; seeing you, that of mine (as being a Virgins) honor should
be a defender, are that only he that attempts its bane, and that (by
undermining it) goes about to destroy and ruin it: Alas! I have not any
Knights to defend me: Defend you me then against your self. I am already a
married wife, and that you well know too: Seeing then you sin not through
ignorance, it is certain you do it out of malice. What is it (I would feign
know) that you pretend of me? Seem (I wonder) either my behavior or fame
such in your prejudicating eyes, as might suggest in your undermining heart so
outrageous a presumption? Or though it so were, that you loved me unfainedly,
and that (through my ill fortune) I loved you too; yet what comfort, nay what
hopes of comfort could out desires have, that can prove otherwise than treason
and shame unto me, and treachery and shame unto you? It will then be the lesser
evil, that (for not tormenting me) you retire your self. Fortune, you see,
has bestowed me upon another; sithence then be yours I cannot, you must be
content that you cannot be mine neither. At these words Ormondo remained
astonished; perceiving himself in an instant to be (ere he was aware thereof)
beloved; and yet again in the very same moment of time (contrary to loves
nature) refuted. But the property of generous hearts being inclinable rather to
hope than fear, he returned her this answer.

Right excellent Madame, as my words aimed no way at your prejudice, so shall
my actions tend ever to your service: And though I be not for the present a
crowned King as is that of Pontus, yet am I to be one day such by the order of
nature, and of such a kingdom too, that (as I may without any vaunting say)
Pontus and ten such cannot equal it. Of the persons I mean not to make
comparisons: But if there be no other worth or good that makes for me, than the
courteous inclination to me-wards, which to my good hap I discover in you; yet
shall that alone sufficiently serve my turn to merit you in your own
judgment, and yet much more in the judgment of others for its depriving them
of all merit: I want, and seek for a wife my self too, and marriages are
written in heaven, the prime Article of whose Law is, that the married couple
be thereunto voluntarily consenting. Therefore although I say not that the King
of Pontus is not worthy of you, considering his noble conditions; yet will I
boldly affirm, that he cannot be justly your husband, in case you thereof are
not contented otherwise than in obeisance of others. I (Madame) never
entertained a thought of motioning love unto you, otherwise than in a lawful
and honorable way. And so to do both your fame and conditions emboldened me,
yea that fame, which (to your passing glory) sounds a singular note of
excellency in the ears of all men, and these conditions which serve for a
norme and pattern for all the Princesses and women of the earth to form their
lives and actions by; for but for your being such, I had never fixed on you an
affectionate eye. Moreover, although (I grant) that your beauty and outward
feature have force to violent hearts, yet may there be, for all that, a heart
armed against them, and penetrable only by the Arms of innocence and internal
purity. Again, for me to get me gone without you is altogether impossible: You
say you are married, and yet (I know) you are not; the Ambassadors of Pontus
and your father had no authority to bind you; you only are she that makes up
the Matrimony, and she that may choose and refuse to make it; The parts
thereof are yet both in their entire, and both free: The bonds of the two
Laws, Humane and Divine, though they be made ready to bind you, have not
bound you yet though, so as they cannot be thereby any way infringed. A true
and lawful Matrimony indeed it would be, that you accepting me for your
servant and husband, would vouchsafe to bless me by pronouncing one single
voluntary Yea; that then I might ascertaine you, that the hopes you please to
build on me are neither vain nor ruinous.

Humane inclinations were ever subject to persuasions. The Princess who
merely for Ormondo's fame was in some sort enamoured of him ere ever she saw
him, now after seeing him accompanied with so many virtues (so
excellently-excelling, as only one of them was able to dignifie and make
worthy any Cavalier whatsoever) became so enflamed with love of him, that the
Matrimony contracted seemed a hell to her, wherefore doubting whether she
should ever more light on the like occasion, her affection being already
unvailed, she deemed it best to unvaile also her desire; fetching then a deep
sigh that intimated the as yet doubtfulnesse of her hopes, she thus bespeaks
him.

Prince of Illirio; I render you not thanks for your love, as according to the
custom of the times I should do, because I like not the being an affectate
follower of the common style; I follow mine own, and have (as I conceive) my
reason for it; knowing that who so loves, loves for his own affections sake,
so as the obligations and reciprocal duties so complementally professed
amongst friends, are words merely superfluous, and terms and names unfit to
be used. Touching now what you offer me, I am persuaded you do it not,
without having first examined the difficulty of the enterprise with your
dangers and their consequences: Let me now then see in case I pronounced your
desired Yea, what (for the less dangerous) course would you take to have me?
Whereto Ormondo all-joyfull answered; The usual course (Madame) in such cases
throughout all the world. The Prince of Thrace my Cousen will lend me his
Galley, which is one of the swiftest that ever furrowed the Ocean. Come once
but to set footing in Illirico, I then fear not all the powers of the world;
for your Father and Brother, they will (I persuade my self) be glad upon
comprehending the exchange you have made of a little King for a great kingdom:
And for Arbone I conceive no occasion you have to fear him. Arnelinda would
not resolve of any thing for that present, but took time to think thereon,
which served for an item for the now halfe-promised bridegroom to prepare
himself.

Ormondo was then come from the Eastern parts with an intent to return
homewards; but passing from Phenicia to Cyprus he there chanced to find
Serpidoro Prince of Thrace his Cozen german, with whom he being bred up from a
child, and both of them having learnt the exercises of Chivalry together,
there sprung from this their conversation a friendship which transcended the
love of blood, the strongest tie of the most part of kinsmen, which gave to as
many as knew them an example of an illimited love without paragon. Now
Serpidoro had (after having given the chase to some vessels of pirates which he
afterward took in the Cilician Sea) heard of the neighboring nuptials in
Cyprus, whither he thereupon retired with one sole Galley, (having sent the
rest home) with an intention to try himself in Arms at the Tourney; where
finding (beyond his expectation) his endeer'd Cozen Ormondo, they both resolved
to maintain the lists against all the adventurers of the jousts. But this new
amorous congresse set their brains a working on new deliberations, Serpidoro
causing (upon Ormondo's scarce opening of his mouth) his Galley to be
new-calk'd and rigged, with giving special order, that nothing should be
wanting her, that might any way make her more useful and serviceable to steed
his friend. Senesteo King of Cyprus, and more than he the Prince Ortomano his
son, enamoured of the qualities and fair disposition of Ormondo did him all
imaginable honor, not without repining though too late, that it had not fallen
to their lot to have had him insteede of Arbone, now that they perceived him
somewhat affectionately inclined to Arnelinda: Love [the fire of the minde]
being hardly smothered, and therefore not unlike the elementall fire, which if
it flame not must needs smoke.

The Princess as soon as Ormondo was parted from her, summoned all her
thoughts before the tribunal of her judgment, the maine subject of her
consideration in her case was the sole point of honor, the arguments about
which were great, but all solved by the title of Matrimony: For her father, she
imagined that he being discreet, would not be displeased thereat; not because
children stolen away ease their fathers of their duty of caring or doing for
them (such being only a shake-off excuse and advantage of base and
servile-minded people) but because the affinity with so great a King might
steed him very much; besides, the having of so valorous a Prince for his
sonne-in-law, of whom he might promise himself more than of the King of
Pontus, whose foole-hardy rashness could not but stir up suspicion in him
and in her fear and terror: A discourse wholly tending to the substance,
since she could not light on any opposition touching any outward appearance,
feature or, demeanor; she conceiting, that no other man than Ormondo could
ever make her happy; that no other than he deserved the Epithet of handsome,
proper, and well-carriaged; that no face, speech, or behavior could be
esteeme-worthy or graceful, that either in aspect, accent, or manners any
thing differed from his. In brief, she conceived, that in him alone was
comprehended all humane good, wherein though she indeed was not much deceived,
yet concludes, that not (for all that) she could not be beguiled, as for the
most part are deceivable all such Matrimonies whose ends are venery and lust,
such not eiyng but where they like: For, pleasure being an enemy to the
privation of it self, abhorres the sight of the unlovely parts, for not being
constrained to loathe them; and has for feeding that its humor perpetually
fixed on the lovely parts more eyes than Argos, but is to the loathsome ones
stark blind; Or if he hood-winked see any of them, he may then chafe and
fret, and perhaps persuade himself to be mistaken, but not have the power to
disolve any part of his beloved object; so as the thought there of either flies
away like a bird, or vanishes like a spirit: For her brother she saw no
probability of his disliking her choice, whom she knew he tendered dearly, as
being to Arbone no whit, but to Ormondo altogether inclined. After all which
considerations, her resolution was, to get her thence, so she might but do it
without danger.

Ormondo (that thought that no time to lose time) failed not to come the day
following to visit her; and having obtained his desired Yea, calling unto him
the Prince of Thrace, who stood apart entertaining the Ladies, he unnoted of
any other, espoused her in his presence, and then instantly proposes the plot
of taking her away that very night, which accordingly so happily succeeded,
that no living soul either perceived or suspected it.

The careful Serpidoro, having lodged the bride-couple a-bed, sailed on with
all diligence all the night long, so as the following morning he was got so
far, as that they could now no more descrie the beloved Cyprus. The fair
Arnelinda, though exceedingly content with her Bridegroom, was yet a little
discontent, or at least pensive for what she had done, a kind of repentance,
(if so it may be called) counterfeite and fained. The consideration of the
likelihood of her being talked of and censured, for having left her father, and
unmarried and remarried again at her pleasure, vexed her to the very heart. For
ought else she was so far from repenting, that if she had been yet to do
it, she would have done it again and again, although in doing it she had
hazarded much more than she did. Ormondo joys her, and Serpidoro cheeres her
up, and does her all loving offices as tenderly-carefull as if she had been
his own sister, failing all the while with a prosperous gale till they came
within kenning of the coasts of Licia, where their being becalmed rowsed up the
ghing, who obeying the boatsonne, made the Vessel stir on with maine force of
Oars. But now that they were got within ten miles of the Chelidonian Islands,
they might see launch out from among the rocks a Fleet of ten Galleyes,
which (as the Pilote judged) had been kept in by contrary winds, and were now
in that calm set out. At the sight where of the sweet Arnelinda grew pale,
imagining (nor was she indeed mistaken) that they were of Pontus, and that
aboard them was the King, bound for Cyprus to marry her; which believed so to
be by Scrpidoro too, he caused (for shunning the incountring them) the
Mariners to take about toward Libecchio.

The Fleet observing the Galley (that before steerd directly toward them)
begin now to alter her course, grew thereupon suspicious of her, and taking her
to be some pirate, gave her speedily a sterne-chase, with three of the
fleetest, the others following them. Serpidoro looking Ormondo in the face
without speaking a word, seemed to expect he should command him either to
abide the fight or fly; whereupon the other turning toward him in a smiling
manner said: And what else shall we do (noble Cozen) but shun the fight?
since that if we chance to have the worst of it, the vanquisher will then gain
my prize; and again, in case we have the best on it, then shall I be much
blamed for first taking away the wife, and then killing the husband too; let us
therefore (a Gods name) hold on our way, we shall have good sport in seeing
our selves vainly pursued, seeing we have (I thank you) a Galley able to
contend with the Dolphins for fleetnesse. This Counsel pleased well Serpidoro,
so did not the pastime Arnelinda, who enlarging her self on the reason
produced by her husband, told them, that for her part she held it not fitting
to jeare any offended person, for not accumulating (against all reason) scorn
upon injury; which she more efficaciously expressed upon discerning soon after
the Admiral (who being a very swift one had left the others a poope of her)
making a sign (as the custom is) with a bunch of feathers, in token of her
commanding obeisance. The Princes all this while could not betake themselves to
a resolute (as they had done to a determinate) flight; but now since that it
stood them upon, they (not despising their enemies fleetnesse) scowred on with
all the force and speed they could, after being vainly pursued full twenty
miles.

The King of Pontus seeing the impossibility of overtaking her, returned to
steer his intended course, meeting with (toward the evening) the whole
squadron of Cyprus, that came tracing the fugitive Galley. Hailed that they had
each other, the Admiral hies to the Kings Galley, whom he acquaints with the
rape of the Princess, stolen away by the two Princes of Thrace and Illirium; I
know not whether he thereat became stone or no, so astonished was he at this
unexpected accident; which if he did, 'twas then surely a fiery stone, for
there flashed from out of it such flames of anger and disdain, as seemed to be
able to consume the world: He now perceived that the Galley he had given chase
to, was the thief; and therefore repented he had not pursued her to the
utmost. But seeing it could now be no otherwise remedied, causing his to tack
about, and the Galley-slaves to be refreshed, he made them plie Iustily their
Oars, steering all the night long, the slaves rowing in their quarters, and
the Knights, Soldiers, and himself too putting their helping hands to the
Oars to releeve them, that there might be no minute of time lost.

The two Princes seeing that the King was (for being weary of chasing them)
retired, and that the Princess (now rid of the fear she stood in) desired
to see land, went and anchored in Rhodes, their ghing being tired, and no
breath of wind stirring on Sea. They took port in the Island, shunning the
City for their more freedom. But scarce was it day, when the Scowt from off
the Maine-top cried out, that there made after them a Fleet of sixteen
Galleyes, not above twenty miles a stern of them: Upon this Ormondo starting
from out his bed, found the vigilant Serpidoro, that having already wayed
anchor, was now launching out of the Bay. By when they might see the sixteen
Galleyes, who before rowing but quarterly with a fourth part of their Oars,
tugged (now that they descried her) with the utmost and united might all their
Oare-men had, whilst others abbassed the Decks, and put all things in
readiness for the fight. Never was there seen a fairer chase, nor a fairer
trial of good Galleyes. Most of the Fleet came lagging on by one and two's,
for not being able to maintain so swift a course as the foremost four, of
which also three in less then fifteen miles course came halting after the
Admiral, some five, some six miles short of her, she alone continuing her
maine speed as at first, the King doing himself the office of Boatsonne,
ghing-captaine, and unjust inflicter of more unjust cruelties on the lives of
such, whom being little privileged in bodily force he would have (to Natures
shame) to have more strength than they had. Thus lasted the flight and chase
from the setting of Lucifer to the rising of Hesperus; of sixteen Galleyes
there now appearing none save the Royal of Pontus; the Admiral of Cyprus
being far a poope of her, and the rest here one and there another, six and
eight miles short of her.

Good pastime had Serpidoro all that day, in observing Arbon's folly,
marveiling that the trial he had two days before made of his Galleyes
swiftness had not by now taught him more wit, since the very Grayhounds cease
their course, when they see their prey so far out-strippe them, as they see
no possibility of overtaking it. And his ghing though they seemed to row but
for their pleasure, got notwithstanding ever more and more ground of their
pursuers, and then upon the breathing of a gentle North-east wind, entering
into the Channel between Creete and Caria in the Ciclads Laborinth, leaving
on the right hand Stefalea, and on the left Terasia; they sailed with some
danger, till they struck into Ecatea, where they cast anchor, having got out of
Arbon's sight the first evening, without seeing any more sign of him: For all
which Arnelinda could not yet think her self safe enough: All this way
steered they in a short time, although Ormondo all this while fretted
exceedingly at the necessity of their flight, whilst the enemy being severed
from his company might be well fought withal and vanquished, his ghing being
even dead with over-labouring, his Soldiers quite tired in releeving them, and
Arbon himself, over and besides his native rashness, being now long of the
torture of his own chafing fury more than ever void of judgment and
discretion: By alleging which reasons he (changed from his former
determination) earnestly importuned and often entreated his wives assent, who as
earnestly of the other side dissuaded and begged of him to forbear. Reposed
themselves that they had one night, they (waying anchor) steered away aloof of
the Hellespont, (Arbon's right way for Pontus, and theirs for Bisantium) and
thence toward Maronea the first place of Thrace, where they abode till
Serpidoro by advertizing the King Ciriandro his Father of their arrival,
received commodious means for conducting them to Court as beseemed such
Princes. Feign would Ormondo have (under one) brought his Bride straight to
Illirio, for not incommodating his friend, which the other would by no means
suffer him to do, but took hold of this occasion of entertaining and
honoring his friend at his home as he had often wished for; which courtesy
it behooved the other to accept, as well for Arnelinda's sake, who was now weary
of the sea, as also for the hope he had, that his sojourne there would not
prove unnecessary, considering the probability of Arbon's hostile incursions
into Ciriandros dominions, the two kingdoms being not otherwise separated than
by the Bosforum, and by consequence near enough to molest each other.

Ciriandro understanding how the case stood, was nothing pleased therewith, as
foreseeing what must in its respect befall him; yet omitted he not (for all
that) the sending of Litters, Horses, Ladies and Knights to serve the Princes;
taking there with hall such order as was requisite for his Statesdefence. And
then came himself in person together with his Queen Siledc being Ormondo's
own Aunt, and Eliante his Daughter to the foot of Mount Rodope to meet them:
whence he conducted them to Nicopoli, and thence to Bisantium; by when he was
advertized that Arbone was preparing to pass over the Bosforum with an
indifferent strong Army, impatient of staying for as much as the necessary
provisions requisite for such an enterprise.

In the mean space King Chronno Prince Ormondo's Father, a Prince
rigorously-just (advertized of the case by the Queen of Thrace his sister, by
speedy messengers) banisheth from his State his son, for being married
without his consent, for the stealing away of another Bride, and the injury
done to two Kings his friends; yet forbear he not (for all that) to furnish him
abundantly with all things needful, by sending him (as from his mother) moneys
for him, and Jewels for Arnelinda, and for the wars, a silent assent to the
Nobility, and express Commissions to the Milice to pass in small disordered
squadrons over into Thrace. So as the number of Cavaliers was sufficient not
only to finish that war, but even afterward to conquer the greatest part of
the known world.

Arbon's first enterprise was to ravage and run over with his Army all
between the Bosforum and the Hellespont, sacking and then (to Ciriandro's more
damage) burning whatsoever he lighted on, and thence crossed over the sea to
besiege Bysantium. Permitted he was to land, but to his fatal ruin, for that
war was ended by that one battle, his forces being almost all of them there
cut in pieces, and himself taken prisoner by Ormondo; who passing afterward
with his Illirians over into Pontus, took all that kingdom, and with it
Bonarea and Arselia King Arbon's sisters, whom together with their brother he
delivered over to the hands of Ciriandro. Met in his return was Ormondo with
great triumphs by his endeer'd Cozen Serpidoro, who eying Bonarea, became
suddenly enamoured of her, an affect necessitating his cheering her up with
terms and offers between courteous and amorous, which was the occasion that
made her soon lay aside all womanish desperations; and so account her
imprisonment the means and occasioner rather of her joy than discontent. She
appeased as well as she could the raving fury of her more than furious
brother, whose liberty she might (as she presumed) have begged ransomlesse,
but that his precipitous nature could not abide the motioning of such a
resolution; his prison was nevertheless large enough, for he might go where
he listed over all the Castle. So was he like wise in all other respects
honored and served more like a King than a prisoner. Serpidoro this mean
while communicating his love to his friend, besought him to bethink himself
of some way of satisfying his desire; for that he doubted that his Father,
despising the condition of a prisoner-princesse, would hardly assent to his
choice. Upon this Ormondo (after having considered with himself the
importancie of the business) goes to Bonarea, whom he finds gladsomely
enjoying the sweet company of Eliante and Arnelinda. Taking her therefore
apart, he thus bespeaks her.

If I pretended (sweet Madame) to implore of your goodness any favor for my
self, I were then ill advised to come in my own person, with any hope to
obtain it; for knowing, that my having done you so many injuries cannot choose
but give you just occasion to hate me. But (so the Gods love me) all passed
faults of mine in that behalf are mecrely innocent errors; whereof the first
was of love ere ever I knew your brother; the second of natural defense,
wherein he through his ill fortune lost his liberty; the third of war, by
which I took from him his State, and your noble personage more esteeme-worthy
than either kingdom, Crown or any thing else; and this thought I fit to
acquaint you with (Madame) before I pass any farther, to the end my actions
might in some excusable way be construed by you, whose good opinion I esteem
more than all my acquists, as I now mean to let you see. Bonarea marveiling at
such a preamble, and longing to understand its sequel, returned him this
answer.

Most valorous and redoubted Prince, Fortune has by your victorious hands so
abased me, that neither you have occasion to beg ought of me, nor I
wherewithal to favor, you, which if I had, I would then let you see, even in
the present estate I yet am in, that a maiden of my condition regards more the
intention than the effects; and though I know that you are the total ruin of
our State, and the sole occasion of our disasters; yet know I likewise as well,
that what you tell me is not far from the truth. So as though I seem to have
cause, yet neither ought I justly, nor can I with reason hate you. Next for
your person, it (right noble Prince) carries with it so many and so great
privileges, that to believe your self to be in its respect disadvantagious
with me, were rather to accuse me of unjust judgment in your merits, than just
passion for your faults; but the present being of both of us, will soon rid
us of any such doubt, since that I being your vanquished prisoner, am by the
practiced Law of Arms to receive Laws from you my vanquisher. The generous
hearted Ormondo remained astonished at so noble a spirit, so as established
firmer now than ever in his good intention, he in this sort replied.

Princely Madame, such generous hearts as yours neither know what disasters
mean, nor are any way subject to vanquishers; nay they losing evermore gain;
well may fortune have power over what is theirs, but yet never over them, and
(by her favor) she is now like to disclaim her interest in either. But here,
because they were standing, he courteously presenting her a stool, and then
seating himself on another close by her, thus proceeded. I have seriously
bethought my self (Madame) of finding after so many evils a remedy for such as
are yet revokeable, as is the Realm, and liberty on such conditions as may
assure a true and durable peace between the kingdom of Thrace and that of
Pontus. The enmity (you know) is sprung from an intended marriage, broke off by
me; in recompense of which one, I would now make up three; the King your
brother can now have no more pretensions, since he has lost Bride, Kingdom,
liberty, sisters, and all; which not with standing, my intention is to restore
him all, excepting your person (Madame) not to detain you prisoner, but that
being a free woman you may oblige me in bestowing your self in an honorable
way on my Cozen Scrpidoro, who entirely loves and highly honors you: The
Princess Arselia I mean (so she be therewith pleased) to match with Ortomano
Prince of Cyprus my brother-inlaw. And to your brother for Arnelinda that I
took from him, I Will give my Cozen Eliante, and with her for dowry both the
kingdom of Pontus, and his liberty. Now although I know that such conditions
make for his advantage, yet held I it not fit to propose them to other than
you, that you might treat thereof with him, considering that he will not easily
be overruled by other, than such whom he is well acquainted with.

Inexpressible was the consolation that the noble-minded Bonarea received from
so beyond-all-hope-generous a proposition; whereunto she (after having humbly
thanked him in the most grateful and courteous language she could devise)
told him; that touching Arbano's business, she would treat with him of it;
but for the other that concern (...) her self, she meant not to will other
than that which to him, to her-so-great obligation seemed good for her to
determine of, stiling her disasters happiness, and her losses invaluable
acquisitions, since they had been the means to bring her to such noble
acquaintance, and such happy friendship. She usually went to visit her brother
almost every day, and had by commending the Cavaliers of that Court, and their
courtesies (seconded with adverse fortune which makes men become wise) somewhat
mollified the hardness of his fierce humor, and now as a discreet woman
falling to discourse first at large of the business, she by degrees fell to
propose, how advantageous it were for him if such things could be effected,
which indeed were already granted. But he thinking they would never be drawn
to such conditions, which he for his part would but too willingly assent unto;
she (with that) opens unto him all that Ormondo had treated of with her;
whereupon expressing with shouts of joy the infiniteness of his obligations to
him; and being after set free out of the Castle, there was soon in liberty
concluded on, what in liberty was to be enjoyed.

Ciriandro first sends a noble Embassy into Cyprus to Senasteo with the six
Galleyes that had been taken from him; acquaints him also with all that had
happened, and offers him with the marriage a perpetual amity; shows him, to
how good an end the ill beginning came to, and how there was fallen to his lot
the most noble and valorous sonne-in-law that the world could boast of.
Conformable to this writes also Arnelinda, and withal craves her Father
pardon, invites her brother, and prays both of them to accept of both the
peace and alliance. Arbone too by his particular ambassadors assures him of
the memory that he would perpetually conserve of his love, no otherwise than if
he had indeed been his sonnein-law; and that since he could not have
Arnclinda, he yet could not choose but commend her for having so happily
transgressed; he proffers him Arselia for Ortomano, and thanks him for his
Galleyes, which though by him lost, were yet out of the vanquishers noble
courtesy resent him.

Senesteo comprehending such a stinging business of difference to be so
composed and determined to his honor, gave his free assent and leave to
Ortomano, who (conveyed by fifteen Galleyes) went flying to Thrace, where he
was courteously received, and nobly welcomed by his sister, brother-in-law, and
Bride with infinite joy: And then with all convenient speed were the treble
nuptials solemnly celebrated, Pontus restored, and Ormondo with the good leave
of his Uncle and Cozen (leaving Arnelinda quick with child) issued out with
his Illirians to the field, not accepting of one Thracian in all his troops.
And taking occasion to remember how his men were ill treated in passing through
the Countries of the Dardans and Triballs, he assayles, subdues, and then
incorporates the later to the Crown of Thrace in recompense of the kingdom of
Pontus, by him restored to Arbone; the same did he also to the Dardans,
subjecting them to his Father. Returned to Nicopolis, he found Arnelinda freed
of her burden, having brought to the world two goodly twins, a boy and a
girl, the first named Ladomonte, and the other Deadora; yet would he not (for
all that) part from Thrace ere he saw budde forth the fruit of the other
three. Bonarea bare Serpidoro a male child called Erpandro, Eliante brought
forth Arbone, another named Vincireo, and Arsilea to Ortomano a third hight
Gradamoro. But then sent for home by frequent Ambassadors from his father,
longing to see with his son his daughter-in-law with her little babes, he
parted (leaving many a farewell weeping eye behind him) though not without
first agreeing on a marriage between Erpandro and Deadora, as then but few
months of age. The love of the two friends ever studying how, and yet never
finding means sufficient to conjoyne, and in varied ways re-conjoyne those
affects in them, which could not possibly be ever either disjoined or worn
away by any malicious suggestion of time or fortune.

The valorous Ormondo having thus by his return satisfied his Fathers desire,
goes out against the Dacians, and subjugates them; and then having conquered
both Panonians, wheels his victorious front toward the Sarmacians, next whom
he vanquisheth the Russians; combated had he also with the frozen Neptune of
those seas, but that the frost of the Hyperborcans retreated him. And being
daily abundantly supplied with fresh men, that from Illirio swarmed to him like
Bees rather to the victory than booty, he thought best to make a
modestly-discreete use of his fortune by restraining the bounds of his Empire
within a governable distance; selecting therefore the best deserving among the
most valiant, he bestows on them his acquisted Crowns; for conserving which,
he left with each of them an Army, which served both for a Colony, and Seminary
of his language; Ormondo having by his victories imposed no other yoke on the
tributary Kings, than the obligation of leaving the Illirian tongue hereditary
to posterity. And thence passing into Germany, he there with other Provinces
subjected the Bohemians, subjugating likewise the Is^trians in returning
homewards; where come, he found his father decrepit, his wife (as it were)
half a widow, and his children well grown up. The first he now therefore
eased of the burden of government, who a little after died happy in his
sons glorious acquists: the second he comforted with new offspring: The third
he took care for, placing Ladomonte in the career of an heroike education; and
seeing that Deadora, disdaining the needle and spindle, with generous affects
emulated his victories, he would not force nor thwart her natural
inclinations, which though not best beseeming her sex, were yet no whit
misbeseeming a royal Lady, a great Princess, and an Ormondo's Daughter. A
liberty which although she assumed, yet made she such delicate use of it,
that Nature repenting the having made her a woman, bestowed on her a manly
deportment, limbs, and force, though yet no point farther than love permitted
her; for observing her to be fair among the fairest, and in both gesture and
aspect graceful and lovely among the prime that way endowed; he would not
with those his graces have enriched her in vain, but would thereof in some
sort participate, so as though she were a Masculine to others, yet was she a
soster sex'd creature to him.

Ormondo's Court was so frequented, (his fame summoning all honouremulating
Cavaliers to come from all parts to see him) as that it had not its paragon in
all Europe. Among the younger sort whereof were his three Nephews, sprung from
the three marriages made by him, (who were) Erpandro of Thrace, whom as soon
as borne he had made his sonne-inlaw; Vincireo of Pontus, and Gradamoro
Arnelinda's own Nephew, all which lived in the company of Prince Ladomonte,
who by his actions showed himself to be a true branch of Ormondo's stock. In
quality he seemed to be their King, in maturity, if not a father, then
something of a name less severe; for title of contemporary (or peer in
years) became him not: Now there was ever among the other three Cozens an
unfeigned emulation, the two of Cyprus and Pontus holding still together against
that other of Thrace, so as being ever of accord and friends either with other,
they ever discorded and were at jurre with him: Again, Deadora (for her part)
always frequented her Brother and Cozen's exercises, as hunting, barriers,
jousts, and the like, in all which she behaved her self so dexterously, as no
man could judge what sex she was of, her ability in performing no way
discovering her for a woman; so as her brother ever chus'd and named her above
and rather than all the most experimented in Arms. Only Gradamoro beheld her,
and she him in either of their pure being, Erpandro by her neither observed
nor regarded, but slighted and in heart despised.

Ormondo had in so long wars in those cold climes attracted no few
indispositions; but above all the Gout most tormented him, which made him ever
seek for some diversion, and of them to have recourse to the less
incommodious, so to be the less sensible of his pain. He therefore retired
to Faria the principal Island of his kingdom, where the constant perfection of
the air, the pleasing solitariness of the Rocks thereabouts, the singular
prospect of it self, and neighborhood of Issa (the most delicious of all
Islands) afforded him means of no less commodious than delight some
entertainment; for, being now become unable to ride, he had changed that
exercise to roving from Port to Port in that sinuous Region, which in despite
of both tempest and blustering winds is ever constantly calm; thanks to the
rampire-like sheltring rocks and cragges, among which (as in a Fish Pond or
Wear) are conserved an infinite number of the most delicious and choycest fish
of the Sea. The City has its prospect fully Southward, with a Haven warmly
sheltred from the opposite winds, Nature having providently planted near it a
rock that steeds it for both Rampire and Parapet; behind the Sea-banke stand
built the houses, ascending higher and higher by degrees even almost to the top
of an elevated Mountain, on whose cime stands erected a little, but well built
Castle; which besides its strength, shows delightful to the eye, in respect
of its being so advantaged by Nature, and embellished by Arts curiosities. The
Dwellings spreading from the top to the bottom, and well near from one point
of the Heaven to the other in a lunar form, seem to represent a fair and
well-proportioned scene.

Issa thence eighteen miles, enjoyes between its exquisite sites, large
vineyards, and with game-abounding forests such choice and variety of
contentsome pleasures and delightsome objects, as it is both a sufficient and
indeed most fit place of entertainment for a Prince, who after long toil
and acquired glories, aspires to repose. Besides, her vast Bay capable of
receiving exceeding great Armado's, served for a pleasing gulf, he there
doing for preservation of his health in his Barge that exercise, which others
of a more wholesome disposition do either on foot or horseback; and the Court
being retired hither, their delights increased with the alteration and variety
of sites.

Gradamoro was (besides his passing well-proportioned bodily feature) by nature
endowed with most amiable conditions, so as there was no man that knowing him,
loved him not. Erpandro on the contrary (with his face all blemished over with
pock-holes, of a nature rigid and dogged, and a vaunter withal) was much given
to scorn and mock others, and the toy taking him sometimes in the pate to
counterfeite Gradamoro in his gentle garb and quaint demeanor, he did it so
misbecommingly, and with gestures so unseemely, as made him loathsome to such
as saw him act it. If therefore ormondo loved him, 'twas for his being a son to
so dear a friend of his, for having destinated him for his sonne-in-law, and
for not fully nor thoroughly knowing him; whereas Ladomonte and Deadora who had
him ever in their eye, could not endure the sight of him; and therefore
entertained him always with respect, for keeping him at a distance off their
familiarity; but she above all others could not brook the sight of him,
especially when with sighs and sobbes he would (as pitifully and handsomely
as he could) represent the person of an heart-sick passionate lover; whereas
tears though real, and sighs though unfeigned, full ill (God wot) became his
mouth and cheeks. No one had this poor Prince that set before him a natural
glass, to see therein his misbecomming carriage; Courtiers he had enough that
followed him, puffed up with an ambition of being trusty to him; but knowing the
good opinion he had of himself, they still seconded him in his humors, which
made him become ever more and more peevish and impertinent.

Gradamoro on the other side, to whom the Graces were Midwives, discretion
mother, and the Muses Nurses, had won him the hearts of all that knew him,
Ormondo loved him for his merits, Arnclinda for neerenesse in blood, Ladomonte
for friendship, and Deadora for love, she being resolved rather to dye than
marry Erpandro; at whose appearance she would freeze, and sweat if she but
heard him speak; and indeed to her it seemed wheresoever he was that mirth
and discourse gave place to silence and mellancholy: and again, where
Gradamoro but entered, there was no kind of thing that in her eyes seemed not
to rejoice, the very statues had then tongues, and the walls voices. How many
times (alas) would she all alone drop from her fair eyes successive showers
of brinish tears, in bethinking how to withdraw her self from such a husband?
How often also made she her moan there of unto her mother, who whilst she
comforted her with her tongue, lamented her with her heart? Ladomonte much
pitied her, and wished in his heart to see her freed from him, but yet durst
not speak of it, well knowing, that any such proposition, though just, would
not be well taken of Ormondo; the match having been made when as they were as
yet in their cradles, and with a friend whom it was not fit he should
displease, since neither of them had ever given the other any cause of either
distaste or discontent.

No sooner was the gentle Gradamoro arrived in Illirio, and seen the
sweetly-majestick Deadora, than that he rent off the habit of a Cozen: Her
beauty accompanied with such singular virtues apparelling him in the finest
love that ever lover was clothed in; but having heard the story (or perhaps
read in the Chronicles) of the stealing away of his Aunt, the war that
thereupon followed, the friendship between Ormondo and Serpidoro, the
marriages and children sprung from them, among whom himself was one, and how
that Deadora was firmly promised to Erpandro, he durst no more lift up his
eyes, for doubt lest the object of an hopeless and hapless love should bring
him to a despairing end; during a great course of time endured he this
tormenting pain, without communicating the same to as much as Vnicireo, to
whom he communicated even his very heart, wearying his feeble forces in
endeavoring to disburthen himself of it; but more potent forces forced him to
undergo its load, so as afterward being used to it, he began to delight in
it; or else that being invisibly eased by Deadora's love, it was consequently
easy for him to sustain a weight of it self sweet, with her much sweeter
assistance. Love has in all times been a cunning warrier, he durst not
assault the generous and chaste heart of Dcadora, ere he had first battered it
on both sides, that toward Erpandro with the Ramme-engine of hatred, and that
to Gradamoro-wards with hope and affection; he led on the assault through the
ruins of anxious thoughts; and though the fight was no less dubious than
dangerous, and the Captain assaylant used to vanquish the stoutest Gods, yet
thought he it not the least of his achievements to conquer such a maiden. And
then too she pensively lamented for such losses that many another would have
been glad of, whereof what judgment to make, I know not; nor can I tell you,
whether or no it were, that she hated her self for suffering her resolution
to be overcome, or for loving another with dead and almost impossible hopes.

One morning had the Princes and she with them run at the Ring, where after
sundry lays, it came by order of carreere to her turn to lay with Gradamoro,
and 'twas that the loser should submit himself to the discretion of the
vanquisher, in whatsoever it should please the same to command the other; she
perhaps would not win, that so her true loss might be shadowed by this false
one at play; or howsoever it was, lose she did. Gradamoro encouraged by the
victory, taking off the Ring, thus accoasts her.

Dear Lady and Cozen, it has pleased fortune to show me in this game how
exceedingly she can hate me; she will that I bear you this Ring, for an
other guise one, which to my ineffable content I would more than gladly have
given you, had she been but pleased to have blessed me in my swathing-bands
as she has done others. What by this wager I can pretend (so it stand with
your good liking) is, that you would be pleased, that I ever burn for you, and
that in such a fire all the remnant of my lives time may blaze out, being
resolved, since the Destinies deny me you, never to have other woman. That
golden shaft which is fained to strike through hearts, and impoyson them with
love, is no more than an amorous word steeped in the affection of a passionate
lover, the one stabbes, the other envenoms; so much teaches us Deadora, who
thereof is both the testimony and example. Impossible is it to represent the
trouble of mind she conceived thereat, and the internal commotion of her
affections, spirits, and heart. Anger it was not, for love had expelled that
passion: 'twas sure one of those things which cannot be known; or (as I by its
operation should judge it) an effect of poison. Answer him she could not
devise how, she was dumb to him now, and though she had known how, yet now
wanted she time for it, the Princes being run thither to see what Gradamoro
meant to command her; who though they came near of taking them both napping,
yet he without losing any whit of his innate vivacity, complains to them, that
the Princess making use of a maidens privilege, pretended her-selfe exempt
from paying him any thing, invoking (with that) justice, the Gods, and their
assistance, which he expressed with terms so pleasing, that Deadora her self
could not choose but laugh thereat as well as the others. But come that evening
to entertain her with his company as he was wont to do, the others being then
by chance with the King, she thus bespeaks him.

Cozen, you were telling me this morning something that I well understood not,
please you therefore to be plain with me, that I may know whether you be in
jest or good earnest? Madame (answered he) with a Princess of your condition
and merit, and by a person of my quality, and one having withal such a
relation to you as I have, full ill becomes jesting in such a subject. I was
indeed borne very near you in blood, but your virtues tied me yet nearer you
in servitude, and your beauty, graces, and merits with an indissoluble knot
fast-bound me nearest you of all in love, if loving you be an offense, then
must the being your servant and Cozen be no less; and if you judge me worthy
of punishment, then must you likewise judge, that your virtues, beauty, and
excelling parts deserve to be the first punished: But I beseech you to believe
(peerless Madame) that these (though great) occasions had not (for all that)
made me this day so bold as I was, but that I knew that your nuptials drew
near, and that Erpandro now expects Ambassadors from his Father for effecting
the Matrimony, which if it stand with your good liking, behold me then ready to
serve you therein, as I shall in all things else whilst I breathe. If not,
then should I think my audacity to have been necessary, and, as such, worthy
of both excuse and pardon. Deadora, who at first had determined with her self
to act the disdainefull coy one, pierced now through the heart with the very
mention of that marriage, replied.

Cozen, your boldness is every way unexcuseable; for, I being long sithence
married, it is not for you to judge whether it be with my liking or not, it
behoving me to subordinate my fancy to my Fathers liking, who commands me.
And had you any such thought out of any charity to me-wards, you should then
have stripped your self of the interesse of your love to your self, which
advises me not for my good, but for his own behoof, and such as (perhaps
too) cannot well please me. My Brother and Vincireo who have not your ends,
have not that pity of me, a sign that your having it is more for your own
sake than mine; therefore know I not, whether or no I ought either to believe a
person interessed as you are, or make any account of your counsels. But
granting they were true, and that I brook'd not such a husband; me-thinkes then
you, that exposed the inconvenience, should likewise propose me its remedy.
Well knew the warily-observant Gradamoro, that the Princesse's words were not
such as they sounded for, and that for well understanding them, it behoved him
to make as though he understood them not; wherefore, as one p^^^tent for his
presumption, I will not (Madame) answered her he, defend or excuse my
over-boldnesse, whilst I pretend both to confess and crave pardon for it;
only I beseech you, that weighing the occasions that occasioned it, you admit
it to be excuse-worthy. Of your obedience to your Father, I neither have, nor
mean to speak any disswasive word; well affirm I, that Fathers should be
well-advised in their commands, if they will not be disobeyed. For sometimes
out of their fatherly privilege and authority, they (without thinking that
they do otherwise than well) pitch upon such resolutions touching their
children, which they would not have done, if they had but considered or
foreseen their ensueable inconveniences. Now for the selfe-good-tending ends
or interesses that you accuse me of, I am so far from denying it, that I
openly confess, nay (as it were) proclaim it. Why! believe you (sweet Madame)
that loves are other than interesses? surely no, love is even an interest or
selfe-tending end of satisfying those affects in us, but for whose being there,
we should never be troubled with love; so as when we love, we in loving ever
love first our own affect, and then that which it loves for its own pleasure.
Therefore if you condemn me for that, then you can do no less than condemn
with me both the World and Nature, the later whereof having not the power to
be otherwise than such, makes me that I cannot choose but love you, whilst I
cannot choose but love mine own inclination and affect, which entirely loves
you.

This said, Gradamoro held his peace; but seeing her make no answer, he thus
proceeded: Next for the counsel which you command me to give you, I should
think any advice needless to such as mean not to follow it. In which regard
I should hold it expedient, that you first resolve, whether you will, or will
not have the Prince of Thrace, whom if you please to like and accept for your
husband, it would be then but superstuous to discourse of what should be done:
But in case you will not have him -- Scarce had he pronounced the last accent,
when they espied coming running toward them the three Princes, rejoicing that
the King had told them, that within four months space he would have
celebrated the nuptials of his Daughter with Erpandro, and had by letter
signified so much to the King of Thrace to send Ambassadors to that end; and
withal discoursed of the order he would have observed in the solemnities and
jousts, and commanded Ladomonte to acquaint his sister with as much. But he
was so discreet, that taking on him to be glad, whereas indeed he was sorry
for it, he would not speak unto her a word thereof before their Cozens: But
taking occasion to conduct her to their Mothers Lodgings, he then performed
his Embassy; where with the Princess stung with an envenomed grief, thus
bespeaks him.

My Lord and Brother, you deliver me a message so cross to my content, as it
draws on me the greatest anguish and hearts-griefe that fortunes utmost spite
can inflict on me. I ought to obey my father, (it is true) yet ought my father
then give me such a husband as I abhor not: you are my brother, and as being
my only one, my only hope in all adverse fortune. I therefore conjure you to
be my protector, and a means for breaking off of this Marriage, which ere ever
I consent to, I am resolved (I here vow to you) to dye a thousand deaths. The
Prince that tenderly loved her, all-confused in mind thus answered her.

Dear Lady, and dearest sister, I never have nor mean to deny you any thing
you ask of me, which any way tends to your behoof or content. And in this
present occasion, I had (to tell you the truth) rather do than promise. For
(to be plain with you) this match never liked me. My Cozen Erpandro is
(indeed) a good Prince, but yet no fit husband for you; I am sorry we have
suffered the disease to have his course for so many years without curing or
stopping it, since its remedies can at this present prove but slow in
operation, if not almost bootlesse. I will work with my father as much as
possibly I can; but won he must be by degres, for the affair is delicate,
and yet to handle it gently we are disadvantaged by the brevity of time that
precipitates it. I (many times) thought to go and confer with my Mother
about it; but yet refrained, out of the belief I had, that she would never
openly declare her self opposite to that match, were it but for her love to
the King of Thrace, to whom she stood so highly obliged, when he with my
Father conveyed her away from Cyprus, but would (I am persuaded) believe, she
did an act unworthy of the friendship and gratitude she owed him. More for the
present I cannot promise you, but that I am resolved (sithence no other
expedient course can be therein taken) to wait for an opportunity to speak of
it to the King, who is so discreet and just, as I presume he will not force
you to match against your liking. These considerately-stayed reasons of her
brother (whom in all other things she knew to be most resolute) made Deadora
perceive that she might not rely upon any prevailing offices to her ends in
this business, considering that to content her, there was a necessity of
offending Serpidoro; wherefore having sent for to come to her the Prince of
Cyprus, she thus bespeaks him.

Behold me now (Cozen) resolved to have none of Erpandro, what therefore (I
pray you) is now to be done? I have thereof spoken to my Brother, and find
him (contrary to his ordinary temper) cold, and seeming to despair of
furthering me rather than otherwise; he indeed accuses me for not having
thereof acquainted him sooner, by occasion of which neglect, the remedy (says
he) is grown to be more difficult, a difficulty which conjoined to some other
considerations may be interpreted an impossibility: Which being so, it stands
me upon to prevent it, for not being constrained to what I am most unwilling to
do.

Gradamoro seeing her now come to the point he wished for, returns her this
answer. Its remedy (divine Dadame) is easy enough, so you but give way to it:
Be pleased to read over the Annals of the King your Father, whom you know to
be so virtuous and valorous, and by that Rule square your deliberations; look
if you can there light on such another case, and then (I am persuaded) that by
that time you have considered the modesty and other virtues of my Aunt the
Queen your Mother, you will comprehend, that necessity sometimes tramples upon
reason. Inextricable knots (Madame) are not undone but by either cutting or
bursting. A Matrimony contracted from the very swathing-bands between two
Fathers so dear friends, without having been in so many years time any way
disavowed by the least opposition of either side (as has been discreetely
considered by the Prince your Brother) cannot possibly be broken off without
violence; which because it cannot be expected from the King, must needs
proceed from you. Your only way therefore is to steal away, for which you
want not a president to imitate. Nay more, the very accident will be adjudged
to be a premeditated plot; revenge done by a blow given, in quittance for a
blow received. But this might perhaps rather withdraw you than otherwise, if
the so patly-counterhappening of the selfsame accidents to the very same
persons, made not the world believe it to be an effect of divine providence: A
document for Fathers to be indulgent to their Children for such faults as
themselves are presidents for; which in case you would do, you should have the
advantage of not being followed after, especially if you would resolve to lift
me into heaven, by blessing me with the title destinated to Erpandro. I
(Madame) am of that stock whence your Mother was stolen away, you the Daughter
of him that stole her, the King of Thrace (complice of the delict) his son
will I rob you of; Vincireo sprung from him whom your Mother was promised to,
will accompany me in conducting you to Cyprus not without divine disposing, to
the end there might be by our so rendering like for like confirmed between us
all an indissoluble bond of perpetual friendship.

No whit pleased was Deadora with such discourse as this, there springing in
her first a suspicion, that Gradamoro's love was (as we say) but from the
teeth outward; and too withal, although she knew all this before, yet gladly
would she have seemed to have been ignorant of it, for that she conceived
those historical considerations of rapes, complicites, delicts, revenges,
disobligements received and requited, rather aggravated than extenuated her
fault: Rather could she have wished to have erred in simplicity, without
penetrating so maine considerations. But Gradamoro for being of a free nature,
suffering himself to be wholly guided by affection, quite forgot all
circumspection, a quality most necessary in such an affair, which ministered
her an occasion to vent out her passion in these terms.

I thought so, that it was nothing but merely your own ends that moved you,
Gradamoro: And though with sophistical reasons you have endeavored to make me
believe the contrary, yet do you now (against your will) discover it by an
affect of mere revenge, taking me to be so simple as not to conceive you; but
assure your self that I will neither believe you, nor be ruled by you. But
content my self to have been deceived in the good opinion I once conceived of
your love, rather than in the false effects of it in a time when my repentance
will come too late. Now the Gods keep me from being an instrument of such
revenge. I will neither marry Erpandro nor follow you, but will rather than do
either languish and dye. Whether Gradamoro's grief were great or no, may be
well conjectured by the unexpectedness of any such language, nothing availed
him either arguments, oaths, or tears, all was but vain, the
Mayden-princesse rejecting his reasons in respect of her being fully fraught
with jealousy, diffidence, and fury; no remedy then but part needs he must and
leave her in that extreamely-passionate mood: And left he had the City too,
but for his being in his return to his lodgings seized on by an excessive
cool shivering, accompanied with vomiting and swoundings; no fire was there
that could warm him; the Physicians ran to him, the like did the Princes and
Queen, yea the King himself would be carried to him. A long time lay he
motionlesse, with lither artirs, dead clouded eyes, grinched teeth, and
grappled hands; in so much, as there was none, thatby sight thought him not
dead, and bemoaned him not. The Queen (who as a child of her own dearly
tendered him) was even heart-broken with grief for him. The King solicited the
Physicians for fresh Pittims and new Cordialls, but nothing availed him, since
they penetrated not into the nature of the disease, nor its true occasion;
Ridden he had and danced too that morning, but without excess, exercises to
him ordinary: Dined he had too, but yet sparingly, repletion and disorder had
no place in him. Deadora seeing him in such a plight, too late now repenting
her being the causer of it, taking him by the hand warmed it between hers,
calling to him with so many throbs and tears, that happy he, had he but seen
them: Nor did such demonstrations any way impeach the reserved modesty of her
sex, their neernesse in blood, education, and domestic amity sufficiently
priviledging her so to do. At length he came to himself, just in that time
when little better than abandoning him for dead, every ones thoughts were busied
more about his funeral than life; for now the King, Queen, Princess, and
Princes were all of them parted save only Vincirco, who staid behind with the
Physicians, and was now set a weeping over him as dead. The King having notice
thereof, returned with the rest, and finding him laid in warm clothes in a
feverish fit, shaking every joint of him, he began to hope the best of him:
And because the throng of Courtiers that came in with him might not disturb
his cure, he took them all again out with him, leaving there only the Queen
with Deadora: The former where of being told by the Physicians, that the
accident proceeded from some great oppression of the heart, much marveyled
thereat, for that she had observed him to be ever merry; yet believing that
some internal humor falling on that part, had caused that accident, she
ran to her lodgings for a most delicate paste made for that purpose, leaving
with him her daughter and Vincireo. She seeing the Physicians retired, and her
self all alone with Vincireo, whom she cared not for concealing her self
from, accoasting his bedside, cures the wound given by the weapons of her
former sharp, by the balm of these her milder words.

My Princely Lord and dearest Cozen (said she) I confess my self faulty, and
pronounce my self most worthy of chastisement, for having been (against all
reason) the cause of endangering your life, by bringing you thus to deaths
door. I confess, yea I now from my soul confess your interesses to be full
of love, and most worthy of being really corresponded with an equal affection;
Behold me here now (my endeer'd Lord) most ready to make you plenary amends;
Cheer then up your self (I beseech you) for lo I am disposed and immutably
resolved to go whithersoever you please. Banish then from you all melancholy,
since I am ever yours, and never will be any others; which that you might be
the more assured of, I have not (you see) abhorred the testimony of the Prince
of Pontus your Cozen and mine here present; which she expressed with an
affection so sincerely-ardent, as both amazed Vinciero, and restored Gradamoro
to life. It is natural for an oppressed heart to disgorge in tears (in the
very instant of its being eased) that malign humor that suffocated it; a
token of health, and a sign that Melancholy departing leaves room and way for
joy to enter. Right so befell it now the Prince of Cyprus, he stood a good
while, taking first the Princesse's hands between his, and distilling rivulets
of tears out of the fountains of his eyes, and then affectionately kissing
them, returned her this answer.

I know not (incomparable Madame) when I shall be ever able to serve you,
conformable to the great obligation to your more than excelling courtesy. You
(Madame) cannot be faulty where you have sovereign power, nor be subject to
punishment, whereas you sway the scepter over all the laws of my affections.
Your nobly vouchsafing to comprehend in the better sense my interesses, and out
of your goodness to accept them in good worth, is to me a supreme favor; but
your benignely daigning to correspond them surpasses even all expectation of
mine, much more the slenderness of my merits: so as I am so far unable from
really requiring your nobly-obliging favors by deeds, as I cannot find apt
words to express or acknowledge them. For the rest, could I but have thought,
nay hoped, that the King your Father, upon any earnestly-sollicitous Embassy
of mine, could have been wrought to bestow you on me, I then would (I protest
unto you) never have presumed to have preposed you your flight: but being
promised as you are, alas! what likelihood is there for you to have (by his
consent) other husband than Erpandro? And the example of your mother that I
proposed you, with the revenge that thereupon ensued, were never by me
intended for arguments to persuade you (since I knew them far from being
availeable in that behalf) but to show you, how by them you might assure your
self, that your resolution should be less blamed and censured. Besides, that
I pretend not to rob what is any other man's; for so you (Madame) be but
pleased to make me (by your noble assent) but worthy, I will marry you ere we
part, to the end our faults (if such they be) may seem by so much the less in
the eyes of both heaven and the world. The Princess resolved both to
felicitate and cure him, here thus interrupts him. Well, my Lord, to the end
you may see, that there is no need of justifications, behold me here at your
disposure, therefore (so you be therewith pleased) marry me (a-Gods-name right
now in the presence of your Cozen here; who astonished to see them at that
point without imparting any inckling thereof to him till then, taking off his
finger a rich Diamond, (Gradamoro having then no Ring ready) reached it him to
marry her therewith, as instantly he did; remitting the rest to another time.

The Physicians being called, found his pulse at a good pass, and the Queen
come, he would needs take what she brought him, to make her the Authresse of
his health, and then got out of his bed the day following so healthsome and
blithsome, as if he had not been sick at all. But then Vincireo could not
forbear from taxing him with discourtesie for the small sign of love he
showed him in this occasion of making use of him; When he craving him pardon,
told him, that at first he had concealed it with out knowing himself the
reason why, (having entered into this business beyond all expectation) and that
afterward doubting that he would have dissuaded him, he was confirmed in his
silence, judging it a lesser evil to offend by concealing his affection, than
after communicating it, not to follow his counsel, or be in some way ruled by
him. And being thereupon demanded, how he meant to carry the business, now
that his resolution had excluded all other either deliberation or counsel? He
answered, that on the very day wherein the King had spoken of the Marriage and
solemn feasts, to be kept in honor of its solemnization, he had dispatched (as
he also knew) a fleet pinnace for Cyprus, under pretext of fetching him all
necessaries requisite for his appearing at the jousts, giving apart secret
command to the Admiral to send him a Galley re-enforced with all those
advantages that such a Vessel might have: And that having therewithal written
unto his Father, to send him a good number of the best Knights of the kingdom
to appear with him in the Tourney, the Galley would come strongly furnished
with men of war, without giving either here or there the least occasion of
suspect: That as soon as that Galley were arrived, he went to embarke the
Princess and him, and so pass all three of them over into Cyprus.

Erpandro likewise in the selfsame time had by land dispatched a Post into
Thrace, with news to his Father of what was concluded on, praying him to send
with all possible conveniencie, Ambassadors for the Ceremony, provisions for
him, and Jewels for his Bride, whom he thought to conduct home through
Macedon, upon considering with himself, or being advised by his Council, that
being accustomed to ride and curious to see, she would receive more gust from
such a sight by land, and that prospect of the Island by Sea, than from the
savage-growne, or rather devasted Country of the Dardans and Triballs, nor yet
recovered or well re-civilized since the last war. Requesting therefore his
Father to be pleased to send him half a dozen of well-furnisht Galleyes, to
expect him the far side of the Istmus, in which might be also embarked a troop
of Ladies to come meet the Princess, and wait on her in her voyage.
Requiring also safe conduct of such of his confederate Princes and Kings, whose
Countries he was to pass through.

The two Cozens received speedily from their several Fathers the
accomplishment of their particular requests, there arriving unto the one his
Galley, and to the other his Ambassadors hard about the selfsame time. Mean
time Deadora begins now to show her-selfe openly disgusted, that her Father had
never spoken word to her touching this business, as though the same no way
concerned her. Whereas indeed the good King supposed there was no need
thereof, conceiving that she could not but be therewith well pleased, since
the first thing that she knew after her coming into the world was her being a
married wife, and yet never showed her-selfe thereto disassenting: besides, his
presuming, that she was sufficiently told thereof by her Mother and Brother.
The day of the Ambassadors arrival, having sent for her to him, he in
Erpandro's presence presented her them as their Princess. But she received
them coldly, and without as much as once looking toward Erpandro: Retired
soon afterward that they were from out of the Presence Chamber, he asked her
why she showed her self so strange. Because I was surpised at unawares
(answered she) without knowing either whose the Ambassadors were, or
wherefore come. Well understood Ormondo that this answer aimed at him, yet not
conceiving that it contained any sense more important, but well liking that her
smart generosity, and smiling thereat, (kissed her that he had in the forehead)
he dismissed her to her lodgings. Already was it murmured over the Court, that
such a marriage pleased her not, upon observing, that (the Ambassadors being
come, and the solemnization of the marriage published to be within eight days
space) she made no answer to such as wished it might prove much joyful unto
her, and that her Mother-selfe could not draw one word out of her that
concluded her assent; but yet her making (of the other side) no show of being
mellancholy, gave no suspicion that she meant to reject him with a flat
denial. Toward her pretended husband she carried her self as she was wont
to do before, in the terms of a kinswoman, calling him cozen, smiling on him
if he but spoke of love without giving him any answer.

Mane times had the Queen observed the reciprocal inclinations between her
Nephew Gradamoro and her Daughter, and heartily would wish to her self, they
could have been matched together, yet discovered she not so much (for all
that) as to come to know such an affection in its true essence. For, being
Cozens and bred up together in the very same exercises, and withal like in
conditions, and therefore deerely-esteeming each other, there might to their
familiarity and love be well afforded other privileged pretexts than a
downright reciprocal affection. Only Prince Ladomonte, who for being by
nature of a deep penetrating judgment, observed more than the rest, might
best of any other light on the right, sorrowing that the effect confirmed not
his suspicion, from his soul could he have wished that the Galley of Cyprus had
been a new Taurus, and his sister another Europa; for he loving her heartily,
was sorry to see her matched against her will, affect he did Gradamoro
exceedingly, Gradamoro tendering him no less dearly, so as the great love
between them seemed to require a greater tie of alliance, were it but to have
a lesser with Erpandro. Mean while the eight days began to run the course
of their expiration, the City being all over busied in working, and more than
half of it merely employed for the Prince of Cyprus, who sending for all the
choycest silks of Persia, and all the rarest inventions of Greece and Egypt,
made all believe that he thought of nothing else, than to appear with more
sumptuous curiosity, and curious pomp than all the rest. Retired he was into
the shady valley between the Cittadell and the opposite Mountain behind the
City, where having erected his Pavilions, he did day after other nothing else
than try himself with Ladomonte in the lists, at barriers, on foot, and on
horseback; sometimes hand to hand, otherwhiles accompanied, being both of them
by Ormondo assigned to be maintainers of the lists. Seldom was he seen in
Deadora's company for continuing his abode without; and chancing to meet her,
he discoursed with her of nothing else save horses and livers, giving thereby
all men occasion to conjecture that he dreamed of nothing else, leaving wholly
to Vincireo's discreet care the ordering and appointing of both the time and
manner of their flight.

Four of the eight days term being expired, the Galley launched out of the
Port, under pretext of going to take in fuel, yet at night returned without
making any noise, and rode without the point at random. The Princess gotten
out at the garden door well armed, found there the two Princes that stood
expecting her, whence taking the outmost way through difficult passages full of
grubs and cragges, they got to the seaside, and there found a long-boate
wherewith they embarked themselves; and then suddenly the Galley steered a
maine speed toward the East, as it stood her indeed upon, it being but two
hours before day, the night then of the shortest, and the lightsome Planet
signing its circle a little wide from the line of our Tropic. Gradamoro had
removed well near all his family to his pavilions in the valley, where they
also were often wont to lodge, so as it was easy for him to get them embarked
unperceived of any, leaving for his wardrope and stable their Officers whom he
could not commodiously provide for in the valley.

Deadora's Bed-chamber-woman used constantly to enter very early into her
Chamber, and softly opening the windows for ingresse of the fresh morning
air, to return to bed again without awaking her. That morning on the break
of day going to do the same, she espied the bed empty, but then not believing
her eyes, she (for more assuring her of the truth) felt with her hand, but
found her not, for she was not there; yet gave she not her self over (for
all that) to scritches and cries, because she knew not what the matter might
be. Entered into the Closet (whereof her Mistress self was wont to keep the
key) then wide open, she might there see wanting her Arms and sword. Yet
could she not imagine how she could clothe her self, all her apparel being
(as soon as she was stripped of them) usually carried into a back-withdrawing
Chamber, and not thence brought back again till she listed to cloathe her
self; which as she stood musing on, there came to her mind Vincireo's twice
coming thither, and carrying with him (by a Page) a Fardle involved in Taffata
Sarcenet, and that come to the Chamber, he had taken it out of his hand to give
it himself to the Princess, so as no body else knew what it was; she now
imagines they were man's clothes, but fixing a more observant eye on all the
corners about her, she might epsy on a little by-table many letters sealed, To
the King, the Queen, and the Prince, with the three several Seals of
Illirium, Cyprus, and Pontus. By this certain of the fact, and terrified with
the likelihood of her being suspected for a Complice, she would have fled, if
she had known whither or how. Till assured by her conscience, and the
improbability of her staying behind them, had she been such, she held it
her best course to bring the Queen the letters. The Maids of honor
marvayling that she desired to speak with her at such an hour, could not
resolve to go to disturb her rest, till upon her importuning them with
solemn protestations, they at length ventured to awake her. She without
speaking ever a word to her, presented her the letters, which the Queen
knowing by the Seals all-amazed opened, reading in that of her Daughter (which
was the first) the resolution taken for which she craved her humble pardon,
showing her punctually the reasons that induced her to do it. Reading
afterward that of her Nephew, and the other, she compressing her tears, hies
her to her husbands lodgings, who intending to ask her what she made there at
so rathe an hour, forbear his speech upon receipt of the letters. He first
began to read Deadora's, but had not the patience to read the reasons, having
read the resolution; speak he would in all haste with the Gentlewoman of her
Chamber, but was never a whit more satisfied by her; and what more could indeed
by the strictest examinations or more diligent inquiry be learnt in it, since
their being fled and gone was the first and last news of it?

A good while stood Ormondo in a muze, as not used to be transported with the
sudden fury of any passion; and then discreetly weighing the case, with calling
to mind how himself had done as much, and considering withal, that his
Daughter had made a better choice for her self with the time, than he could
have assigned her before the time, he both pacified himself and consolated the
Queen, so as nothing else now troubled him, save the injury done Serpidoro,
which he knew not how to make him amends for. But calling to mind, that he
alone was with him at stealing the Queen away, he thereupon said; Our Daughter
and Nephews (wife) have erred, but yet we must bear with them, since it is
impossible that they have not looked into our lives, and that our example has
not emboldened them. Here sending for Ladomonte, he gave him his letters: By
this time amazement being past, and reason returned to its proper seat of
residence, the King was no whit displeased at the change of his sonne-in-law.
The Queen (likewise) was glad thereof, and the Prince exceeding joyful, was
by his Father commanded to acquaint therewith Erpandro, who was like to grow
wild at it. He ran to the King and Queen, and then finding no Galleyes
ready in the Haven, would have leapt into the Maine, and swome to overtake the
fled-away Vessel. But that remembring-himselfe of the Galleyes that rode
expecting him at Peloponcsus, and that riding-poaste he might get thither
before Gradamoro; be mounted on horseback and ran poaste thitherward night
and day. Arrived he sent one of them to Zacinthus to epsy if the other were
passed, and was joyed at the heart when (at her return) he understood, that
she was with a long prospective-glasse descried to be so far discoasted, as
a good sight not interposed by the curvity of the Globe might discern, and
that she would be more than a day a coming, calculating the slow course she
had steered sithence the time of her setting out. And that there was placed on
the Island of Cithera a Centry, who upon her coming by night (which for
certain would not be, she sailing not by night by the proportion of their
account) should give notice by fire, and by day with smoke: So as it behoved
him to transport himself presently to Capo Melio for being there ready to
assail her.

Erpandro approved of that counsel, and launching from out the Promontory, at
the smoke he descried from Cithera, met and fought with her with very bad
success: For, notwithstanding his advantage of so many Galleyes, he was (in
his very own) by the Princess her self fought withal, beaten down, and
taken prisoner, whilst two of his Galleyes were burnt, and the rest retired.
But dressed and cured with all possible diligence, visited, consolated, and
opportunely persuaded to reason and patience by Vincirco, he not only grew to
be pacified, but also upon calling to mind the passages between their fathers
no less considerately than discreetly conceived, he had no occasion to find
himself agreev'd: Whereupon licensing the Galleyes that made after to recover
him, he wrote to his Father, praying him not to be displeased for what had
happened, since he (for his part) would conserve himself in the ancient love
and favor of his Cozens, and be present at the solemnizing of the nuptials,
judging himself fortunate, to have missed the marrying a woman that loved him
not; especially considering his being withal confident, that at his return,
King Ormondo would not fail to give him instead of this Cecromma the other
Daughter. Arrived in Cyprus, they were received by the King with great joy and
triumph; who would needs prolong the solemnities already commenced, and send
Ambassadors into Illirium, Thrace, and Pontus, who successefully obtained so
much of the offended as not to pretend themselves such, and conformable to his
expectation, Cecronima instead of Deadora. Ladomonte causing to be embarked
both his and his brother-inlawes preparations destined for the festival
solemnities of Faria, commanded they should be brought after him to Cyprus,
where he in a choice Galley arrived in a few days space, entirely welcomed and
honored with all affectionate respects, conformable to the passing love they
bare him. Nor wait they for now toward the celebration of the festivalls for
ought else save the things embarked, so as we shall come time enough to see
them, being they are to be kept at Pafo near the famous Temple of Venus,
whither they are all of them reduced to thank the Goddess for so prosperous
an issue of these affairs.

Polimero had heard talk of Ormondo and his great exploits long before, which
made him now very glad to hear his disgusts thus terminated by so pleasing an
alliance, the old passage taking from him all occasion of revenge. And right
joyful was Lindadori, to light on by the way so solemn jousts; hope also she
did, that her Father would dispense with his haste to be acquainted with those
Princes, she being more especially desirous to see Deadora, and to try her
self at Arms with her. But so it befell them, that neither Polimero had
occasion to displease her, nor she opportunity of working her own content;
for the sea swelled into such extraordinary billows, for being over-blowne
with the rage of a tearing wind, that the Pilot was forced with haling the
tack a-boord to strike a hull, and lash sure the helm a-lee, till gaining the
wind a-sterne, he was feign to ease the Vessel with a small Trinket sail
fastened to her Maine-yard, so as she now carried on with an excessive violence
outranne the course, and leaving on the right hand Cyprus, could not possibly
choose but pass to Creete, where with much ado they made a shift to get
ashore.

Greatly steeded this Tempest Polimero by advancing him much on his way,
besides the pleasure he took at his Daughters anger, and her chafing at the
sea and winds; yet that accident afforded her another way, that which fortune
had denied her for contenting her martial humor. For that time the kingdom
of Creete stood afflicted by a war little otherwise than civil, divided into
factions, every one attempting to effect his own peculiar ends under pretext
of the public good, an ordinary mask wherewith the most seditious are wont
to cover the true face of their actions.

Virate King of Crecte left behind him three sons, whereof Cretaneo the
eldest inherited the Crown: the other twain being accommodated with two of
the goodliest and richest Dukedomes of the whole Island, Restargo with the fair
Duchy of Cidone, and with that of Ritinna Riverargo. Now Cretaneo was a good
Prince, a lover of Philosophy, and in it so plunged, as he conceited to make
by its direction both himself and his kingdom happy; yet never philosophiz'd
he, that Kings may well be capable of Philosophy, but not Philosophers of
kingdoms: For then had he learnt, that Kings ought (for well ruling) to be
formed of virtues more real than philosophicalll, and that these without those
ruin such as own them. Disposed then for conveniencie's cause to marry, and
hearing famed for beauty the Princess of Caria being a neighboring kingdom,
he sends thither Restargo, believing, that Carito's King would willingly grant
her him, for being demanded by so great an Ambassador as his brother, whom he
allowed a great train of followers, and store of moneys; to the end he might
carry himself both like a personage of his rank and quality, and conformable
to the greatness of him that sent him; an ordinary custom in those Countries
not to concede men wives, till they be first for some while wooed and served
by the pretenders, and (if they be Princes) by Ambassadors in their steed.

This Princess was (over and besides her beauty and comely feature) an only
child, and by consequence heir apparent to the Caritan Crown; In which
regard Restargo allured by the occasion of gaining himself a Crown,
forgetting both his allegiance and trust reposed in him, did that office for
himself, which he should have done for his brother; whom whilst with false
letters he held in hand with more false hopes, 'twas easy for him (malignely
procuring to be brought to the King of Caria's ears passing bad relations of
Cretanco) to get his daughter for himself: Having won all the Courtiers with
the prodigal effusion of his brothers treasure. Cretanco thus injured, without
making show of being angry thereat, excused it with his wonted facility,
judging it (in respect of its occasions) pardonable, upon discoursing within
himself, that interesses of preferment make men (if they be not professed in the
habit of virtue) from very good to become exceeding bad; yet knew he how to be
so much angry (for all that) as to forbid him for coming ever more in his
sight, and that become now successor of a kingdom, he should keep him within
its limits, without venturing to return into Creete: For the rest, he neither
meddled with his patrimoniall Dominions, nor came to those terms, whereto
justly incensed Kings are wont to come to.

Restargo making no account of words, rather confident of his brothers lenity
than timorous of his justice, forgetting his being forewarned, grew desirous
three years after (Cretaneo being by then married) to pass over into Creete;
ambitious (it should seem) of being there honored above the rank of the
first Peer of the blood Royal, in the quality of a Sovereign Prince, and in
his time King. But no sooner was he come, than that the prison was his lodging,
where he remained seven years, the King and Princess of Caria proving all the
while unprevailing suppliants for his freedom. The seventh year being past,
it seeming good to Riverargo to intercede for him, he without any difficulty
prevailed, King Cretaneo being by then weary, if not halfe-sorry for having
contrary to his nature retained his color for so long a time, thinking that
justice became now cruelty, and that the revenge exceeded the injury,
especially in a brother; not considering (as he should have done) that his
brother had his affects corrupted, and that such a man as had been once
wicked, should be ever presupposed to be such. Restargo insteede of repenting
(waxen now more wicked than before) provides in a few days from Caria in small
disordered companies a good band of men, besides those of his own State, and
knew so well how to do ill, that deposing his brother from his Royal Throne,
he put him in the very same prison that he had kept him seven years in, and
then sending for (together with his wife) new forces, he assumed the title of
Governor with his other brother, affirming the King to be unable to govern,
speculations having brought him to be now dotish and good for nothing.

The seven years being past, Riverargo thinking to obtain of Restargo for
Cretaneo such liberty, as Cretaneo had before granted him for Restargo, moved
him earnestly for it; but where two natures are different, it is certain that
their effects cannot but be unlike; Which we may hear confirmed by the example
of Restargo, who judging Riverargo's pity to be too-too-tender, showed him;
That in setting him at liberty, he should commit a fourth error, whilst the
three former (one his, and Cretanco's two) pointed at it so apparently. His,
when building on his brothers over-good nature, he came and put himself like
a sheep into his hands. Cretaneo's first, when depriving him of his liberty,
he bereaved him not also of his life; and the other, that he restored him to
the one without taking away the other: yet that having then erred both of them
without a precedent example, they were in some sort excuse-worthy; but that now
a fourth error would be altogether inexcusable, and yet more especially this
of his, for offending so grossly against the rule of the former three. Offend
he should against the first, in relying again on that good nature, which he
had already found passionate in a case of a less offense; and also expose
himself against the second and third with danger of life, having at both their
costs learnt, That fierce beasts will not endure the goade's pricking, but must
be either pierced quite through, or not touched at all. Nay though it so were
not, yet even common sense taught him, that a person injured never pardons,
unless he be either extraordinarily good, or irrevocably foolish. Now he but
too well knew, that Cretaneo was no fool though they indeed made of him such;
nor yet that good natured man they took him for, having been so constantly
wedded to his anger for seven years space. And 'though yet he were as
good-natured as man can be yet were it bad relying on it, since a man is
changed in an instant, especially where the Clock of good nature has for
counterpoyses passions and injuries. Besides, that he should not lose the
quality of good, Revenge in Kings writing it self in great Characters JUSTICE.
With such reasons, he not only satisfied, but terrified Riverargo, but more
especially by making him comprehend himself to be a complice in the fault, for
having (of his own proper authority) entitled himself Governor, persuading
him therefore to govern thenceforwards with the title no more of Governors,
but of Kings. Agreed on it, they consecrated in Mount Ida Priest to Jove,
Lascaro only son to Cretaneo, and causing him to renounce his pretenses both
to the Crown and all worldly things else, they necessitated him to fly; For,
being (for his pusillanimity) hated of his fathers friends, he not only wanted
the things necessary for his lives sustenance, but had also his fears
increased in such a manner, that suspecting to be one day ill entreated, he
went his way whither no news was ever sithence heard of him.

Mean while the two Kings commanded equally, and caused money to be coined
under their stampes, images, and names, writing themselves Kings over all; till
such time as Restargo desirous to reign alone, told the other, That the people
could not brook two Kings, a novelty (to speak the truth) monstrous and
examplelesse: That he therefore had designed to take for his part the Dukedomes
of Cidone and Ritinna united, and leave to his brother solely both the Kingdom
and Royal Title, so to prevent with the disgust the insurrection of the
people. But Riverargo (a lover of ease) thinking the both States equalled both
the title and kingdom, advantaged with the being freed from the weight of
government, answered him; that it was no reason, that he being the youngest
should remain solely King, the eldest excluded: In which respect, since an
unity was so necessary, he was content to accept of the two States, and cede
him the kingdom. Restargo then being proclaimed King, there was no more
tidings heard of Cretaneo, followed a little after by the new King, who left
both his life and kingdom: Him succeeded Caricreto his only son, but being
cockred up by his Mother in passing bad customs, odious to the Subjects,
together with the domination of the Carians to them insupportable, they
banished him, and chose for their King Riverargo, taking the occasion of his
then absence, as being conducted by his Mother to Caria, to be thereof crowned
King, his Grandfather by then being dead: And now he pretends as his patrimony
the kingdom of Riverargo, and with the favor of his Fathers servants moves
war against him, publickely complaining to all of the wrong he did him, by
him not denied, in case Caricreto had been son to Cretaneo and not to
Restargo; alleging, that Restargo was no King buta Tyrant, for depriving
Cretaneo of the privilege first of Nature, in taking from him his wife; next
of the Law in usurping his Crown, and lastly of humanity in causing him to dye
in the miserable lothsomnesse of a close and nastie prison. And that he (for
his part) was freely elected King by the States of the Realm without any
sinister practice or corruption. And therefore, that if he were to lay down
the Crown, it should then be to restore it to Cretaneo's, but not to
Restargo's son. In these confusions stood then that goodly kingdom, battered
by the arms of the Carians, supported by many Barons, with an intention, when
they had deposed Riverargo to chase away afterward the Mother and Son, and
so to carry away from the public calamities private emoluments, making
themselves Masters of both the money and Royal authority in those Provinces,
wherein obedience was denied Riverargo, whereas Caricreto was but in a show
obeyed neither.

Polimero with his companions setting foot on ground, without knowing any
thing from these confusions, (leaving the Knight of Cyprus sick a-boord the
ship) took their way to a hill-wards, to see if they might thence descry any
habitation. Come thither that they were, they found on the other side of it an
ambush of fifty horse, who asking them (after the military wont) who lived? and
receiving no answer, suddenly assailed them. Lindadori that had with impatience
longed for tourneyes, jousts, and barriers, was (missing of these) beyond all
expression joyful to light so unexpectedly on a battle; so as without staying
for any other to give her example by leading the way, she furiously forced her
passage into the midst of that Troop, neither considering nor caring for the
advantages of the site, but necessitating the others to follow, either to free
her, or dye with her: But the valorous effects corresponded to the mayden's
undaunted heart.

These folks had scowr'd the field all that night, got good store of bootyn,
ruined houses, and burnt Villages; yet of all their spoils the noblest was
Ermestea daughter to the Baron of Manetusa, among the fair ones of Creete the
fairest, and among the noblest the flower of that Country. The Soldiers stood
now a watching her; for though she was exceedingly afflicted, yet had now the
extreme weariness of her body in so long and incommodious a journey given
truce to the affliction of her spirit, and procured her sleep, though
interrupted by her waking grief, and hardness of the bed, easy only in that
part that her tears had softened. And now at the sound of Lindadori's
thundering blows she awooke, started up, broke the truce with grief, and
confederated with hope, who placing himself as her guard in the bulwark of
her breast, boldly defended her (though with much ado) against the assaults of
her cruel enemy [Feare]; yet was she hurried again near the ghastly
precipice of despair, when she saw her self remounted on horseback by the
Soldiers, to convey her farther on, under the conduct of some fifteen of
them, but that suspension tormented her not long. For Lindadori imagining her
by her tears to be a prey of those people, ran thither alone forcing to
fight them, who in respect of their being so many, made an account to exempt
themselves from the necessity of sharing of the battle. Off cuts she at first
blow the hand of him that held her by the bridle, and him that at lifting her
into the saddle, was suddenly so taken with her, as he could not forgo his
hold of the skirt of her coat, she passed with a thrust through the heart, so
as one wound was cured by the other. A certain experiment, that the weapon's
stabbes cure those of love. Eromena seeing her daughter inconsiderate in all
dangers, as resolutely followed her, and slaying some of them, both she and
her daughter were constrained to retire to the hillock, closely pursued by
above twenty of the Enemies; the whole company (leaving the prisoners and
baggadge) now facing toward the assailers, thinking they did no small act, if
they but defended themselves united together.

Polimero seeing his wife and daughter in such a plight, was raging-mad that he
could not come to releeve them for the wall of so many men that stood in his
way, whilst Don Elcimos had the fortune to open it of his side (where was less
throng) with the death of one of them, whence he ran and laid at their backs,
himself being no otherwise stricken at by such as pursued him at the heels.
Polimero by this time less charged, and by the good old Count of Bona
valiantly assisted, made such havoc of the rest, as that he gained the
passage; and running to rescue his company, made a shift between him and the
Count to ease them of four, by them slain ere they were aware of their
coming; yet too much would they have had to do though, if fortune had not by
another means favored them; for the soldiers being hardy, well armed, and
resolved either to save their prey or dye, never thought of running away, their
horses being all laden with pillage; and although they had lost many of their
company, yet had they so many left as they hoped to get the best of their
Adversaries, by worrying if not vanquishing them. And so had it by all
probability befallen them, if the fair Ermestea (gotten loose and flying back
the way whence she was led) had not met a Knight, who hearing she was taken
away, was coming with a good troop of horse to rescue her. Understanding how
she was fled away, and that too, rather to go find out some to aid the five
Knights, than to save her self, she hastily returned to show him the place,
whence they might hear the cries and blows ere they descried the Combatants;
this assault quite ruined the soldiers first hopes, now that they were
assailed by two parties; the rescuing Knight having the edge of his valor
sharpened with revenge and anger against those men, insomuch, as he was loath to
receive into his mercy such of them as yielded themselves unto him, judging
that such deserved no fair quarter, which warred against women, beauty, and
their merits.

Ermestea alighting off her Steed, ran to the Knights, whom she could not
find sufficient conceits to express her beholdingness unto, a thing ordinary
for a grateful mind to suffocate it self in words, by endeavoring to make
them serve for erres of the effects it thinks it self tied to perform. But
to Lindadori above all the rest strove she to acknowledge a greater obligation,
to whose lot befell the being the more efficacious (if not the prime) cause of
her deliverance: Wounded they were all five, so as Carasio's hands had
wherewithal to employ them, but with such felicity, that as no one of them had
any dangerous wound, so was there as few of them that any way bemoaned their
pain. But Lindadori more shrewdly wounded than the rest, and being in respect
of both her age and sex more tender and delicate, wrought amazement in all that
considered, how she, being in all things else over-sensitive and impatient,
was yet in her sufferings even insensible, and far from bemoaning her self
or troubling any body. Very importunate was Ermestea to have them home with
her: But Polimero (considering that the courtesies of such personages had no
limits of time, and how much it stood him upon to hold on his way, his affairs
admitting of no delay) fairly excused himself, yet with assuring her, that to
do her service he would have omitted all businesses of his own. But sithence
this was but merely in consideration of themselves, they were necessitated
(without loss of time) to pass further. But the owner of the ship not
yielding to any persuasions of passing them any farther, his Vessel being
fraighted for Cyprus, they were forced to accept of the invitation, for being
constrained to furnish themselves of a new Vessel. Satisfying then the
Mariners, and taking their leave of the sick Knight, (by whom the Count failed
not to excuse himself by letter to Gradamoro and Deadora) they mounted on
horseback, Ermestea causing the booty to be brought back to be restored to its
owners. And then after having released the prisoners, setting on a round pace
homewards, whom might she meet a little onwards but the Baron her Father, that
with two hundred horse came running after the track of those that had stolen
her away, whose joys were now by so much the greater, by how much they were
less expected.

The wounded Knights were accommodated at their ease with Chambers near one
another, as they had desired; and served with such respective diligence, as if
they had been known for what they were. Polimero not neglecting to solicit
for a new passage, wherein for doubt of displeasing him Ermestea failed him
not. News came (the mean while) that the nuptials were celebrated in Cyprus
with great solemnity, the flawes in friendship occasioned by new injuries being
sodred up by the old affronts, and both reduced to a confirmed friendship by a
new realliance. And for domestic affairs; That King Riverargo by a great
defeat given the Carians, had totally chased them from Creete; that Caricreto
was thence fled, his men slain, the field sacked, four Barons beheaded, the
Rebels hung up on trees in such places as they chanced to be taken in; All
news, that to the house of Ermestea brought incredible consolation, it having
ever taken part with the royal side, whereof who-so knows not how to be,
knows how to perish. Cromeno (the Knight that had releev'd them) was he that
brought them these news, having (when he had conducted them to the house)
taken leave of them to go and make one in the battle which he knew was to be
presented the Enemies. The Count of Bona had some while before related to the
Princes the story of Corianna, and praid them to touch at Ericusa, and
thereupon had that suite of his without any great difficulty granted him; for
which end there was provided them a Vessel for that part.

Ermestea in the mean time had observed and perceived the counterfeited sex of
the two Princesses, whereupon she en quired thereof further of Lindadori, who
could not conceal from her her condition, obtaining in recompense thereof her
promise to come to Sardinia to see her, of whose company she was already so
enamoured, as she could never be from her: Which observed by her lover Cromeno,
occasioned him to assay the sharp stings of poisoned jealousy. Returned he
was from the Camp, and for enjoying Ermestea's company frequented the house,
entertaining the unknown Princes with respective observance for finding in
them conditions surpassing any contrary affect, jealousy not depriving him of
his inclination to their merits. But the two young Ladies taking notice of his
passionate sufferings made it their pastime. And although Ermestea, that truly
loved him, had indeed compassion of him; yet could she not (for all that)
forbear from heart-vexing him for the nonce, with the favors which boldly
without showing him any respect, she did every day more than other to
Lindadori. A pass that put him (poor Gentleman) to ruminate on strange
thoughts; since although himself was now favored as he was wont to be, yet
saw he a rival before his face as good as courted, and that in such a manner
too, that she seemed to hold it lawful for her so to do. Sometime it would
come to his mind to speak to her of it, but then seeing her with a pleasing
and smiling countenance slip away from him, he knew not what to judge of it,
especially when she would (which was yet worse) as she thus fled from him,
run directly to Lindadort, who discovering the business to her Mother, made
her a third participant of their pastime. Yet this sport lasted but a few
days, for the ship being furnished of its necessaries and the horses embarked,
they took their leave. Ermestea seeming to be dissolved into tears for so
hard a separation, and confirming her promise of going to see them as soon as
she were married, which she was shortly to be with her so
pleasingly-made-jealous Cromeno.

The Baron and all the rest were not a little offended at her for not better
concealing her affection to Lindadori; but understanding afterward who she
and the others were, he was as much then displeased on the other side, that
she revealed them not to him or her Mother: Only Cromeno was joyed at the
heart, to hear they were such, being never a whit ashamed of suffering
himself to be so deluded by two Girls; the remaining whereof being by her
Mother chidden for it, thus excused her self: You blame me (Madame) for what
you should (under favor) rather commend me for; you know how we are by men
held to be blabs, which induced me by silence to show, that we can (if need be)
lock up secrets in the cabinets of our breasts better than they can.

Favored with a gentle gale, prosperously sails on the valorous company
without lighting (for a good space of time) on any adventure, for giving me
time and leisure to get me elsewhere.

Olmiro Lucano's servant (that was sent to Parthenope by the Princess Corianna
in pilgrims weed) came thither in a few days, without lighting on any
remarkable encounter by the way; and having got him a lodging in a Lane
behind Lucano's house, he took on him to be a passenger bound for Sicily, to
accomplish a vow he had made to the Goddess Ceres: His Host told him, that to
go thither was at that present very dangerous; it being not as yet known how
that King was inclined; who although he had indeed no cause to think
himself injured, was nevertheless much suspected for his extravagant whimsees
and excessive pride. Olmiro asking the reason why, was by the other told of the
loss of the Princess gone away no man knew how or whither; only it was
probably conjectured, that one of the two Dukes that were found slain in the
Castle had conveyed her away. But because it could not be learnt out which of
them it was, the King who went to wrack his spite on their corpse, was with
much ado persuaded to grant them to their friends, such a revenge being
unjustly taken on the innocent of them, and prejudicial to his honor and
Royal dignity; since it could not but suggest to the world disgustfull matter
of displeasing discourses: That being (upon this) retired to his royal Poggio
(whither he admitted no man) he was sundry times like to dye for grief: That
the Queen too sickned so dangerously, as her life was much doubted of: That
all the Nobility and prime Gentry were retired home to their own mansions and
estates, except the Duchess of Lucania; who having sent home to her
territories her sons corpse, would not follow it thither, out of a conceit
that she had of having him present with her; never sithence stirring out of
her Chamber, but keeping its windows close shut, so as it is doubted, that in
a few days she is like to follow him, by breaking her heart with grief: That
Ambassadors and foreign agents were feign to have recourse to the Lords of
the Council, who dispatched such affairs as they could: That the City (thus
deprived of the Court and Nobility, lived in great misery, the houses being
tennantlesse, the wares unvented, and no money stirring; a loss that
Parthenope is like for a long time to feel the smart of: And as for Sicily,
that its Prince coming to fetch his Bridegroom, had (even at his launching
out) met the Galley that was speeded him with that dolorous news, whereat he
burst out into terms that exceeded the bounds of all gravity, modesty, and
civility: His Father worse yet than he, a doting, turbulent, wavering, and
spiteful old man, aggravating the conceived affront done them.

Much was Olmiro troubled in mind at these news, not so much because it
grieved him to hear them, as for that humane hopes, though founded on dreams,
do yet so dilate themselves in despairing consolations, as if they chance to be
crossed or frustrated by confirmed certainties of the contrary, then the grief
for them increases an hundred fold. But whilst he stood muzing what to do,
he might from out the window see passing by his old Camerade Erinnio, his
sometimes fellow-waiter in Lucano's Chamber; upon this he hems and spits to make
him cast up his eye: The other not knowing him with a close-shaven beard in
such an habit, (seeing him make signs to him to come up and make no words of
him) beheld him more observantly, till by a peculiar gesture of Olmiro he came
to know him. Glad then that it was he, he likewise made signs that he was
coming up to him: Now some of Lucano's meaner servants were sometimes wont to
go drink in that house, so as it was an easy matter for Erinnio to find an
excuse to go thither to ask for a horse-keeper: But being answered by the
Host, that none of their household had been there since their Lords death, he
affirmed that he had seen him at the window: The Host assured him that he
was mistaken, praying him withal (in case he believed him not) to go himself
up and see, telling him, that all the rooms above-staires were open, without
any other living soul in them save a poor pilgrim. Erinnio gotten up the
stairs, in great haste told him at a breath, that he could not speak with him
there, but wished him to come at two a clock at night to the secret door that
lead to their Masters Lodgings, where he should find him ready to let him in.
And then returning down, he told the Host that he was indeed in the right;
howbeit that the pilgrim from a far off resembled much the horse-keeper who
wore his beard close shaven as this man had his.

Olmiro missed not the hour appointed; the first thing he asked Erinnio was,
How he got to stay in the house after the death of their Lord? My Lord
(answered him Erinnio) is (God be thanked) yet alive, 'though he can lead but
a dying life, till such time as he recover the Princess, and accommodate their
affairs. Olmiro, rapt with unexpected joy, with a countenance of one
transported beyond himself, gladsomely replies: Is it possible (my dear
Erinnio) that my Lord is yet alive; oh let me bless mine eyes with the dear
sight of him; bring me, oh bring me quickly unto him! and I Will bring him news
of the Princess; for she it was that sent me hither. Erinnio embracing him
anew, lead him the way in, having already made the Duke acquainted with his
coming. Ascended that they had the stairs, they found him with a vissage pale
and wanne, laid all along on a low velvet couch. Olmiro knew not whether he
were awake or no; or if he were, yet did Lucano, Erinnio, the Surgeon (that
stood apart) and the very house it self seem in his extasied eyes to be
visions and ghosts; howsoever, his joy was such, as he falling flat to the
ground lay melting himself for mere over-joy into brinish tears, deprived of
the power of stirring from thence.

Lucano more yet transported than he, had not freed his speech for a long time
from the prison of a more than extazied passion, if his impatient desire of
knowing how the Princess did, had not burst open the gates of his silence.
Olmiro acquainted him with all that had befallen her, the place she dwelt in,
the grief that tyrannized over her, the daily selfe-wasting life she lead,
her dreams of him, and imaginations that the wind was his spirit come to see
her; of his beloved name's being called upon, invoked, and cried out unto, both
in light and darkness, with the orders given him to go learn what had
happened since her departure: That, in case Lucano were (according to the
relation of signs) alive, he might then come to find her out; and if dead,
that she might beg of death the favor of being joined with him. In sum,
Olmiro forgot no one particular to make even cruelty it self become
compassionate, and the direct hatred well-affecting. But all was (God wot) but
superfluous for Lucano, to whom the sufferings of Corianna were aggravations of
hearts grief; he could not endure to hear the end of her story, so rent was
his affectionate heart with what he had already heard of it, though by fits
eased by the hope he conceived of corresponding her obligements with
equivalent gratitude.

The relation being ended, Olmiro (said he) I will not thank thee for thy
fidelity, because honest men (as thou art) pretend not such a foundation for
their merits; nor yet for the toil thou have endured, since I persuade my
self, that the love thou have ever borne me, not only takes away the
irksomeness of it, but withal makes it pleasing and delightsome unto thee. I
only thank thee for having endeavored to keep me (whom thou thought to be
dead) alive in the life of her, for whom alone I desire to live or dye: I
thank thee for the good news thou brought me; and for having taken me out
of the jaws of a more-than cruel death, which was the not knowing where she
was. But first of all I render hearty thanks unto the immortal powers, that
have raised me up so benignely from so low a fall. But tell me Olmiro, shall
we go now presently? And with that starting off his bed, he hastily walks
the round of the Chamber, love causing him to make that way in an instant,
which lay subject to the measure of time. But Olmiro (that saw him so
heart-sick of an heart-burning fever of affection, that he raved with desire)
thus answered him. Our parting shall be when it shall please you, my Lord. We
cannot solicit it so much, as for the Princess sake we should; an hour to
her is an eternity. Time (as your self have found by proof) is in
consolations and pleasures most swift, in afflictions and hopes slow if not
immovable: Yet should I (for all that) be sorry to see harm done by seeking
to do good, which cannot but happen, in case you being not (I doubt me) as yet
well recovered, should hazard your life, in too soon undergoing this voyage;
the same Erinnio also told him: But he still standing constant to his
determination of parting suddenly, was at length dissuaded by the consideration
of the want of a fit habit to go disguised in, and the necessity of referring
the resolution thereof to the will of his Mother, for not causing her to fall
from one grief into another. Here seeing how impatiently-desirous Olmiro was
to know how he was brought to life again: I will recount unto thee my self
(said he) the things succeeded since Carildo and thou parted'st, leaving me (to
your thinking) dead.

The clashing noise of the swords awoke the Captain of the Castle, who
thereupon came down; and finding us both slain, could not imagine how we
came by our deaths, much less how we entered into the Castle; so as he being
thereat no less amazed than afrighted, grew to be yet more afraid, when he
found the gate to the sea-ward wide open, which because none save the Princess
had any key of, he went instantly to her lodgings, where causing her Ladies to
arise to go and awake her, there was no Princess to be found. Thou may
easily guess what a case he was in, who was oft-times minded to cast himself
into the sea, and had, but for the inward comfort of his assured innocence,
undoubtedly drowned himself. Behoove him it did to acquaint the King with it
instantly, business of such importance enduring no delays: But yet to abandon
the Castle in such a time might bring him to merit through justice that
punishment, which he feared would be inflicted on him merely out of a furious
anger; and again, to trust another in such an affair was dangerous, one word
misconceived being able to occasion his utter ruin, much more if spoken to his
disadvantage.

There was the chief Chamberlain (as thou know) to the Princess the Count
of Cana a noble and honored Cavalier, he, because there was no other fit for
such an employment, resolved to be the messenger of these dismal tidings. And
understanding by that days watch, that neither of us was come in, he imagined
that we got in (and so indeed we did) by night under the privileged names of
the Princesse's servants. On he went, and turned the Palace topsie-turvy,
saying he must needs speak with the King instantly: Brought in, he related him
the case. The King rising up in a fury sent to call the Admiral, whom he gave
sudden order to search every creek of the sea (knitting with that his
threatening brows, and framing his mouth in a wrying posture in saying) to find
out his Daughter. We the mean while lay distended on the cold surface of our
Mother Earth, little regarding ought that was a doing against us, the Constable
and his being dead indeed, and I in such a plight, as no man imagined that I
had any life in me. The King was once minded to have us both hanged up by the
feet by the beams of the Drawbridge; but his consideration laying before the
eyes of his judgment, that one of us two was innocent, though he could not
come to know which of us both it was, wrought him to conceive how unfitting it
was for imagination to usurp the place of certainty, in a case so doubtful,
with persons of so eminent a quality, so as he came at last though with much
ado to be entreated to give way that our corpse should be restored to our
friends, forbidding us though funeral Rites, and all ceremonial pomp: All
which succeeded to my great advantage, since there was no man in all the Court
that thought me not guilty, now that the success of the case opened the
general eye to take notice of the Princesse's favors, which before were
sufficiently observed, but yet of all men taken and construed as ceremonious
respects due to my birth, the greatness of my Mother, and parity of our years.

My Mother being made acquainted with the case, was by some one or other
counseled to send speedily for my body, which having all the night long lain
exposed to the benumming coldness of the piercing air, without (for ought I
believe) one drop of blood left in it, was thereupon presently brought home in
a close Horse-litter: But whilst Erinnio inconsolably stood weeping over me,
doing me (as he thought) the last services I should ever stand in need of;
having stripped me to wash off the blood, and embalme me, he found that part of
my body that lay next my heart warm and panting: which he discreetly
concealing to himself, found means to rid him of all the company-standers
by, save only Tideno and the Surgeon thou there see; who upon his making
it known, that I had yet life in me, throwing hastily aside his instruments,
prepared for opening and imbowelling me, fell to dressing me with applications
so cordial, that I in a short time recovered my spirits, but yet so weak and
benumbed, by reason of the great quantity of blood I had lost, and malignity of
the raw nocturnall air that had poisoned the wound, that I remained two days
speechless.

Having thus dressed me, they knew not how to make my Mother acquainted with it,
without incurring the danger of discovering all with their own sudden
gladsomnesse; till Erinnio takes on him the charge of managing the business;
who leaving with me the other two, went to the place, where she (woeful
woman) with her hair all disheveled, sat weeping among a great company of
Ladies, that stood busied in comforting her the best they could: He then
whispering the secret in the ear of her woman Antea, soon devised a way to
get them all out. Left thus alone, Erinnio acquainted her, how they had found
and left me in so hopeful a plight, as the Surgeon doubted not of my life,
upon the assurance he had of the wounds not being mortal: Yet with putting
her in mind, that if then she showed not her prudence in discreetly-depressing
her joy, the second inconvenience would much exceed the first.

At these unexpected news my poor Mother was so over-joyed, as she fell in a
swound; and that was indeed even it that Erinnio desired; who thereupon ran
out of the Chamber, calling no less hastily than lowdly for water, and crying
out that the Duchess was stone dead. The Ladies returned all in again; and
having laid her abed unlaced her, whilst others were busied in spirting and
sprinkling water in her face, to bring her again to her speech which she had
lost, for an occasion quite contrary to what was by outward likelihood by the
spectators conjectured. Come then again to her self, she said.

I kindly thank you (my Ladies all) for the charitable offices you do me, I
pray the Gods reward you for me, sithence to me being in their hands, and
under their afflicting rod, there rests no other spirit, than to crave them
mercy, and to yield them thanks for having given me a disposition to conform
and subject my will to theirs. I beseech you to assist my prayers with yours,
that they thrust me not out of their sight; and that we may the better do it,
be pleased (I pray you) to retire you all, to the end that the meditation of my
faults, and my sorrow for having offended them may so increase in me, as may
either rid me of the extreme hearts-griefe which I am overcharged with at this
present, or make me apt and able to support it rather according to the law of
Grace, than to that of Nature. These pitty-moving words drew fresh tears from
the eyes of all there present, insomuch as many of them would not avoyde the
room: Till some of the discreetest (perceiving that the instance was not
ceremonious, and that great griefs have their exhalations from themselves
rather than from any other ground, and are withal soonest stopped by being
suffocated) persuaded the rest to avoyde the room, leaving with her only her
domestic servants, from whom also she quickly found means to free her self,
to come and see me. By this time they had convaid me into that Chamber there
that is next hers; and in this room wherein lay my (to their then thinking)
dead corpse, Erinnio had placed my Coffin full of heavy things with another
lesser one for my bowels, so as she needed not to go further than from her
Chamber to mine: Upon this she told them, that she desired to be left all
alone, and then bid Antca lock the door, and so leaving her in trust to keep
it, with Erinnio's help rose up on her feet trembling for fear of being
observed or discovered: As Soon as she saw me alive, she had much ado to
keep herself from swounding: Feign would she have embraced me, but that my
wound (that passed from my throat quite through the neck-joynt into the head,
not touching (by good fortune) the Weason-pipe) was so sore, as that I could
not endure to be touched; yet could not the extremity of my agony so stupifie
my memory, as not both to know her, and with beteared eyes to express the
sorrow that I conceived for the affliction and grief that I had drawn on her,
in grateful expression whereof I with a reverent affection touched her hand,
and used (because I could not speak) all the outward expressions I could
possibly imagine to comfort her: Here understanding by the Surgeon anew
that he warranted my life, she considered with her self, how she might best
keep the business concealed. The maine heads whereto her resolutions were
reduced to, were; That leaving her bedchamber for being too near to that
where my corpse had been, she should remove into the other on the far side
of it (she her self or Antea keeping the key of it) to the end that her
Gentlewomen might neither hear me, nor the trampling of those that came to
serve me: That there should be allowed Erinnio and Siledo a good table, under
pretext of observing a Fast in the Chamber where they had laid me for dead,
and the leaving of their table to be reserved for the poor, who were to be
served with their own hands through the gate you came in at, to the end those
of the house might not suspect, that there were any more than two mouths to
consume it: That the Surgeon should (as he might with a good color do)
give out, that he was, for some dangerous cure, gone afar off, for not giving
any ground of suspicion to his family or others, by absenting himself from
home, having before hand carefully provided all things necessary that could in
any occasion happen to be requisite for me: That Antea should serve me for
Cook, till I were able to chew, under color of doing it for my Mother: And
that my Mother should not stir abroad, to the end the presence of her person
in those Lodgings might keep off others from coming thither. In sum,
matters were so well disposed of, that there is not to this day any one that
believes I am not dead. The Coffin sent to Lucania was placed in my Ancestors
vault, my Mother leading ever sithence so retired a life, as the world believes
it to be, from a good one that it is, raised to the pitch of a Saint-like and
holy one; the fame whereof was in such sort divulged abroad by her women, and
so increased by passing from one mouth to another, as it ministered subject to
many a strange story.

I afterward pretty well cured as thou see me, was yet so troubled in mind,
for not knowing what was become of the Princess, that I was like both to undo
my self, and spoil all: For, walking one evening in my chamber all alone,
whilst Erinnio was with my Mother in her chamber, I became to be transported
with an affect so strange, that I fell a-talking to my self, overheard by two
Gentlewomen, by ill fortune, and through Antea's fault for leaving the door of
that chamber open. Then burst I out a complaining, that fortune after so many
felicities, had made me the most unfortunate Gentleman breathing, seeing, she
not content with causing me to be slain, had for tormenting me with a double
death deprived me of the knowledge of my Corianna's state and being. More I
would have said, but that upon sudden consideration of my indiscretion I held
my peace, and the words believed to be uttered by a dead man occasioned the
spreading abroad a rumor, that my spirit was heard stirring all over the house,
but especially in the room where my Coarse had bin laid; and that Erinnio had
seen it, but was afraid to confess it, for doubt that some harm would betide
him for it: And indeed upon the Gentlewomen's questioning him about it, he
was forced (for concealing the truth) to induce them to believe the false
rumor by ambiguities, and a kind of affirming-silence, charging them to make
no words of it' though it were true, lest the King should be taken with a
humor of interring my body deeper, and for not joining of greater fears to
the Dutchesse's already more than too-too grievous afflictions.

Whilst Lucano stood thus relating his own disasterous adventures, they heard
the noise of a key unlocking a door, and then beheld come in thereat the
Duchess, to see her son ere her going to bed; who (good Lady) though that
Olmiro's habit and beard had much disfigured him, yet failed not (for all that)
to know him suddenly. And having been formerly told that he was gone along
with the Princess, she joy'd not a little to see him, out of the hope she
conceived of hearing some news from her, and so to see (by some means or
other) end with some more happy conclusion Lucano's till then over-tragicall
disadventures. Olmiro having kissed her hands, told her of the Princess, all
that he had formerly related to Lucano, beseeching her to give him leave to go
find her out as soon as his weakness permitted him; with showing her, how
that (over and besides the obligation interceding for her) mere pity should
win her assent thereto.

Olmiro (said she) Corianna is both my Princess and Mistress, which
subjection I will never forget for all the privileges that she has or may
give Lucano. Howbeit I ingeniously confess to thee, that I know not how the
harm she has done me can any way oblige me unto her, whereof if she has
endured much too, yet is not the fault mine, sithence the Gods know, that I was
never so ambitious as to have a Kings daughter to my daughter-in-law at so
dear a prise. But what is once done and past cannot be undone again. And I am
(for what depends on me) most heartily willing that Lucano make known unto
her, that as he has spent one, so he is most ready to spend a thousand lives
in her service. Nor can he (indeed) ever declare himself to her to be such
and so deserving, that the love showed by her, and the virtue that should be
in him, require not that he should strive to express himself in
an-yet-more-ample measure. I mean not then to hinder him, but rather to
command him to go, and that too as soon as may be: Nevertheless to stay yet
a week (or such a matter) cannot but be his best course; for being by that
time thoroughly well, he will be able to perform his voyage without falling
into any relapses or new indispositions, which would prove to him dangerous,
and to Corianna and me a subject of augmenting and prolonging our griefs.
Concluded it was, that go he should as soon as he were fully recovered. The
Duchess thinking every hour an year till she saw him out of the Realm,
conceiting it impossible, that his long sojourne discovered him not; being
withal very desirous of Corianna's return, for the ending of her so heavy
sufferings. Little ambitious (God wot) in the rest, (when she had considerately
examined all things that made for her disadvantage) for by reason of the
Realme's having a Prince (though a babe) Lucano could not aspire to the Crown:
Also that the Princess should be there but slenderly esteemed; it being not
likely that she should ever get a good look of her Father; and her not
elected but forced affinity likely to prove odious and displeasing to both King
and kingdom. To these were added womanish emulations, for respect whereof she
would rather have had a daughterin-law of a midling condition that were
obedient unto her, than a royal Princess, whom it behooved her to be
observant of. Full little slept the Duke that night, thinking himself to be
already gone, nay arrived in Ericusa, in the cave, and between the arms of
his more beloved than deerebought Corianna: so as not yet thoroughly well and
abandoned of sleep, the humors stirred up with unexpected joy, brought on him
a new fever, which lasted him many days; insomuch as it was unpossible for
him to part till a month after. But then clothed in a course habit, and
accompanied with no other than Erinnio and Olmiro, taking the way of Taranto,
he embarked himself for Feacia, and thence to Ericusa. But here
contentcrossing Fortune thinking she had not yet afflicted him enough, would
needs (to make it perhaps known that she made no reckoning of Princes) take
her pastime on him by ways unlawful, with an intention happily (according to
her custom) cruel, to kill him with grief, since she could not kill him
with the sword.

Corianna was by this time up-risen from childe-bed, and Carildo being
(according to his wonted manner) sent to see if he could see arrive any ship,
and in her Olmiro, beheld (under the house of Feredo, inhabited then by
Almadero as has been told you) the then owner of the house himself, who upon
a hunting-nag was then riding to visit the Princess of Feacia. Now he was in
all things so like Lucano, that Carildo believed it was he, yet could not
imagine how that could possibly be, being he had left him (to his thinking)
dead: Besides, that being now (to his seeming) living, he had not in his
retinew any one of his wonted servants, to him very well known. But that which
chiefly induced him to believe it, was his language and accent, when he heard
him speak to his servants in the pure language of Parthenope. Accoasting
therefore one of them he praid him to tell him, who that Knight was? and
understanding that he was the Knight of the tears; he was not halfe-satisfied
with that new by-surname of his, though he were thereby the more confirmed in
his opinion, by conceiving that he had taken on him that name for the loss of
Corianna; but praying the same man again to inform him of his proper name and
country, he was answered, that he could therein be satisfied by no man save
only his Squire, (who was now gone before to see if the Princess of Feacia
were at home) sithence all of them had been the Druid's servants, and were now
his, without knowing of him any more than that he was settled there, upon some
not-openly-knowne discontent or crosse-fortune befallen him in his own
country, but that he (for certain) came from parthenope, where of his
language accused him to be a native: yet howsoever it were, he could be no
less than a great Prince by his manners, carriage, and expense.

Carildo having thanked this servant of his, remained astonished, when he
observed how the Knight himself, upon his saluting him, had eyed him as a man
he had never seen before, thinking it impossible, that Lucano could be so
forgetful, as not to have retained in his memory some guess of having seen
or known him before: He therefore would willingly have followed him, but that
he thought it his better course to go see if he could epsy in the house any
thing that might rid him of his doubt; but yet could not discover there any
more: Led he was through every room, and showed all his Arms and Armor, but
yet could not gather any thing from them neither; seen that he had that noble
Steed, which by his marks and making, he well knew to be of Lucano's breed,
(the prime race in all that kingdom) he remained so confused in mind, as he
knew not what to think on it. Returned to the cave with his wonted answers, he
renewed to the unfortunate Princesse's wonted afflictions, which made her
accuse Olmiro of negligence, and the Fates of cruelty for hindering his
return. Carildo would not acquaint her any whit of his suspicions, but taking
an excuse to return about some business he had to do abroad, he went out
the morning following, with an intent to speak himself unto the supposed
Lucano, whom upon his entrance into the wood, he might see close by the
Princess of Feacia in amorous practizes.

Lucano was the night before arrived, and by Olmiro conducted toward the cave
through the wood, when unseene they saw the same that Carildo did; there was
not any one of them that took her not for Corianna, and by peering one in
another face, they expressed their amazement at her habit misbeseeming an
afflicted person; at her countenance that argued content, but most of all at
her gadding so alone to find out some one to accompany her; for, passing-by
without seeing them, she jetted on with a pace so indecent, as pierced Lucano
to the heart, a wound (for all that) supportable, till such time, as seeing
Almadero meet, kiss, and close with her in amorous embraces: His doubt ceded
to certain realty to the eye and sense, which (as issuing out of some violent
machine) struck through his heart with the sharpest grief that ever cold
jealousy tempered with its envenomed juyces in the infernal forge, assisted
by the Furies and spitefullest spirits of the worst of hells. Kill him outright
it did not, the force of his animal spirits supplying the place of his abated
courage by conspiring against it, increasing for the increasing of his torment,
and to make him miserable above all those that ever grieved either for
perversity of stars or malignity of Destiny; and withal to the end nothing
might be wanting him toward the making full of his heart-racking tortures,
there appeared for next object to his sight Carildo, that (whilome) honest,
faithful, and obliging Carildo, become now traiterous, disloyal, a pander of
dishonesty, and instrument of his Mistresse's shame, whom he imagined to be so
retired aside of purpose to wait for to reconduct her from the polluted grove
to the wicked cave, th'abominable receptacle of infamy.

The with-love-re-inveigled Almadero had ever sithence Feredo's departure,
employed all his study to gain the love of the Princess of Feacia, which
succeeded him so well, that the little love she bare to her old husband so
accelerated her resolution, that she from a love became to be a lover,
insomuch as upon his many times forbearing out of the respect due to the
husband, she (whom another sort of intelligence ruled over, not caring for any
such observances) would oftentimes come to find him out just as she had done
that day; because, that though he had been the day before a-seeing of her, yet
had she not (for all that) the opportunity of being with him as she desired.
Taking now therefore an excuse to go to her wonted devotions in the wood, she
left to wait for her return at the entrance there of her servants and horses,
for having no spy over her actions; the same had she done whilst Feredo was
there; for having been enamoured of him, without being (for all that) able
with all her devices ever to win him to pitch nearer the lure of her desires
than in the far distant grove of rigid lovers, and that but through the
suggestion of an imaginary birth of her conceit neither. And now because she
had the day before made a match with Almadero to come thither at that hour,
they therefore (in respect of his being there before to wait her coming) met
jumpe together, retiring themselves (after their first
reciprocally-halfecloying each other with burning kisses) into the thickest of
the wood, in a place there made commodious for their loves.

Carildo upon the appearing of the true Lucano knew Olmiro and Erinnio, but not
him, so disfigured by his habit and long sickness, which in case they had not
the force to alter him, yet had his new-come grief power enough both to
transform and deforme him. He therefore now doubted no more of Almadero's
being Lucano; seeing these three infallible witnesses, instruments (to his
thinking) of the most detestable and basest treachery that ever was heard of;
imagining that upon their landing in Ericusa, he fell to be enamoured of that
woman, and that forgetting his lawful love, he was now given over to unlawful
adulterous lust, without caring any more for her, to whose affection he was so
highly obliged: But that which the more argued the baseness of his foul
fault, was the impudency wherewith he carried it, in taking on him that he
knew him not, for thinking to keep by such base shifts his
villanously-disloyall fact undiscovered: Whereupon resolved to unmaske his
knavery, (though he died for it) he bent his pace toward the three, to see
what they would say to him. But by then Lucano unable longer to resist the
violent agony of his grief, seized upon by an extreamely-shivering cold,
caused himself to be conveyed out of the wood, so as the trees took him and
his out of Carildo's sight, who finding them gone from the place he had seen
them, wandered all over the wood to seek them out, imagining then that upon
their espying him, they were slipped away for fear of being discovered by him,
which made him so mad with anger, as he would willingly have slain Olmiro,
Erinnio that third man, and himself too: Till finding that he could not wreck
his spite that way, he thought it his next best course to expect for the
coming forth of the supposed Lucano, and to affront him in the presence of his
new Mistress: Yet considering his Lady and Mistress her being and dwelling in
her country a friendlesse and acquaintantlesse stranger, subject to wrong,
without any defender, he resolved to return home, acquaint her with the fact,
persuade her to hate him perpetually, and to get her thence to some other place
less griefesome and less odious.

Accordingly then Carildo returns home all-enraged, and appears before the
Princess a quite-altered man from what he was wont to be: He now observes
neither measure nor reason in his actions; he speaks never a word, nor makes
any answer to any question asked him; he lets fall out of his hand whatsoever
he handles, stumbles and trips wheresoever he puts his foot: His eyes are
heavy and sunk in's head, his brows lowering, his countenance grim, sour, and
pale. The Princess takes notice of him, and imagining this change could not
spring but from some great and extraordinary occasion, thus bespake him.

What Is the matter (Carildo) that thou art so changed? have thou any ill news
for me, that thou can not find in thy heart to impart me? if thou have, I
pray thee tell it me boldly, for I am now become a soil fit for such seed.
Have thou (tell me) met with Olmiro; yea sure thou have, since thou make me
no answer; and with that fetching a deep sigh she spoke on: yea, yea, I well
knew that it was not ordinary to raise up the dead again otherwise than in a
dream: But yet (I pray thee) Olmiro, wherefore comes he not near me? Because
he is a wicked villain (answered her Carildo.) She stricken to the heart with
so harsh an epithete, by her thought blasphemy, held her peace, whilst he
thus proceeded.

Madame, your Highness must both know how the case stands, and resolve
courageously to accomplish and do what I dare advise you. Corianna, who was
even dead to understand his meaning, answered him. Tell me it then a Gods name,
if thou will not that thy faint-heartednesse in discovering it, should teach
me how unable I must be to support it. Madame (said he then) I beseech you to
pardon me if I proceed preposterously in this business. For, before I
acquaint you with what is done, I must first tell you what is to be done. Well,
do as thou will (so thou but tell me) answered she. Madame (replied he) be
not (I beseech you) then offended, if I make bold to tell you, that what you
ought to do, is, never to love Lucano more. Thou shallow-pated fool (answered
him she then) thou sure either dotest or art mad; what? must I love him no
more because he is dead? yet if thou be not stark mad, then show me the
reason for it, since thou well know how impossible a thing it is for me to
resolve of a thing so unjust; explain me therefore (if thou can) any
possibility or reason for me to do so: Mary so I soon will (said he) so you
but vouchsafe me the patience to hear it, which I briefly thus deliver. If
Lucano were alive and loved not you, but (seeing the present state of life you
lead, and either detesting or slighting it) were become enamoured of another
woman, and past his time with her, would you then think and grant that
impossibility merited the becoming possibility, and unreasonablenesse reason
to love him no more? This said, he stopped his speech, which upon her not
answering, he thus continued. I beseech your Highness to tell me, if rather
than to have Lucano dead, you would be contented to have him alive (mistake me
not) not yours, but a woman's whom he keeps and enjoyes before your face here
in this Island, whilst you live like a serpent under ground for love and long
of him; and where (because you could not dye with grief) you strive to kill
your self with the rotting humidity and malign exhalations of the dankish
earth. But be pleased (I beseech you) my Lady and Princess, (whom I know to be
discreet) to tell me, Is it not a strange thing, that the Duke of Lucania, who
before was dead, should be now risen again to life; who before a lover, should
be now a loather of his deservedly-beloved object, and who formerly was a noble
and loyal Gentleman, should (as for certain he now is) become most
perfidious and ungrateful. Corianna become clay cold thereat, had not the
power to answer him; the Duchess also with the Gentlewoman astonished at
these strange news, stood mute like so many statues; till she her self at
length, having first dried her beteared cheeks, thus said.

Lucano then is not dead but lives, and yet is no more mine? And is it possible
that Lucania could bring forth and foster such cruelty and ingratitude? No, no,
the world will not believe it, no more do not I. Thou dream'st, (alack) thou
dream'st Carildo; the constantly-good-gentle-carriage of Lucano is a cloth died
in grain, incapable of either spot or stain. But hereupon Carildo's distinct
relation of all he had seen, (taking for the right Lucano the true Almadero)
she flung her self on the ground tearing her hair, clothes, and face, and
had doubtless killed her self in that passionate fury, had not the discretion
of her attendants hindered and crossed that her so desperate intention.

Lucano on the otherside (being by his loyally-loving servants conducted to the
place where he landed, and whither Carildo was wont to come to buy provision,
and to epsy for the landing of any shipping, was in a poor lodging, provided
of a poorer bed with small hope of life, his grief augmenting his fever
whilst his spirits hourly wasted. Resolved then to dye, he yet resolved first
to be the death of the Knight that was the cause of his death. Olmiro and
Erinnio did by turns the best they could to bring him out of the imminent
desperation he was in, from which they could not think of a better or more
powerful diversion, than the loathing of Corianna; showing him withal, that
in respect of loves being engendered by love, the one should surcease to be,
upon the ceasing of the others being. A correspondence (in their judgment)
every way just, for that if the hazarding ones life for any ones love, was an
effect not only of affection, but also of duty; wherefore then (since we have
all of us reason to respect ever chiefly our own good, and to love our selves
best) should any man so love any one that loves him not, as to hate himself to
death? with further telling him, that amorous constancies were poetical
fables; and if not, that yet they could not be virtues, their effects being
vicious and against reason. That that which was constantly to be liked and
loved in a woman was constancy, honesty, modesty, shamefastness, and the
like, and not their opposites and unlike. But Lucano arguing the case according
to his passion, returned them this answer.

My well-meaning friends, the privilege of men in health is to judge of
sicknesses as they conceive of them, and not according to the sick man's pain.
Would not ye hold me for a mad man, if I (being well and you sick) went
about to persuade you, that it is ill done to be sick, and contrary to the
reasons of loving a man's own good, and content; with adding, that your being
sick makes your friends sorry, disquiets your family, and leads you the
highway to death; and that therefore your best course were to be well again,
which if you please you may be? Yet ye now persuade your selves that I can do
what I cannot, thinkign that passions should be ranked among things
indifferent; whereas indeed true love has ever been a supreme Commander,
and to this day exercises his Soveraignety, not only over reasonable men, but
also over reason itself; how much more powerfully then must I needs be
tyrannized over by mine, that has been already possessed of its sweetes, and
since (in an examplelesse manner) suspended from them by time and sufferings?
Think you that a thing so precious, acquired with the hazard of my life, and
loss of my state and fortunes, can be by me given over and resigned to
another; only because my will and resolution (you say) should be to do so?
You would persuade me to it, out of charity to my self for sooth; but (I pray
you) tell me how can I express my self more charitable to my self, than
(seeing a necessity of my death) to dye quickly and willingly? To love no more
Corianna is unpossible for me; nay more, the mere instincts of love yet
persuade me she is innocent, and the Law we live under enforces me to
believe her such: Again, that she hates me I cannot believe, nor yet dared
ye tell me so. Is she (having heard of my death) obliged to languish
perpetually? Or do the Laws deny marriage to fair, young, orphan-widowes,
and in a plight so miserable as she was in? Corianna was borne to love me out
of her voluntary nobleness, to cause me to be slain, yea and slay me too,
but innocently; Corianna has for my sake forsaken both Father and Country,
nay lived too like a worm under ground through my doings; till occasion was
offered her, that a gentle Cavalier moved to compassion at her sufferings,
freed her thence, and she (poor Lady) was feign to accept of his courteous
offer, now that she lived (for loving me) excluded and deprived both of Realm
and honor: Nor can I but acknowledge my self (in some respect) obliged to her
Knight her new servant, and am sorry that I cannot requite him, since that
Corianna being mine cannot be his too, nor have two husbands at the same time
living; I therefore am necessitated to slay him with my own hands; or if he
chance to kill me, I shall then (Heaven be my witness) dye contentedly, and
dying, wish him that felicity, which my own heart desired I should enjoy with
my dear Corianna.

The disconsolated Princess slept not all that night, but spent it in
bemoaning Lucano living, as she had before lamented him dead, resolved the
next morning to go find him out her self; which because Carildo dissuaded
her from, as both a thing unworthy of her, and a subject of favor to Lucano,
and of triumph to the Princess of Feacia; she bade him spare his speech, and
get her a few new-laid eggs, she having not eaten any thing all the day
before. In this he obeyed her with all readiness, and by so much the more
willingly, that the innocent babe (which she nursed her self) suffered
exceedingly through the want of milk, and abounding of ill humors which his
Mothers passions engendered in him: and then accompanied with no other than the
Duchess, she leaving her woman to look to the babe took her way to
Almadero's house-wards, going rather a Bacchan's or bedlam's than a royal or
sick-womans pace, and so speedily as the Duchess had much ado to follow her.
They well knew the next way without going any compass, having been used to
walk it often, when sometimes they went out to enjoy the benefit of the fresh
air. The sun began to send out his hotter beams by that time they were come
to the foot of the hill, which made them irresolute, whether it were their
better course to go up, or expect his coming down into the wood. But such
was their good fortune, that Almadero chancing to epsy them, came running
down toward them, taking one of them to be his Lidomia, for such was the
Princess of Feacia's name. The Ladies, on the other side, discovering him a
far off, and not doubting that he was Lucano, retired themselves to along
bench, seated at the mouth of the wood, to attend there his coming

Almadero having first commanded his Attendants to stay behind, came running
down the descent of the hillock all alone, with as great speed as could be
imagined. Being come near them, and seeing Corianna (whom he believed to be
Lidomia) so altered and pale, he with a compassionate accent cried out, Alack
for woe! what face is that dear Mistress of my life? how came it so to lose
its color and fresh beauty in one short day? With this, offering to take her
gently by the hand, and she disdainefully but faintly withdrawing it, her
spirits failed her, her head hung drooping down, and her breathles body had
also sunk to the earth, but that the Duchess and he supported it; Almadero
not knowing the Duchess, asked her, what disasterous fortune had so
discourteously used the Princess his Lady and Mistress, as to alter her so
exceedingly in so short a time? In so short a time (answered him then the
Countess) it is indeed but a short time since thy disloyalties were known,
but not since she began to suffer for thee, thou false unworthy Knight;
whereas if she had listened unto my words, we had not been at the pass we
now are reduced to. But Lucano? thou the most abominablest of men, have thou so
flinty a heart and brazen a face, as forgetting the miseries which are and have
been endured for thee, to falsify even before the face of so high-borne a
Princess (to whom thou art so much bound) that plighted troth, which was the
occasion of her becoming unfaithful, and a promise-breaker to the King her
Father, the King of Sicily, and her self? Ah thou ungrateful, unworthy
Traitor.

Strange seemed this language to Almadero, for being unacquainted with the
actions he was taxed withal, nor could he imagine the reason why this woman
(whom he never knew nor saw before) so spoke unto him, as if she had been
before of his acquaintance, till the naming of Lucano made him somewhat
conceive the error, but the naming of the Kings much more; yet could neither
of these stop the violent current of his first conceit; for the seeing of (to
his thinking) Lidomia in such a plight, made him believe, that the Lady might
be mistaken in the names but not in the fact, wherewith he imagined some false
report might have misinformed her conceit: But seeing her not yet come to her
self, he thought it a more beseeming office to run to fetch water to revive
her, than to take any heed to the bitter words of a misinformed woman: But no
sooner was he parted from her, than upon hearing her fetch a profound sigh, he
returned, contemplating in her with an eye of sorrow-displaying pity a
mortallbluish palenesse; here offering to take her by the hand anew, and
again repulsed with open disdain.

Madame (said he thereupon) I now well see, that this place is against all
reason the Island of Adventures, whereas its name should rather be the Island of
Misadventures, seeing its adventures grow from good to evil; considering how
you are from a healthy woman become so sick and altered, as I scarce know you,
and I from an honest man grown to be disloyal, unworthy, and a Traitor. This
Lady (whom I know not what she is) both contrary to the modesty of her sex,
and beyond the limits of reason takes on her too much authority to injure me: I
am verily persuaded she knows me not, but mistakes me for some other, since
her being with you, and her noble aspect should not (me thinks) permit her to
give such unmannerly language to any man, much less to me. Upon this the
Duchess leaving Corianna half unlaced, turning angrily toward him: Would to
Heaven (answered she) that I had indeed never known thee, for then had
thou never been the ruin of our House, and shame of our blood. Woe is me, I
know thee but too well, though I indeed never till now knew thee to be so
shameless and impudently-audacious, as to dare to deny with the acts the
persons; tellest thou me, thou know me not? will thou say thou know not
the Lady Princess neither? To this Almadero halfe-angry replied: I never have
nor will deny what I knew, and for my Lady the Princess, I shall much sooner
forget the knowledge of my self than of her; sithence for retaining the
knowledge of her everlastingly, my spirit has so stamped her shape in my
memory, that appear she well in health, courteous and favorable as she did
yesterday; or angry, disdainefull, and sick, as she seems to be to day, yet
shall I never forget either her noble person or obliging favors. All reasons
making for the contrary touch not me, which if they did, then were I indeed
that disloyal, unworthy miscreant that you make me. For the rest, I understand
you not, you call me Lucano, a name that I never heard of before, and you
talk (I know not what) of our house and blood; But truly I believe, that if
such interesses were between us, I should then know you as well as you imagine
you know me. For which if I had no other argument, the very falsenesse of the
calumny which you brand me with, is so manifest, that I knowing that I have
never shamed my blood; know by consequence, that none of my kindred can upbraid
me of any such crime.

The Princess that had the while with a sterne-lowring eye oft-times beheld
him, perceived she was mistaken, now that she had observed in him the favor
and making, but neither the gesture nor true accents of Lucano, imprinted in
her memory with an indelible stamp; and therefore now grown desperate, upon
the becoming dead again of her a little sithence resuscitated lover, she
began to grieve with a new kind of sorrow, and had willingly spent her dearest
blood, to be (without being deceived) the beguiled and betrayed one, so he but
lived: Whence we may gather, that there is not any affect either more
inconstant in its operations, or more contrary in its self, than that of
amorous jealousy: Hatred and love are ever constantly the same, the one
neverthinkes of loving, the other never descends as low as hating; but when
once jealousy enters, then they confound themselves. The lover knows not
which of them he were best pitch upon, if he enjoyes the one, he covets the
other, which gotten he abhorres, and returns to the first again; hence
proceeds that vicissitude or perpetual motion of war and peace in amorous
affections. The Duchess observing the language of the (to her thinking)
Lucano, though she imagined not that she was mistaken, yet discreetly
conceiving, she had too much offended him, she with a milder countenance thus
bespake him.

Nephew, if with my fortunes and the rest I had lost my wits and memory, I
might then doubt of knowing you, though I have no reason to wonder that you
know not me; but should indeed marveile more, that in all the time that we
lamented you dead, our hiewes and faces were not altered, and more yet that we
are not over-growne with grass instead of skin and hair. But for all this
alteration, is it possible that I am so disfigured as you know not the
Duchess of Magna Grecia your own Aunt? That you could know the Princess my
Mistress sooner than me, is to me a double wonder, her griefs and
sufferings having been greater than mine, and her beauty and youth more
subject to change, than my wrinkles and withered agednesse: But since you say
you know her, I pray you then how came you to know her, if you be not Lucano?
The Knight at these words peering in her face, stood as immovable as a stone,
upon his comprehending of this mistake: Glad then of being disburthened of the
great pain, that the alteration of his believed Lady and beloved Mistress had
drawn on him, he with a smiling countenance thus answered her.

For certain Lady I may well be your servant (and so I now offer you to be)
the being such depending on my choice: but be your nephew for truth I cannot,
that being an office reserved to Nature; I am sorry that the resemblance which
I might have to that nephew of yours Lucano, has deceived you, as the
likeness in favor of this noble Lady to the Princess of Feacia has beguiled
me; but now that mistake deludes me no longer, seeing that it is impossible
that she whom I so lately saw so well and in such perfect health could in so
few hours lose both flesh and color; and now if there be any thing in me,
that may better satisfy you for the further clearing of your mistake, behold
me most ready and willing to obey you.

The Princess who till then had her pale lips sealed up with silence (become
now but too certain of the truth) said unto him: Worthy Sir, there needs no
other proof; the acting of such a deceitful part cannot be expected from a
person of your quality: and for this Lady's using you discourteously, she was
indeed persuaded she might do it, out of the conceit she had, that she
spoke to her Nephew, and upon the supposed ground of a fault, whereof he
(unfortunate Gentleman) is so much the more innocent, by how much his being
reduced to earth and dust deprives him of the power of sinning; with that word,
she sinking down her head swounded again, and became as cold as ice.
Almadero (the sweetest dispositioned Knight living) had much ado to refrain
weeping for mere pity; and seeing some of his servants not very far off
him, he called for water, which came (but too late) with the accourse of all
that were above to help her. Feign would he then have known who she was,
but held it no good manners to ask it yet of the Duchess, who was both
confused in mind for him, and busied about the Princess; but having already
understood the story of Corianna, he ran with his imagination to the truth:
Use therefore he did all the means he could imagine by entreaty and
persuasion, to have her carried up, whereunto the Duchess assented, yet she
could by no means be persuaded to it, but suddenly parted to avoid his
importunity. Whereupon Almadero would at least have her carried to her Barge,
(for they had made him believe, they had a Barge that attended them) but she
would by no means agree to that neither, being resolved rather to dye by the
way, than to let any one know where she abode.

Carildo gone out of the cave (as was told you) came where Lucano was lodged,
where (as before he ghessed he should) he met with Olmiro. Both of them grew
pale, and in vent of their spiteful ire each against other, Carildo first thus
reviles the other. Is it thus that Princesses ought to be served? Olmiro: Is
this the faith thou owe such personages? Is this the gratitude to thy
Sovereign Mistress for so many favors? To know that she pines and dies for
news from Lucano, and yet both Lucano being alive, and thou living with him,
lead a most dissolute course of life, whilst she (unfortunate Lady) lies a
dying? Now fie for mere shame, if you have no charity, yet should ye (me
thinks) have so much modesty and respect (injuring her with so much
ingratitude, and with so little reason as ye have to do so) as to do it at
least so privately as she know it not.

Olmiro (who understood the matter otherwise) thought these the most
dissembling and counterfeit words that e're were uttered, and Carildo the
unworthiest man breathing; which made him thus retort. If thou had served
the Princess as loyally as I have done, thou had not then brought herto
that dishonest pass she now (through thy means) is brought unto: We have
well seen that she lies not a-dying, but for her greater content, lives in
thy presence accompanied, with whom I know not save with whom she lists or
lusts after. Wicked miscreant? is this the care thou should have of a
Princess? Is this the thanks thou give Lucano's bounty? Is this the duty
due to his favor and merits? Must he (unfortunate Knight) who was slain and
halfe-buried, live again; and being come hither for life, find here his death?
Me thinks ye should at least have had the patience to expect my return;
sithence if he were alive (as for his greater misfortune it is but too
certain that he is) he would then take from you the occasion of falling into
the error you are in; if dead, then would there rest to her (being so rid of
her husband) the field honorably free to other loves, whereas ye are now
through your frantic impatience become inexcusable, by becoming your selves
the murderers of that unfortunate innocent Knight.

Carildo the noblest-minded Squire living, conceiting that Olmiro had for
hiding his and Lucano's faults, invented this dishonest calumny; and that not
content to injure him alone, he had basely let run his lying tongue on the
honor of his innocent Lady and Mistress; forgetting now all the rules of
patience, clapped his hand on a skeane that hung at his neck, Olmiro doing as
much with another such weapon, and then either of them redoubling his blows on
the other, did his utmost endeavor not to wound, but (like cruel enemies) to
speed each other; so as one of them had soon been slain, but for the
arrival of five Knights: But I must now crave leave to get me elsewhere,
undertaking to deliver them you in in a short time woundlesse and friends.

We left Polimero and his company parted from Greet with their prow to the
Westward; who as they sailed with a gentle Loome-gale, discovered (the second
night of their voyage) a far off in the Island of Cithera, a great number of
fires, which seemed to go and meet one another; an effect not to be judged of,
in respect of the motion of the Vessel; whereupon to satisfy their curiosity,
they steered directly toward it; where drawn near, they perceived them to be
Torches, wherewith some dead man was accompanied to his last home. The pomp
was considerable both for quantity and variety; the men were all hooded with
Capuchios, and the more principal wore long trains; the horses trapp'd with
black velvet down to the hoof: the Funeral contrived into a curious form of
lights and banners; the military Music orderly divided into correspondent
spaces, whereof those of voices next about the Biere enforced with their
sweetely-mournefull consort, the stoniest affects to grieve and sorrow.
Polimero could by the great pomp he there observed judge no less, than that
the dead man was some great Prince; for which cause, and because also the
shee-warriers were desirous to see him, he commanded to run a shore there:
yet could they not land so soon, but that the Biere was before entered into the
Temple, whilst they stood wondering, that there could be in so small an Island,
so stately a show, and such a number of Nobility. There stood placed in the
midst, a Piramide-wise-built Scaffold, with stairs to get up on it, and so
high, as it seemed to contend with the hight of a Cube; there sustained it
twelve great Pillars, and under it was laid the Biere with the corpse, whose
principal ornament were many Arms; the fairest of them (which for being
enriched with precious stones glittered at the flaming-light of the Torches)
were on the nethermost of the stairs, whose corners were adorned with statues
even to the uppermost of all; the first four of the four cardinal virtues,
the others of the succeeding, wrought with such exquisite artifice, as they
seemed to be of finest Marble; the Torches in great quantity orderly ranked
from the top to the bottom in great silver Candlesticks, and the whole
circumference lighted by an infinite number of wax-lights proportionably
contrived and molded.

The Princes passing by all other curiosities, hastened to see the coarse,
which being a youth of about nineteen years of age, exposed to the eye
(though dead) a show of such lively beauties, that the privation of life seemed
counterfeit, only that he might be gazed on; he lay armed all save the head.
A Mantle of fine purple, within lined quite through, and without down to the
waste with white Ermins, and a Crown (which for being set full of precious
stones shone on his head) manifested him to be undoubtedly some great Prince.
There sat at his feet two damozels clothed in black, whose habits, together
with their nethermost border without, were lined with fair white vailes. They
lamented him, singing in a tone so mournful, that there was not an unbeteared
eye among all the spectators: Another such pair was placed one of each side of
him, with two great rich winde-fannes in their hands; busied they were in
fanning him air, till the two first, having by then given over their song,
successively underwent their office. But the sweltry heat (which for being
increased by the lights and pestering throng of people, made them feel it
still more and more stifeling) enforced them to retire to the air into a
Cloister hard by; where being by a Priest known for strangers, they were by
him courteously offered the commodity and sight of the house; seeming desirous
withal to relate unto them its beginning, and how there was there nursed the
fair Goddess of Cyprus: But they moved with the curiosity of that lugubrous
spectacle, besought him (though they had understood the generality of it
already) to tell them its particulars, how that Prince came to dye in that
Island of Cithera: the good man willing to obey them, (following a great Torch
that he caused to be carried before them, and walking right on to a long
Gallery, that led to that part of the house that was called the strangers
Lodging) thus satisfies their curiosity.

Some two years sithence may there be (says he) expired, since the Queen
of Macedon (a kingdom not hence far distant) having sent of three sons
that she had the two eldest, to be educated and taught elsewhere, holding
native homes, especially those of Princes unfit and prejudicial (in respect of
the authority which they there possess) to the institution of their youth, was
taken with a longing desire to go see him disguised, but yet in the habit of a
noble pilgrim; and of them unexpected came to the marveilous City of the
Meridian Lake, where taken with the rare delightsomnesse of the site, and other
excellencies there remarkable, she made for some while her abode; the scope
of her desire was to go see Egypt, and thence to return to Macedon; but was
not so soon launched forth into the sea of Creta, than that Corideo the eldest
of the two sickned; whereupon being necessitated to come ashore here; she
thereof advertized her husband, who hastened (good Prince) with all possible
speed to the beloved sight of his wife and son, though the joys of seeing
her (part of himself) were corrupted by the likelihood he faw of losing his
son, part of them both: Wherefore when he had (in vain) experimented all the
remedies of Art to be bootelesse, he then, as though his recovery lay in his
sons own hands, thus bespake him.

And will thou then leave me (my Corideo) now that I am run hither unto thee,
of purpose that thou might not aband on me? Cheer up thy spirits, (my
son) for behold me here ready to accomplish thy wishes; and if the wide
world can raise up thy drooping courage, there is not (assure thy self) any
one thing in it that I Will not procure to give thee content: We have here hard
by, Macedon, where thou art wished for, and where thou shall be cured, so thou
be but pleased to be merry: Will thou by dying deceive the expectation which
the world has of thee living, as if thou distrusted'st to accomplish with
effects, what thou promised'st by the hopes conceived of thee? No do not, oh
do it not (my dear Corrideo) death though timely will seize on thee but too
soon, which (alas) he should not in this the fair springtime of thy youth,
and in the budding forth of its flowers, before the taking of its fruit, and
ere it be either gathered or tasted. Look on thy dear Mother, her love
toward thee is no new affect, and think thou that thou can satisfy her
by dying, the debts thou owe her living? For my self, I say nothing; for if
I desired that thou should live for my sake, I should not then love thee but
my self; but I loving both thee and her, ought to procure thy life for her
sake and thine. More he would have said, but here ceased, for having his royal
spirits o'rewhelmed with a fatherly affection, seconding (as rain follows
thunder) his lamentation with tears.

My Sovereign Lord (answered him the Prince) if one that already feels the
ravishing sweetes of a better life would follow the affections of this, he were
unworthy to enjoy them. I never (the Gods know) meant to abandon you; which if
it be conceived by any, that I by dying leave you, such a conceit argues not
wisdom in the hatchers thereof; your Majesty (I am sure) is not of that
opinion. This life is a race unequal in all men; mine (whatsoever one it be)
is ended; I find my self at the mark in my best strength, and therefore
since I have won the prize, you have no reason to repine or be sorry for my
gain. The young man and decrepit dotardare (when they are once parted hence)
in an equal degree, nor would my dying an old man do me any more good in
consideration of my present years, since eternity admits of neither number nor
time: Indeed if I abandoned you for the interest of my own sole advantage,
you then had reason to grieve for it; but (alas) the arrest that is laid upon
me comes from a higher power; your royal commandment extends not so far,
no more than my possibility in the effect of serving you. Therefore (my dread
Sovereign) the accusing me with the argument of my duty toward you, and my
Mothers love to me, corrupts to me the divine sweets, which I already relish
with the bitterness of unsavory terrene affects, which like sharp thorns prick
me but too-too much already on this my deathbed? Now for those things which
you proffer me, with putting me in mind of my Country and kingdom, they
(alas) are not to be paralleled with those I aspire unto; besides, I were most
unworthy if it lay in my power to live, to live for any other end, than to
honor and serve you. That I (by dying) corrupt the hopes conceived of me, I
(in my judgment) in so dying dye an happy man, having in these few years of
mine learned, that actions contend with opinions of volubility and
inconstancy; so as, although who so does well, digresseth not; yet escapes he
not (for all that) the censure of opinions, which like mere shadows and
Chimera's of spirits, run along with our days and alter with our years.
Therefore (my Royal Sovereign) if your persuading me to live, be to command
me, be then pleased (I beseech you) that I tell you, that neither your
authority nor my obedience has so large an extent, since the spirit, for being
the better choice, has more prevailing arguments than the flesh. For the rest,
behold here my Brother Almondo, on whom my memory may together with the
heritage be settled. If you but look well into him, you shall have no occasion
to grieve for want of me: Be not (I beseech you) blinded with my lovely
livelihood, and prompt forwardness now done and past, that nature which you
see sweetly-grave in him goes on (indeed a slower but) a surer pace. To you
(Madame) it rests that I make known, that in this my passing over into the
other world, there lies no greater rub in my way, than my affection to
you-wards as yet not transmuted, but halfe-terrene and mingled with your
motherly affects; yet I hope that the Gods will hold me excused, for its being
an effect of pity to one, whom next them I owe most unto. Madame, my Liege,
Almondo I now go hence, let the memory of me be dear unto you, which to the
end I may part hence contented, I pray you promise it me without grieving. With
that word, he offered to reach them his hand, which as he began to raise up,
sunk down again; he (with that) restoring his divinely-sweet spirit to him
that had sent it him.

Such was the end of Prince Corideo, which may serve for an example, to who so
aspires to gain that which should be desired far before any earthly thing.
The lamentation and moan made for him was exceeding great, the King also being
no more capable of consolation than the Queen, although to comfort her, he
took on him to grieve less than indeed he did. They are now retired into
that Chapel there (pointing with that toward the place with his finger)
whither our Father Guardian (a Priest of much holiness and profound learning)
is gone a little while since to comfort them, and I was just now a going thither
to see and hear them. If you therefore can dispense with my service, I shall
crave leave of you to go on, or if otherwise you be possessed with the same
curiosity as I am, I will then (so you be therewith pleased) see you seated in
a dark window whence you may unseene see all. Upon acceptance of this last
courteous proffer, they mount up; where (upon the opening of a door leading
from a privy chamber) they discovered a little Temple, wherein upon large velvet
cushions sat the King and Queen, whose Royal aspect so discovered their
dignities, that their mourning-habit void of both pomp and ornament, could
not disguise their native greatness. She being endued with a beauty so
majestically-grave as might strike reverence into the stubbornest spirits, and
he bearing stamp't in his forehead the true caracters of a magnanimous and
generous heart. In the same instant entered the Priest, who being made sit on a
low stool close by the Queen thus framed his speech.

Madame, the Gods send me hither to be both your Physician and Ambassador,
with command to comfort you as an Ambassador, and to cure your grief as a
Physician; so you therefore be but pleased to make a short pawse on your
hitherto-just-teares; I will (the Gods willing) accomplish both the one and the
other. The Queen (lifting up her eyes, and seeing stand before her a reverend
old man, who clothed in a snow-white raiment, made a show of something more
than humane) dried her beteared eyes, but returned him no answer; for being at
one and the same time to do two (as it were) contrary offices, which was, to
retain her tears, and give free way to her speech. Whereupon he, as one long
sithence acquainted with the nature of grief, without expecting any answer,
proceeded.

Madame, I am glad that saving health begins already to have place in your
Majesty, since at the very name of God I see you shake off the shackles of that
benumming droopingnesse wherewith you were fettered. Humane afflictions have
(Royal Madame) two most potent arguments, or rather means of shunning
extremes; the one practiced through the help of Philosophical virtue, the
other infused by celestial grace; that common to all, this only to those whom
God communicates it unto: From the first we may learn, that ordinary accidents
should not in any extraordinary measure afflict us; that the gifts of Nature
are bestowed upon us for use, not possession; that riches, children, and
honors are more suddenly lost than gotten; that prudent and discreet persons
receive from reason that consolation in an instant, which others are wrought
unto by time and persuasion, and that such comfort too depends on our
imagination, and our imagination on us, so as the prefixing to our selves
things either burdensome or light, is to shut or open the gates of comfort.
The second teaches us; that the death of the just is precious before God; that
humane capacity conceives not the joys of such as have an eternal seat
amongst the blessed; that the life of such is not taken away, but conserved
till that long expected day, which must bring us, being freed from the tyranny
of time and fortune, to the enjoying of a truly-perfect life; that that death
which terminates the course of an holy life, is not properly death, considering
the sweet quietness that ensues it, the fair advantageous exchange it makes,
and the undoubted assurance it receives of it; that the good are called before
their time, for ridding them out of the hands of the wicked, and from being by
them either molested or corrupted; that God makes no difference between the
rathnesse and latenesse of time, but that man arrived to the term prescribed
him, becomes old even in his very childehood; and that therefore we should with
a cheerful mind accept what he sends us, to offer him in gift what we owe him
of duty.

The Queen listened unto the Priest with great attention; and seeing him now
silent, with a countenance composed to constancy, whose mild serenity showed
she had chased away the cloud of passion, she returned him this answer.

Father, I yield the Gods hearty thanks for having voutchsafed to remember me
through your means. I could not (I confess) answer your arguments, if I had
the power to practice them, but wanting it, it behooves me to search for it in
the secret of your precepts. And first, I beseech you to teach me, how I shall
conceive to be ordinary that which never was heretofore? I lament not (as I am
a woman) the general death of man; but bemoane (as a mother) the particular
death of my son; I know that it is an ordinary thing that every man dye, but
to dye in youth, to break the order of Nature, and to have befall us in our
more pleasing years that which should not happen us before our decrepit
loathsome old age, is (I am sure) no ordinary thing. For the gifts which we
receive, alas I grieve not for being debarrd the possessing them, which I
pretend not, but for being deprived of the use of them, which was violently
taken from me. If it were ordinary for mothers to be deprived of their sons,
the world would then be soon ended, for in one sole age there would not be
either fathers or sons to be found; that worldly things are transitory, our
very sense shows us, but ere sense can renounce the grief that follows the
privation of them, Nature must first forbear the forming it of passions. For
the discreet I know not in what sense to conceive them; conceive them perhaps
I might, if the proprieties of affects were punctually known, but who can fit
me one pleasure or one pain to two that be just equal to them, and reduce
withal their constitutions to such a parity, that tense make not a difference
of them? which if it could be done too, yet could there be no great matter of
prudence in it, since we are tied to work with such equality: And again, if
it cannot be done, I must then call it rigidnesse of nature, declination of
sense, stupidity or defect of apprehension at the least. The procuring in fine
that mere imagination should bring us to comfort, is beyond the reach of my
understanding. And I would feign know, if such an effect shall be conformable
to its cause? which if it be, then must such a consolation needs be false, the
imagination being formed of things not true. To your second Arguments I make no
answer, their authority being but too great, and their truth most manifest. But
the supreme truth not being comprehensible, otherwise than by the mind, it
should not (me thinks) seem strange to you, if I (for being governed with the
sharp sense of my griefs) comprehend it not in its own rays; whereunto I
(for all that) submit both my self and my griefs so I be but permitted to
evaporate them a little, lest the principal be exceeded by the interest.

Upon the hearing of these words, the Assistants who till this time were all
tongue-tyed by a drooping silence, made resound the Cube of a confused
lamentation, the aged Priest weeping with the rest: Till observing a little
after that the Queen dried up her tears, and that returned to her former
quiet temper, she stood expecting some further speech of him; he thought to
reply, when she continued the file of her speech, saying.

Father, there are some passions which have more need of sword than shield,
which a man must either quite defeat or still live withal; which if it so
be, where then shall I (alas) for shunning such deadly company, find Arms to
defeat mine, ere I be first by them quite ruined? Philosophical reasons are
(God wot) but feeble wards, they are shields framed by wit, which many times
either speaks what it is not sensible of, or practices not what it speaks.
It Is but too difficult a thing to put off the habit of humanity, there is not
any man that disburthens himself of it without sorrow at parting from it. In
heaven (answered the Priest) where in the hight of bliss lives the glorious
Prince Corideo, you (Madame) by that time I have assured you of your glory,
shall find this vital sword. And being asked how he could know it, and if
the places appointed for the happy were not the Elizean Fields? These are
mysteries (said he) which I should indeed conceal, if the imparting them you
were not the unguent wherewith I should heal you. The ordinary place then
appointed for the happy, is indeed the same you now mentioned, but yet there
are of them others granted but to a few, for but few such are there as was the
Prince Corideo. The soul (Madame) is a fire, a ray or sparkle taken from the
divinity, infused by the Gods into bodies in different degrees, the cause of
the differences that are seen between soul and soul. All the Gods infuse
not this fire, nor other save such of them as have the virtuall power of
influence, and by the quality of our working, is known by which of them we
were inflamed. This fire so infused, works in us the same effect, as the
real fire does in coals, anticipating in kindling according to the portion
given it, if little slowly, if much quickly: Hence comes it that the knowledge
of old men surmounts that of younger, because the coal in these scarce
kindled, is in those quite burnt out. This is the ordinary operation according
to the course which the Gods proposed in Nature, and such as of this order dye
just in this life, have their repose among the fair pleasing shades of the
Elizean Field: But the extraordinary one (employed only on such whom the Gods
are, out of their benignity, pleased to favor extraordinarily) is not only to
communicate the fire in a multiplied portion, but also to take it from Jove's
own rays, which he himself with the consent of the other Gods infuseth, to
form thereof a hero, a demy-god: And this multiplied portion is in some so
swift in its working, that some, though babes, are in knowledge and discretion
old men, and yet but children at their dying hour; because the fire having
done its operation, both kindles and consumes away even in an instant: Of this
number (Madame) was the Prince Corideo your son; for I observed in him
whilst he was sick, the spirit of Jove, the infusion imparted from the other
Gods, obliquely regarded with grimme and malign aspects only by Mars and
Saturn: Yet such like spirits are not infused by men and Earth, but by the
Gods and Heaven; and have when they are separated, three distinct places of
bliss prepared for them, conformable to the distinct degrees of the rays they
received upon their being united to bodies: The first which is the inferior
contains the spacious latitude of the air, enjoyed by such, who despising
vulgar opinions, lift up their minds to heaven, there to consider Nature, and
(joying for enjoying now not the uncertain and enigmaticall, but the real and
clear sight of this fabric) compassionate such, as with a stern
philosophical brow teach lies believed for truth even to this day. Here it is,
that they contemplate the true Spheres, the certain motions of the heaven (I
would say of the earth too, if it were credible) the reasons of ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, the perennity of fountains, the generations of winds,
with a number of other things, whose reasons are thought to be known, but
indeed are not: And such spirits, because they ever loved mankind, enter into
terms of natural charity with them, not ceasing at all occasions to help
them, either by freeing them from evils, (if it lie in their power) or at
least in foretelling them of such ere they arrive; appearing in sundry shapes,
and forms of Rainebowes, Suns, armed Squadrons, fiery Meteors, and pleasant
domestical spirits inamoured of such as have a spirit in a degree like them.
The second place is the extent of heaven, which is the superficies of the
firmament: Thither come such, who not content to have with the speculators of
nature known God for the first cause, believe further his providence, and
teach virtue and piety, which (for being a strong weapon of the spirit)
defeates, puts to flight and slayes vices, which are the true monsters of the
earth; and being made stars, sparkle outwardly the light of their creation,
in sign of their divine internal love, watered by the water of their
regeneration. The Asterismes under the shapes of beasts and life-lesse things,
are formed of Heroes made blessed for the virtues peculiar to such a living
creature; as subtilty to serpents, active strength to Lions. The Bear
represents a solitary life; the Eagle the elevation of the mind to God; the
Triangle the ineffable mystery; the Altar Religion, the Balance Justice; the
Po the river of celestial grace, and so forth the rest. True it is, that our
having (in our time within the space of these two and thirty years) seen two
spirits (the one in Cassiopeia, the other in Sagittarius) taken away two years
after their appearing, has made us believe, that the divine providence has
been pleased to show us by their being exalted, that the starry Circle is not
the supreme place of bliss, but that there is yet a further passage to a
third, which neither eye can see, nor understanding conceive where the light is
inaccessible, and where every rash and overcurious eye is not only weakened,
but also blinded. Here abide such as issued out of natural predicaments
transcended nature, and by the contemplation of the divinity, become partakers
of the glory which the Gods only enjoy, where among the eternal melodies of
the super-celestiall Spheres, they (become worthily fellow-guests to the table
of the Gods) are feasted with divine Nectar and Ambrosia. Here (Madame) in all
fullness of bliss resides the Prince Corideo, whence he conjures you, not to
corrupt his joys and glory with your heaviness and lamentations, contenting
your self, that he being borne for heaven, remain there, without wishing
him, to your own grief, a sojourne here contrary to his felicity. Her replies
the good old man knew how to satisfy with reasons so lively, that as well the
Queen as the King remained well satsfied therewithal.

Eromena moved to commiseration, and somewhat grieving thereat, besought her
husband to be gone; whereupon kindly thanking the Priest, they returned to
imbarke themselves, so favored with the winds, that in a few days they
arrived at Siracusa; where they had scarce set foot a-ground, when they saw
two Squires, who having suddenly slipped out their weapons, furiously endeavored
to speed each other: The Count of Bona knowing one of them for Carildo, stepped
in between them, and by him also known; Good my Lord (said Carildo) I beseech
you hinder us not, for I must needs either slay this Traitor or dye: The other
(who was Olmiro) telling him in spiteful manner that he lied in his throat,
begged of the Count the very same favor; with telling him, that his enemy
being the most infamous villain of the earth, should not be taken out of his
hands, for not freeing him from the punishment that he deserved: But having
the lie retorted him by the other, they being hindered from closing with their
swords, buckled together with their reviling tongues, accusing each other with
the selfsame, or a very-like fault; which so puzzled the five in striving to
find out the truth (each of them showing probable apparances of reason of his
side) as they saw no likely way of according them.

Mean while Almadero being got away from Corianna, was no sooner come to his
house, than the repercussion of the Sun on the weaponblades gave him occasion
to descry from above, the scuffling between these two at the next Port.
Whereupon, thinking they were Gentlemen come of purpose to fight in that Island,
he bidding some of his servants to bring a horse after him, descended the
downe-hill, ever almost running till he came to the place where the affray
was; where seeing the Knights that had parted them, he courteously saluting
them, was again in the same manner re-saluted by them, when Carildo said to
Olmiro: God be praised that thy Master is now come to thee to participate of
thy triumphs, since that by his own testimony these Gentlemen may judge
whether of us is the Traitor: Olmiro having seen Almadero before (though he had
not in the wood well observed him) had now also taken him for Lucano, if his
healthful plight and habit had not assured him of the contrary. But Carildo
noting him yet more now than before, turning toward him, thus boldly bespake
him.

And is it possible (my Lord Duke) that crosses and adversity (which in others
quell rebelling humors, and refine their minds, by bringing them to a better
temper) should work such a contrary effect in you, as you become strangely
ungrateful do not only take pleasure at the death of your noble Lady and
Princess, but that to trample the more on her calamity, you (upon your
reviving) must also come hither so contemptuously to wrong her without so much
as once voutchsafing her the favor of coming to see how she languisheth for
death? Nor yet herewithall content, but that you uphold or (for ought I know)
command your servants to accuse me with those treacheries which are merely
yours and theirs in particular? Olmiro (who grown to be confused in mind at
the appearing of this new Lucano, and who for knowing what plight he had left
the true one in, took not this for him, could not for all that upon more
serious surveying him choose but believe him to be the very same,
notwithstanding that reason convinced his fancy) stood thereat so amazed, as
he had not the power to utter a word. Almadero, on the other side, perceiving
these new injuries to spring from the old equivocation of her whom he before
had met with Corianna, could not refrain from smiling thereat, and had made
good sport of it too, but that he duly considered the importance of the case
as it stood; whereupon he used this mild language.

Honest friend, if your adversary has no greater cause to be offended with
you, than you have to be angry with him for my sake; you will then (I am sure)
be both soon wrought to an accord; for (I tell you) I am not that Duke you say
I am; neither is he here my servant, as you take him for. I never saw him (I
protest) to my knowledge till now; nor is it long sithence I was taken for one
Lucano whom I know not. What is he, I pray you? Is he dead or alive? Here
Carildo felt himself struck to the heart upon the conceiving of his mistake;
whereupon he crying him mercy, would needs run to embrace Olmiro; who more
enraged now than before, thrust him off him, with threatening to be his death if
he but came near him; doubting indeed of some new stratagem, for that he
could not believe that either Carildo took Almadero for Lucano, or that
Almadero knew not Carildo, since he knew him for the very same that was in the
wood with the Princess of Feacia whom he took for Corianna. But being
entreated to be either friends with him, or to tell them his reason why he
would not be so; he answered, that a friend to him he would never be; and that
to tell his reason openly, he neither could nor needed; since the other knew it
but too well. Every of these replies were so many deaths to Carildo, there was
never a word of them, that pierced not the very center of his heart. Believe
me Olmiro (said he at length) thou wrong'st me to accuse me as thou do; I
have not (I vow to thee) offended other than God, and that too by sins that
concern no other than my self; and since thou will not talk with me in the
presence of these noble Gentlemen, be but pleased (by their good permission) to
retire apart with me: For, I assure thee, that as I would have sworn that
this noble Knight was Lucano, and on that mistake, without imagining that I
lied, would not have stuck to accuse him of treachery as well as thee; so
likewise shall thou find thy self every way deceived in me; wherein if thou
find me any way faulty, or short of my word, I now here deliver my self into
thy hands to be punished at thy pleasure. The Knights persuaded him to content
himself with this his so reasonable proffer, and so left them alone. Whereupon
Olmiro said to the other, Well now; how can thou excuse thy self of having
been the instrument, that the Princess is given for a prey (under what title
I know not) to that Knight there, whom thou take on thee to have mistaken for
Lucano? whereas Lucano and others besides my self have seen her with him in
the wood. Carildo's heart so leaped for joy, to hear Lucano was alive indeed,
whereof he was till then uncertain in respect of his mistake, that Olmiro,
who expected to see him amazed, marveiled at a contrary effect, when Carildo
lifting up his eyes to heaven-wards, thus bespake him.

Alas Olmiro! how strangely and dangerously are we reciprocally mistaken! it is
but a little while sithence this Knight came hither, as thou shall shortly know;
neither saw I him ever, till the day that I took him for Lucano; and yesterday
in the wood, where he courted the Princess of this Country, who (for
resembling Corianna as you shall see) deceived you; and he again (favoring
very much Lucano) beguiled me, who believed that, forgetting and slighting the
Princess, he had given himself over to this new love. Therefore (dear
brothere mine) if the Duke lives in such torment, (as indeed he has reason to
do) let us go and free him of it, and that quickly too, sithence I have left
also the Princess in a case so desperate for the same mistake, as it is an
even lay whether she be by this time alive or no: Vp^on this Olmiro believing
now the case to stand as indeed it did, with lovingly embracing him, heartily
cried him mercy: But because the then-dangerous state of the business required
something else than words; they returning speedily to the Knights told them,
they were now accorded, with beseeching them to dispense with the relation
thereof till another time; not without yielding them infinite thanks for the
courteous office done them, but for which they had undoubtedly killed one another.

By this time Almadero had invited the Princes to come lodge with him;
wherefore he answered them, that he would expect them at his house, out of the
curiosity he had to know the end of that business, and more especially to
understand how he was taken for another; wherein the Squires promised not to
fail him, and with that (taking their leave) returned to Lucano's lodging,
where they held it best that Olmiro should first enter, so to take from him the
occasion of venting his passion on Carildo: But scarce was he entered when (for
missing to find his Lord within) he came out again; upon this, enquiring of
the man of the house for Erinnio, they were showed him with heavy downe-cast
looks coming droopingly toward them. Being asked for the Duke, he (with a
deep sigh) answered, that he was slipped away no man knew whither: But espying
(with that) Carildo, he stooped down for a stone; when Olmiro seizing on his
hand, briefly reaccounted unto him how the case stood: Whereupon, after
friendly embracing each other, they went so long enquiring after Lucano by
counter-signes, that in the end they learnt he had taken the path of the wood,
whitherward they were then a-going. Carildo by the way relates unto the others
the life led by Corianna, with the manner of their mistake; but now come to the
wood they could not find him out, although they with exquisite diligence
sought for him all over: what way therefore to take they knew not, when Olmiro
thus bespeaks the other two:

Here do we (being, as we are, all three together) but trifle out the time;
it were therefore better, that thou Carildo went to the Princess to comfort
her; and (that done) to return hither, or to our lodging, if thou have but
time; then one of us may keep hereabouts to hinder the Duke to come to fight
with the Knight, whilst the other goes to his lodging, lest he chance to come
thither; and the first of us that happens to find him, may impart him the good
news, and send word to his fellows. But how shall I (said Erinnio) find the
way to the cave, in case it should behoove me to come thither? Mary very well,
as I shall now direct thee, (replied Carildo:) For, ere we walk an hundred
paces farther, I will put thee on a path that leads directly thither, and will
withal give thee such counter-signes as thou can not miss of it though thou
would. But scarce were they gone fifty steps on their way, when they might
hear a faint voice, whose pitiful lamentations were often parenthesed with
sighs and tears; whom, upon their passing further on, Carildo perceived to be
the Duchess.

Corianna was parted from Almadero in a bodily state exceeding feeble (as I
told you) having refused to accept his courteous proffer of causing her to be
carried to the Bark, which (for keeping concealed the place of her abode) she
made him believe she had waiting for her return, but went not far, ere her
heart was so choked with the extreme agony of her passionate grief, that
she sunk breathless to the ground, a benumming cold that seized on her corpse
depriving it of all likelihood of her ever reviving any more, and the
soule-afflicted Duchess having experimented on her all the remedies that
place could afford her, and seeing them all bootlesse, was now set a bemoaning
her, and stood a crying over her with rending her clothes and tearing her
hair, when the three Squires arrived, who seeing a little way off the Princess
in such a plight, were ready to drop down for grief.

On the other side, Lucano who remained in his lodging, accompanied with none
save Erinnio, whom because he knew not how to be handsomely rid of, that so
he might effect his intent, he bethought himself of sending him to learn out
who that Knight might be, and accordingly straightly charged him not to return
without a distinct relation thereof. But no sooner was Frinnio gone, than that
the Duke got him out of his bed, and then making the best shift he could to
cloathe himself, he took the way of the wood, with an intention to stay
there, till such time as the Knight (his reputed rival) came forth, that then
he might slay him or dye. Laying then himself along under a tree that grew
apart, he might espy (a good way off) the three met together, who having
sought him in vain, went to observe the way that led to the cave; he marveiled
to see them so loving together, whereat conceiving an unthought-of hope, he
followed them a-farre off, to see what they meant to do; till seeing them make
a stand, he likewise rested him behind a tree, from whence he might hear the
Duchess utter these despairing speeches.

And is it possible (Madame) that you will burden poor innocent me with
those vengeances which you inflict on your as innocent self; (whereas they
should be inflicted on no other than injuring Fortune) wounding thereby my
very soul for not reserving them for a time more desperate? Open (dear
Madame) alas! open (I beseech you) those fair eyes of yours; oh let that
gentle soul of yours respire in you; or if you have such power over the
Heavens as to dye when you list, then befriend me therewith too, by procuring
that I may follow you; for, I trust I have deserved that favor at your hands;
you know I associated you voluntarily in your sufferings and travels, therefore
I hope you will not shake me off from accompanying you in your sweet repose:
Besides, sithence I forsook all to serve you, it befits not a magnanimous and
noble Princess (as you are) to recompense me with this, to you, sudden, to
me unexpected death, and so leave me a miserable-exild-stranger, deprived of
you even in that place, where among the torments of your inexplicable
sufferings it was my hight of glory to be near you, both to lament and
participate of them. Thou Lucano, thou (woe is me) art he, who not content to
have (while thou lived'st) robbed her of her free will, wilt yet (now that thou
art dead) deprive her of her life too. But (sweet Madame) alas will you leave
your sweet little Prince Lucandro motherlesse, as well as fatherless? his
quaint prettiness and taking graces must then dye too, since that when you
(both his mother and nurse) are once dead, there is none then to give him
(poor infant) any more suck. The disconsolated Duchess stood so attent to
her griefs, that the three were come at her ere she saw them; so as the first
motive that drew her eyes on them, were these words of Carildo: Why! what mean
these strange alterations, Madame? am I come to bring you good news, and
pretend you to receive them with so dolorous a spectacle? my Lord Lucano lives,
nobly-honest and loyal as ever, nay more! he is here too; and will then his
(more than life beloved) Princess dye because she will not see him? At that
word the Princess opened her eyes, and faintly sighing peer'd Olmiro in the
face; when he prostrating himself on the ground thus bespake her.

Right excellent Princess, if any tardance of mine be the occasion of your
Highness sufferings; I then pray Heavens that yours be my death: But know (my
liege Lady) that more than is, could not possibly be done; I beseech you strive
with your self to pluck up a good heart; for to your comfort know that the
Duke my Lord is here, and by reason of a mistake lies in as bad a plight for
you, as you do for him: Be pleased then (I beseech you) to give us leave to
carry you to the cave, that I may then after hye me speedily to him to give him
life, and bring him to you.

Whilst Lucano stood as a by-spectator of this part of a Tragecomedy, he might
see displayed from out the wood another scene. The Princess of Feacia (whom he
before had taken for Corianna) not knowing that her Almadero was otherwise
busied, was met by him whom she had espied from the hill top: And Polimero
with his company seeing the three Squires coming out of the wood, went another
way to find them out: Whilst Lidomia being told by Almadero that he had
strangers at home, goes her way. Lucano at first sight was almost deceived
again; nay he had questionless so been, if the lamentation of the four had
not pointed him out the true Corianna: And now seeing those Knights go
that-a-way, he made a stand, though his heart drew him out of the ambush he lay
in, as free by then from jealousy as more than ever sick of love and pity.
Corianna (now that she was somewhat able) was about to speak in answer to
Olmiro, when she saw stand over her the five Knights, and a little after
Almadero; Lindadori forgetting her design of passing for a man, sat close by
her like a young Girl, conforting her with the prettiest words that could be:
When Almadero (by this time come) greeted her with these speeches.

Madame, it has pleased (you see) the Gods to chastize you for the disfavour
you (to your own prejudice) did me, in refusing to accept of a short repose in
my poor house: I hope you will now oblige me with that favor, sithence these
noble Gentlemen join with me to entreat you to suffer your self to be
carried up, there to continue till such time as you have recovered strength
enough to go on your intended voyage: But she, not being yet able to speak
much, with a low voice thanking him, told him, that those her three servants
would carry her very well to her Bark; and with that, calling to her Olmiro,
she whispered him in the ear to go for the Duke, and bring him presently to
the cave. Lucano who standing aside observed all, seeing him part, and
imagining that he went for him, stepped out to Olmiro, (a joyful man to see
him, whom he was already bethinking with himself whither to go to find out)
who now told him in two words all the business by him before hand sufficiently
comprehended: That done, Lucano suddenly breaking through the circle of
Knights, prostrated himself before her, and then taking her by the hand and
bathing it with his tears, he affectionately kissed it: She presently knew
him, and at the very sight of him instantly recovered her full strength, her
soul then returning to its proper mansion, and her spirits executing their
several offices. Clasping then her arms about his neck, forgetting the nice
decorum of her sex, and the (at other times blush-procuring) presence of so
many Knights, she (parenthesing her words with greedy kisses) thus bespake him.

And what God restores you to me now, my sweet Lucano? what spiteful death
(alas!) took you from me, dearest life of my soul? Dye I, or live I now, I
shall live or dye contented for seeing you alive, and too withal not another
but mine. But tell me (I beseech you) are you indeed Lucano, or the sweet
spirit that was in him? No, no! you are my true loyal Lucano. Spirits (I see)
are not dissolved by the blows of Fortune. This your languishing palenesse is
a mark infallible of your love, and a most glorious trophey of mine: But (my
dear soul) you are in some sort recompensed for it, since your tomb has not
any either more worthy Epitaph, nor your Hearse any Elegy that express your
disasters more lively than does this face of mine, whereon (so you but cast
your eye) you may there read in sad characters the deposition of my affection.
To this Lucano after he had first (as a preludium to his speech) vented a few
profound sighs thus answered.

The life (Madame) that at this present I receive, is the hight of so great a
glory, that the death and now past calamities that I suffered, come exceedingly
short of meriting it: Happy therefore were I, if for better expressing my
loyalty and to do you further service, I might often reiterate the sufferings
of my disasters. For, though that your favor to me-wards ever the same does
ever warrant my content from becoming subject to alteration; nevertheless
Fortune's so various accidents make me (now that I have proved and felt them
adverse) relish better my happiness than before, when I knew nothing of its
spiteful effects. Only I affectionately beg of you, to add this one favor
more to the sum of my obligations, (which is) that you will presently cheer
up your spirits, and live; otherwise I protest unto you, that I may well
resolve to dye my self, but not to endure to see you lead me the way to
either death or grief: which said, he embracing her affectionately, nourished
by the assistance of their close-joyned lips, her weakely-panting with his
fresh-vigorous spirits; and then (she having first bestowed such time as was
necessary for recovering her intercepted breath) bethought of getting her self
up, and to be gone to her retiring-place, her cave: For furthering of which her
desire, the Duchess, to strengthen her fainting spirits, presented her with a
morsel of restorative conserve, which she had brought with her purposely to
revive her, but could not persuade her to take of it before, because of her
then resolution to starve her self, or otherwise set a final period to her
days. Now also afterward she was by importunity won to taste of a little
conforting wine, which together with other dainties Almadero caused to be
brought down for her, and now presented her withal, not without letting her
know how sorry he was, that her diffidence extended so far as to Cavaliers,
who were obliged to serve her.

Eromena lighting now on an occasion conforming with a determination of hers,
concluded on by her husband and the Count of Bona of taking her along with
them, thus greetes her: Madame, I know you by your high birth, noble spirit,
and disasters, ere e're I had the honor to be acquainted with your person; and
now that I have the happiness to know you that occular way too, I thank the
Heavens for favoring me so much as to find you out in such a time or plight
as I may any way steed you. And to the end you may be excuselesse, for not
commanding me, I am Eromena --. More she would have said, but that name scarce
expressed, bred such joy in Corianna, that she interrupted her with saying; And
how happy a day is this for me (Madame) wherein Fortune has been so liberal
as to restore me my Lucano, that so both he and I might personally tender our
service to you, whom we so much honor and desire to serve? But Eromena
observing her speak with a great deal of pains, made her this sudden reply;
Sweet Madame, let us (I pray you) lay aside all complements, and think of
some means of conveying you hence, to take some conforting-cordiall-simples,
for I conceive you have need of them: Besides, you may honor me by
voutchsafing to be acquainted with Polimero my Lord, and Lindadori my daughter,
who are also come here to serve you together with these two Knights, the one of
them which is this (showing her the Count of Bona) having chanced to epsy you
out before, hathconducted us hither expressly to bring you along with us to
Sardinia, where we shall with your greater advantage treat of your
reconcilements. And then, after complementall courtesies replied on all sides
Almadero would by all means have Corianna carried up, which favor she
accepted not of, but in excuse thereof said:

Courteous Sir, I may not accept of your much-obliging proffer, not because I
dislike of it, but for that I cannot conform the necessity of my occasions to
the desire I have to obey you; in explanation whereof I must tell you, that I
am (though I presume you hitherto know not as much) your near neighbor, and
have at home a young sucking babe that expects me; and therefore I shall make
bold to beg of you one undeniable request (which is) that you would be
courteously pleased to leave to my Lucano and me with our company the use of my
cave; whereunto (seeing her resolution so fixed) they all assented; so as she
was seated and carried thitherward in a chair accompanied (though against her
will) with all of them; who when they came to see that subterranean habitation
(though adorned with royal furniture) they could not refrain from weeping:
But more than all the rest Lucano, though he afterward passed from a sea of
tears to an Ocean of joy upon sight of the babe, whom Lindadori would needs
feed, whilst Eromena (having first excluded all the menkinde) helped Corianna
to bed; and then soon after re-admitting them, she with some sovereign
restoratives by then prepared her by the noble maiden, both conforted and
restored her enfeebled forces.

Full fifteen days entertained they themselves all of them in Ericusa: For
the Prince of Feacia being informed of their qualities, went in person to
conduct and lodge them in a delicious house of his pleasingly-scituated on the
sea side, where upon Corianna's recovering her former beauties, they were
observed, although in appearance the same with Lidomia, to be animated (though)
with different spirits; only so far alike, as took away all marveile of
their being taken the one for the other. Lucano rather was a greater subject of
amazement, since between him and Almadero could not be discerned any sensible
difference of favor or making, other than in certain gestures, and those too
rather habitual than natural.

Many complementall ceremonies passed between Eromena and Corianna, touching
their going together, till at length upon the later her accepting of the
invitation the old Prince furnished them with a Galley:

Leaving then Almadero protested-unto of a perpetual amity, they fetching
about Sicily, prosperously arrived in SARDINIA.

FINIS.

