The bayte and snare of Fortune.

Wherein may be seen that money is not the only cause of mischefe and unfortunate
ends: but a necessary mean to maintain a virtuous quiet life. Treated in a
Dialoge between man and money.

Imprinted at London, by John Wayland, at the sign of the Sun oueragainst
the Conduite in Fletestrete.

Cum priuilegio per ^ep^e^^ium.

The Prologe.
Saint Paul Doctor of verity, says that Avarice is the Root and beginning
of all euylles: Algates the men of this time present, be thereto much inclined.
For of all Estates fro the highest unto the lowest, all give their study unto
Avarice, and every one desires to have gold and silver: and for to have the
same they travail night and day, by water and by lands, thynkyng therein to
find quietness and rest, which shall never be: For in riches is never reast.
The more that a man has thereof the more he desires. For Avarice of the own
nature is insatiable, according to the saying of the Sage in the fifth Chapter
of Ecclesiastes. The covetous man is never satisfied. And Horace the Poet
says that the Coueteus man is always anhungred. And S. Jerome says that
the love of worldely goods is insatiable. And Boece in his third book of
Consolacion says that if the man which is auaricious had all the world in
his dominacion, he would not be content: for ever he would desyer to have
worldly goods more and more, and principally money, which never should be
noyons unto man were not his couetise, which ever ^^^nneth man's heart: For God
has made the silver as well as other things for the service of man. unto
whom he has made all thing subject. But when the man sets his appetite,
and desires to get money otherwise than by right and conscience, that may be
called avarice which has dominion upon the man above reason: and so it
appears that (...): which should be maystres is the servant, and she that
should be subject, is the lady, which is great blyndnes in man.

Th^s is money maystres of the man, and man to money is subject, and is
therewith so abused, that he does more therefore than for his maker, or for the
health of his soul: O fault of wisdom, o fault of reason, O faulse couetise
thou art cause of the perdicion of many men, thou art ca^se that infinite euyls
be daily committed in this mortal world. And now to show more plainly that
men be enclyned to gather money, and consequently be subject to the same, I
have put here in writing a question made between Man and Money, by manner of a
Disputacion, which vary in their words the one against the other: For money
would show his great power, and man speaks against him. But after great
disputacion the man abides vanquished because of his covetous mind,
co^^essing that it is a great felicity to have money in possession. () ()

The Bait and Snare of Fortune.
Money begins. O All mankind desirous of honor,
That would of worldly wealth have iouys^aunce
Cum hither to me that am of wurthy valor.
I am the prince perelesse in puissaunce
My name is money, that have in governance
All wurthy faytes to lose or else to bind:
Ech^ man requires to have mine acquayntaunce,
For good Fortune by my friendship they find.
^o lord there is, lady, nor chorle of kind,
What for my power and wise circumspeccion,
That they ne bear to me a loving mind,
And gladly would live under my proteccion:
What man of himself by might or wise inspection,
Without my mean can wurke a worthy deed*
None doubtless, for I set all in good direccion:
Who lacks money is not like to speed.

Man answers. With boasting words thy self how do thou lau^e,
Presumpcion in thee appears to be great:
Thou art false money, full of deceit and fraud.
In vaunting words is set thy full conceit,
Of cursednes thou art the chief receipt:
I am the man that shall it prove anon,
Against thy pride so shall I lay a bayte,
And cast thee forth a bone to pike upon.
In all the laws and books many one
I find how thou art root of all mischief,
Through thee full many a wight has misgone:
For unto man thou art so dear and lyef,
That he becummeth a robber, and a thief,
For thee forsaking God and algoodnes,
And hanged is at last for thee with great reprief:
This wage be wins by thy worthiness.

Money. MAn I perceive thou speak without thy book*
But I shall answer to thy foolishnes:
Thy wit is naught it stands all a croke,
Thy tongue is racle, thy wit is rechles
Thus to report of me such wickedness
That never knowingly against thee did ne spoke:
With me to dispute thy mind is great (I guess)
Speak what thou will, and answer shall I make.
Unto my faite good head if thou do take,
Who lacks me he likes not easily,
Displeasure and thought does bring him unto wrake
And ploungeth his heart full often in fantasye:
Merchandise he sees to sell, and feign would bye
But I am away that ever do the deed.
Than sinketh his thought in deep melancoly
Distress and dolor does cause his heart to blede.

Man. THou speak enough but hold me yet excuse
Thy word to believe, for all thine appetite
On leasing is set, that man were well abused
That would for thy bost, and words white
Have in the favor, love, or else delight:
For whose list to live at liberty
And of displeasure and trouble would be quite
Ought as fro a serpent fro thy love to fly.
All wickedness is wrought by mean of thee
As Robberies, rapine, usury, and strife
With fraud, flattery, disceite and subtlety
Brawling and barat, with all misordered life.
Thou raisest debate betwixe the man and wife
Thou causest man often to swear blood, arms, and brains
And suddenly at last he dies upon a knife
All for thy love, this is a goodly gaynes.

Money. THou speak not well, I tell thee man again,
For who that has me is honored as a lord,
A knave can I make for need a captain
The great man shall lowte (and never to remorbe)
Unto the villayne, the wise man shall accord
Lowly to the fool, his bonet to auale
With master Doctor in mouth at every word
And knee to ground to boot him of his bale.
But he that lacks my friendship in his male
Had he the strength of Samson in his time,
The tongue of Tully for to tell his tale,
And Salomons wit living without crime,
Yet for he has no help nor succoure by me
The people in play shall point him with the finger
Lo there goes a semesypher in algorisme,
There goes a wretch, a fool, and a barat bringer.

Man. WEre it not tath I have intelleccion
Reason and wisdum to know what is what,
Thy foolish presumcion and hardy obieccion
Would bring me in doubt what for this or that,
Whether I should believe thy words or not:
By just probacion yet trust I for to find
Good matter enough thy boasting and barat
Clearly to confound, and make thy reason blind.
Full often I think and muse in my mind
Upon thy faite thou cursed creature,
Encombred thou have full many of mankind,
As well is founden written in Scripture:
Such fantasy men have unto thy false figure
And so desire thy cursed acquaintance
That the poor soul may seek his adventure,
So do thou draw them to the diuils dance.

Money. BE still man I say, for I have litel Joy
Thus to hear thee Iangle as he that takes no head.
Who builded London that named was new Troy
But I puisant penny, that each man cloth and feed.
Ever grows grace out of my gromel sede
York, Lincoln, Linne, Leycestre, Lichfelde, and Lancasire
I bilded Bristow, Bremingam and Barwik upon twede
Durei^me, Darby, Dorcestre, Dover, and Dancastre.
Winchestre, Walden, Worcestre, Ware, Warwik and Westchestre
Cambryge, Carleil, Couentre, Calais, and Canterbery
Bath, Boston, Bedforde, Bokingha^, Roeston, and Rochester
Medla^, Manchestre, Malmesburi, Stawmforde, and Tukesbury
Southamto^, Sandwith, Sud^u^y, sa^^t Albo^s and Salesbury
Northamton, Newarke, No^^ngha^, New Ca^^^^ upon Tine
Great cause may I have, for to be glad and m^r^,
Since these and thousands more be made by me and mine.

Man. TO hear thy words it is a w^^^nes
For never was noble C^t^^ (...),
But by the occasion of thy ^^^s^dnes
Has been destroyed full many (...) C^^^^*
Howbeit mankind by great subtil^^e*
By diligent labor and politic prudente
Through out the world in every country
Has made many Cities and towns (...)
Not by thy mean, but by experience
Of his pregnant wisdum in each op^r^cion*
He made and forged thee by high and (...)
Of earth that is matter most vile (...)
Thou geuest to thy self a great (...)
As profitable to man, which is each (...)
Full many a fair City to utter (...)
By thee has been brought, that (...)

Money GReatly have thou erred as manner well a^^^s^^
Me thus to rebuke, and utterly despise,
Full litel reason is in thy head comprised
Me thus to reprove it is no gentil gu^se.
Great lords and ladies that be both good and wise
And al degrees have me in lane and favor
And gladly a mean would find and devise
My kind acqueintaunce to purchase every hour.
Thou know how god the high (...)
Of earth has formed man after his (...)
Of all the world he made him gouernoure
And after that, I will not keep in cage
How man made me with cross and crowned (...)
Out of the earth whereof himself he came,
Why should man be contrary to me in his (...)
Since he came of the earth and I came of the (...)

Man. AS in this case thou say me troth in deed,
God has made man of earth a vile substance
This do I believe as parcel of my creed
But than god gave him soul made to his own semblance.
With many fair gifts he did him than advance
Endowed him with virtue, grace, wisdom, and reason,
To order him and his, and do his obseruaunce
Unto god his maker, when time requires and season.
A thing unreasonable art thou not worthy two peason
Unworthy to be compted of gods high creacion
But man him self the made, when grace was with him geason
As naught out of naught, by cursed instigacion
Of subtle Sathanas that gave him informacion:
Than wealth, grace and goodness their roumes began to resign,
Thy pride among Princes took such a dominacion
That many royal royalmes ben brought unto ruin.

Money. THough do great wrong so strongly me to blame,
That god has made man of the.iiii. Elements.
To serve him as his lord, I fully grant the same,
In Genesis written the mat^er evident is:
And man has made me (what need these argumente^)
In semblable wise to serve him at his need,
Living by reason* and as convenient is
Preserving his soul from vice in word and deed.
When god formed man (thy self thou may it read)
He gave him fre will that he in all goodness
Might make here in earth his profit and his speed
Of me and all other creatures more and les:
Sith man has reason, and will of his lightness
Misuse me, putting his soul in ieopardy,
Should I be blamed* for his unstableness
No god forbid, there is no reason why?

Money. BE still false money, and understand my sawes
Full cursed art thou, and made all in dispite,
Of reason, of right, decrees, and all good laws:
For after that man had made the for delight
The golden world furthwith was quenched quite,
What time all joy was to the people rife
No cross nor coin of the not worth a myte
Had they that time, and led a merry life.
Their Merchandise they gave man child and wife
One thing for an other by way of Innocence,
Al riches was commune without barat or strife
Tresours men hated as death or pestilence:
Full ioyously they lived without concupiscence
Of the, that art now the causer of all vice.
Thy cursed coin and inconvenience
So brenneth men's hertes with fire of avarice.

Money. THy words as Iapes ought well to be recompted
For by thy speech Ise thou would sustain
That one man than, an other not surmounted:
It is not troth, for it appears plain
How sum were subjects, and sum were sovereign,
Record I rake in the old testament
Of Nembroth the great, as king and Captain
That had great people to him obedient.
Wherefore I silver, as thing expedient
Was sought out and coined, mankind to succoure,
None Emperor there is, King, Duke, ne Regent
But I must uphold his dignity and honor:
Who maynteyneth Justice but mine excellent power?
Who ponisheth mysdoers that do the poer oppress,
Who wageth the servant who paieth the souldeour,
But I pu^^sant ^eny that does all wrongs redress.

Man. NAy leave out rebres, and say that do all wrong,
For when truth is tried that will be the conclusion.
Is Justice done by money: for shame stop thy tongue,
Such wourdes to pronounce it a great abusion:
^ay Justice by money is brought to clear confusion.
But noble wisemen that reason have in store
With connyng and conscience, and cast for no collusion
By these is Justice exalted evermore.
But by false mean these deep men in lore,
Have often a crossed cloud cast before their sight,
That never a true letter written them before
Can be understand, so stopped is the light:
The poor man has his matter made wrong out of the right,
And thereupon is given false judgment:
Thus justice by thee reuerced lies upright,
And law deep in the dyke is driven down and drent.

Money AS for an answer, I say unto thee man,
Part of thy words be true, I do consent,
Saying that the laws be ended now and than
By great learned men of wise entendment.
But who so ever before them does present
His righteous matter without my help in hand
His case up so down is cast incontinent,
The ground thereof they can not understand.
But he that has treasure, gold, silver, house and land,
He shall be obeyed as lord with young and old,
That man may lead the world well in a band.
For each man to him gives, and says, good master hold.
Who so has De quibus, has pleasures manyfolde,
Him needs not to care for children ne for wife,
For trouble or vexacion, for hunger or for cold,
He takes no thought, but leads a merry life.

Man. The more we dispute, the falser do, I find
Thy words peuish penny, for man without measure
Has pain for thy sake, though his desirous mind.
Both night and day with all his busy cure,
Over hills and dales (alas poor creature)
He rydeth, he runs, and over sea he sayleth,
He dyggeth, he delueth, and dolor does endure
For penny, yet his peine sumtime him naught avails.
If man would mark well how penny him preuayleth,
A mer'uaylous thing it were for to consider.
To serve his maker both night and day he fayl^th,
But mind of money him draws he cares not whyder
He renneth for money now hither and now thither,
More dangerous in deed thou art and poysonable
Than is the venym of serpent, toade, or spyder,
Through mind of money is man made miserable.

Money. IF man would be content with suffisaunce
Of worldly substance, hauiour, and riches
He should for certain live without greuaunce,
Without suthe travail, pain, and business,
Happy should he be me penny to posses,
To live for ever in joy, disporte and pleasure.
And if him list, so govern him doutles,
To be without all rancour and displeasure.
But since he cannot be content with measure,
Much travail and pain behooves it him to take
Pennies to purchase with rich substance and treasure.
Quietness and rest for me he does forsake,
with travail and pain he is content to wake
Because he knows my puissaunt excellence
Me to assemble with means that he can make,
He does him endeavor with all his diligence.

Man. HE that on money so fixes his intent
More wicked he is than ever was Judas,
Leading his life in sorrow and tourment,
And ever a bydyng a miserable caas,
Of vi^es an heap, he has both more and less,
As couetise and pride, with clasping nygardy,
Treachery also him shall not ouerpas,
Envy nor wrath, nor wretthed usury.
In him is neither law, prudence, nor policy
To do a good deed he never can have leisure:
All grace and goodness have leave to pass by,
His mind is set hollie of riches to have seasure,
In detestable vites is set his only pleasure,
And goods for to assemble in great abundance,
Whereof he has no mind again to make disseasure,
But poor men to punish unto the ou^traunce.

Money. TO hear thee speak, it seems plain in deed
That man without me with sin is never blent:
That is not so, now take unto me head.
When Satan with subtlety does man's mind prevent,
And than of his lyghtnes inclines his intent
Aduertence to give unto his false temptacion,
And after does the deed with foul and vile consent,
Shall I bear the blame for his abhominacion?
Now mark well my saying, after the worlds creacion
First was made Adam, as father of mankind:
Who fell not long after to preuaricacion.
His makers commandment as creature unkind,
Right sinfully he transgressed, so pride made him blind:
Cain after mourdered Abel the mean time was not long.
That time was I uncoined, therefore man change thy mind
To blame me of all evils, in deed thou do great wrong.

Money. This is a fair excuse if it might be so taken,
Yet infinite evils thou causest and offense:
Gods high commandment for thee is often forsaken,
His laws be broken by disobedience.
Men draw to them Money with all their diligence,
By barat, by subtlety, by rapine and deceyt:
The poor thou defoulest by forse and violence,
That beg must he needs, thou hold him so strait.
Envy thou raisest among them that be great,
That many Royalmes thereby decay and be destroyed,
Slain are the Captayne^s, and wrath lies in awayte
Til cities and towns are perished and annoyed:
On misery and mischief thus money is employed,
For money man applies him to all abhominacion.
Grace and good manners for thee he does avoid:
No reason can be laid to this, nor replication.

Money. If I lacked reason against thee to reply,
My matter were like full porely to be stayed,
If all these euilles and wretched misery
Might be found in me that thou have to me laid
In thee were than the right, it might not be denayed:
But man of his nature he is so miserable
with all the worlds wealth he can not be appayed
His mind euermbreis so insaciable.
The deuylles temptation to him is acceptable
That Cresus the king was not so covetous:
In all his deeds than is he varyable,
A brawler, a baratour, and often sedicious
And yet wurst of all he is so letherous
That he (...) consumes in foul fornication.
Beware yet I advise him, for pockes be perylous,
Least their uncleanly corrosgues him call to consummation.

Man. IF I of my lyghtnes would to thee condescende,
Thou would blase thyself as creture good and true.
Nay glutton, the wind stands in an other end:
Thou make women wanton, and to avoid virtue,
For thee they sell their bodies, and so they do ensue
With vicious living their sensual appetite:
Yet lechery at last their bale sumtyme does brue,
That often they live in dolor after their foul delight.
Spouse^reche with sum is counted not a myte,
So money may be gotten they care not how or what:
Fine keuerchefes as silk, and smockes as snow so white,
Hattes, kyrtles, gounes and gyrdles, this geat must needs be gat
With brouches, beads, and ringes, and who shall pay for that?
The husbands be so poor, they lack both gold and gages:
To ^inde therefore sum friendship where florens be more fat,
Often fall they to aduoutry, and break their marriages.

Money. ANd I make answer apertly yet again
That thy words be neither true nor stable:
I am in no wise cause* I tell it thee for certain
Though woman by her wit and mind that is mutable
Do otherwise than right, as frail and variable,
Two things in women make hourly their invasion,
Enducinge them ever to warkes vituperable:
For of all virtue these two be chief abrasion.
The first may be called the false persuasion
Of Sathanas that never cease them to assail:
The other is ambition, these two be the chief occasion
That man nor woman in virtue can prevail,
And women's hearts of nature be so frail,
Light as the leaf, and mouyng as the wind,
Ready to consent to things of none avail,
That they of afterclaps have no thought nor mind.

Man. FVll cursed art thou money and much unfortunate,
And founden wast thou first in evil time and tide,
The kardes, the dice, and other plays inordinate,
By thee ben up brought, whereby God is renyed,
And newly with blasphemies and oaths crucified.
By thee are committed vices out of number,
His poor soul to perysh to man thou art a gyde,
And death with evil end at last him does obumbre.
Thou teach him the manner his soul to encombre,
Whereby he renieth God, and wilfully offends,
For thee by night and day withouten sleep or slombre,
All vices he auaunceth, no virtue he entendeth.
The poor for all his poverty by thee his portion spends,
The world goes to wretchedness by thee, and to destruction.
By thee to foul enormitie all goes, and there it ends,
For to all wretched wickedness thou art induction.

Money. THou speak I perceive without consideracion.
So cruelly to blame me of all enormitie:
Mine arms in deed thou blasest in an homely fashion.
Mark well my wurdes a while now I pray thee,
Where see thou any man that is of gravity
Blaspheming his God, or swearing by his name?
Never in thy life, this lesson take of me,
But riotours and rybaldes that have no dread of shame.
The wise man that loves his honor and good fame
Blasphemyng his maker thou shall him never here,
In play, disporte, and pastyme, in gladness and in grame,
He has respect to sadness, his reason is so nere.
But baratours and brayneles brybours met in fere,
Their maker they dismember, and on his name they wunder,
At table, at tavern, at church, and every where:
Great horror is to hear, how they rent him asunder.

Man. THou myghtest be a minion to keep good company,
For tongue thou have enough thy matter to sustain:
If I unto thy purpose consent would or apply,
Thou would say here that Jesus our king and sovereign
Is not by thee offended, yes yes, I tell the plain,
By night of tunes a million, and much more by the day.
Who would to thee give credence a fool he were certain,
For thou art full of ficcion, thy wurdes be false alwaie.
But answer now my question penie I thee pray,
That think thee so mighty, so stern, so gay and stout:
Yield me a solucion to this that I shall say,
Concerning a matter whereof I stand in doubt:
Thou say that by thy maistrie thou bring much about,
And of thy wurthie valor great ^ost do thou blow:
What is thy puissaunt power, I pray thee speak it out?
For this is all the matter that I would of thee know.

Money. WEll do I understand thy purpose and intention,
And also perceive theffect of thy demand:
It is not so hard, nor of so high inuencion,
But if thou were in Tems in midwarde of the sand,
I should full well assail it ere thou might cum to land*
My valor and power thy question is to know,
It is no littel matter thou shall it understand,
I am of noble fame, beloved with high and low.
Upon the church of God great substance I bestow,
The ministers that sever him be all at my wages:
The poor have my succor in hunger, frost, and snow,
I feed both horse and man in holy pilgrimages.
For faier young lusty maidens I purchase marriages:
When Churches and chapels be falling in dekay,
I must make reparacion: with masters and with pages
My help must needs be had, or else there is no pay.

Man. WIth words thou would sustain that no good deed
Is done without thee, thine aid, or assistens:
Which all I deny, and shall it prove for need
That ever been thy words unworthy of credence:
Untrue art thou ever, and by thy false pretens,
Do teach men the trace of all iniquity.
Provoking him even to inconueniens,
And plounging his heart in great perplexity.
Affirm would thou feign by thy peruersiti^.
That man cannot be saved from endless pain
Without thy favor, thine aid and amity,
Wherein I say no reason does remain:
Full many a soul (more pity it is certain)
Is damned by thee to everlasting fire.
And many one more in joy should ever reign
If they should leave thy love in hot desire.

Money. Regard man and consider as reason will discern,
How I as of my self can nothing do ne say:
In thee lies all the deed, that have me to govern,
Wherefore if thou of thy lightness thee list by night or day
To lead me that am blind no streite but crooked way,
The fault if we fall is thine, not mine in deed.
To order me aright it is no childs play,
Look therefore ere thou leap, the better shall thou speed.
I am the post and pillar unto all Adams seed,
The father of the faith sumtime is made by me,
The Pope I mean, Gods vicar, and captain of his creed,
Great Emperors and Kings I crown in magestie,
Duke, Marquise, earl, baron, and Lords of each degree.
Rich Cardinals, Archbishops, the bishop and his Deane,
Abbot, Priour, prouest, the bailife with his fee
All that have promocion may thank me and my mean.

Man. O Money full of vanity, thou make me all dismayed,
Considering and knowing thy fraud and faculties,
Wherewith full nere the world is destroyed and decayed:
Men be I grant full of vice and vanities,
In towns, in boroughes, in castles and cities:
But this notwithstanding at last Atropos kerueth
A sunder their hearts, as she that without pity is,
So goes the corpse to earth, the soul as it deserves.
By arrogance oultrageous thy tongue on vanting swerueth,
Saving that by money be pourchased high estates,
Both Emperor and King at last by death he sterueth,
That avails it then their floreyns and ducates?
Each prince and prelate the darte of death chekmates.
Record may be taken of Ceasar and Pompeus,
Of Alexander, of Arthure, and Hector past their dates,
Of Charlemayn, gentle Iosue, and Judas Machabeus.

Money. THy wisdom to redress, and spirits to revive,
And of thy troubled reason to make a reformacion,
Of Adam thy first father sumwhat I shall discryue.
Immortal was he made by God at his creation,
But after that by Sathanas subtyl instigacion,
He fed him with the fruit, therewith he did transgression,
And so becam he mortal, for death took dominacion
And mortal still continues of man the hole succession.
Since death on father Adam thus took his first possession,
He proudely executes his privilege each hour
On prelate, prince and poor man he uses his oppression,
Indifferently he deals as well with rich as pour,
As soon the young as old he daily does devour.
To caytyfes he is comfort for all disease he cures.
Above all kings and Capitanes he is a conqueront,
His pride shall never perish while the world endures.

Man. O money all thy wurdes I do well understand,
But nothing to my purpose do I in them espy,
Thy sayings to deny still will I take in hand,
And sum what on thy back of charge yet lay shall I.
I know to thine opinion each person will apply,
For all men are glad to have thine alliance,
The poor is deceived, the rich has gaynes thereby,
Men favor thy faulse figure and have therein affiaunce.
The rychman oppresses the pore by his puissaunce:
And when the poor fyndeth him self at indigence,
Wrongfully entreated and driven to penance,
His reason than he leaseth, his wit and intelligence,
Turmentyng himself by great impacience:
His maker he blasphemeth, all halowes he despyteth.
And who causes all this inconvenience,
But money, that ever to mischyfe men encyteth.

Money. THe rich peradventure oppresses now and than,
The poor man in deed: but who is cause of this?
Couetise and avarice the daughters of Satan,
Evermore entising a man to w^cke amiss:
The Church they despoyle, the poor the post may kis,
For nothing they leave him, to plain him naught avails.
Shall I than bear the blame? no lay it where it is:
Lay the blame on rapine that so unjustly deals.
I know it of troth, when dread man's mind assayleth.
When he draws in age to fall in poverty,
Considering how penny in purse him much prevails,
As neybour that is necessary in each necessity,
His favor and affection enclyneth much to me,
And good reason why: for who that may not have
To help him in his age, in careful case is he,
An hundred times a day he wysheth for his grave.

Man. Enough have thou pronounced, now shall I thee confound:
By thee as I have said, was lost the world of gold.
But no we mark well the wurdes that I shall tell thee round,
By thee the gentle Jesus unto the Jews was sold,
Which after his great pains and passions manyfolde
Was stretched on a tree, and naked thereto nailed,
Best aied he was by Judas, for thyrty penies told,
Thy cursed coin with couetise so strongly him assayleth.
Great cause has now the S^a^^ot to weep and to bewail it,
That ever thou wast founden or fro the earth out tried:
For to have been unborn it had him more auayled,
Than to have ^eought the treason whereby his master died.
But where is now the traitor, the thief, the homicide*
With Satan and his feres in the infernal glede.
In perdurable pains behooves him to abide,
For love of thee faulse money lo thus he has his mede.

Money. I Se thy heart is great, with wurdes thou would defame me
Reproching me that Jesus should be by me betrayed:
With help of cursed Iscariot unjustly do thou blame me,
Thou do mistake the matter, untruly have thou said,
Thou layest on me the blame, but hold thee man appayed,
The troth of the ma^ter I shall to thee expres.
Three causes of his death in deed there may be laid,
That he was soulde by treason as first I will confess.
The Jews were much disdaynous and full of wickedness,
Al soubtilties they searched, they set their false intent
To death to have him judged they brought their false witness
Unto their Provost ^ylate their prince they did present,
Who to his condemnacion did finally consent,
For dread to be deprived and put out from his office,
Though sound were none occasion, on Christ he gave sentence
Great crimes are thus committed by mean of avarice.

Man. SO perfitely dispute against thee can not I,
But thou do assoyle the same incontinent.
To all my wurdes full well thou do reply.
With apprebacion right convenient.
And so I do perceive as by mine own judgment*
If man with his money would be so reasonable
To use it in virtue, and with a good intent,
The usage thereof should never be dampnable.
But when man of him self is so insaciable
To covet worldly goods without reason or measure,
Full wretched is he doubtless, and more than miserable
Of his abhominacion it is a great displeasure,
A man to have money, wealth, and worldly treasure
In virtue to auaunce him, and vices to avoid:
Of his wealth and welfare all other may have pleasure,
So he him cross from couetise for doubt to be acloyde.

Money. THree things there be to man as venim poysonable
When they be all assembled the man for to assail:
The first is age the crooked with stouping limbs unstable,
On man he daily crepeth, no watching may avail:
And sickness is the second that does the strength to fail,
The color he consumes, all pleasure he subdueth,
The third is paynfull poverty, these three be shreude catayle.
When these be met in man their metyng sore he rueth.
I say for my conclusion, all solace him ensues
That has of pence plenty to take when time requires,
He may live out of danger, for ever his joy renueth,
But poor men that be penyles melancholy them fyreth,
The poor oppressed with poverty full of this death desires,
So dulleth him his dolor, of God takes he no head,
That after all his misery he wretchedly expireth
To steal, to beg or borow, man is compelled for need.

Man. VVorldly goods by suffisaunce to man is necessary,
To take them at his need and serve him in goodness,
But yet he must regard, for dread his wealth miscary,
That all his goods be got by way of rightousnes.
Let God always be served before all business,
In gatheryng of his goods man may not use deceate,
Goods kept against al right, fie fie on such riches,
The pore must be relyued with clothyng, drink and meat.
Pride may not be exalted because the goods be great,
In sumptousnes of clothing let measure be a mean,
Let reason shape the fashion, not over large ne strayte,
All prodigal expenses is wisdom to refrain.
For he that is excessive a caytyfe shall remain.
When Right has gadered riches, let Reason than expende it
In virtue, to the honor of God our sovereign,
So order we our money that God be not offended.

Finis.
The Author.
Regard well all my Lords that shall this treatise read
Of man and his money, this is the disputacion,
Great reason make they both, who to the same takes head,
Ever him boasts money as high in reputacion,
Recording up his valor, but man mak^^ de^ega^ion.
Unto all men my reason I say as I have thought,
Solas is most in season when silver is unsought.
By penny to preferment many a man is brought
In borough, town and city, all men of each estate
Enforce them self to please him, the poor is set at naught,
Succor he seeks, but silver and he be at debate.
Therefore to make conclusion I say now at my gate,
Of great good deeds my Money full many be done doubtless,
Nevertheless yet is it cause of many a wyckednes.
Explicit nomen authoris.
Good Counsel
GEt thy goods truly, Spend them precisely.
Set thy goods duly, Lend thou them wisely.
True getting, Cise spending,
Due setting, Wise lending,
Have ^e little or much, Keeps a man full rutche
Until his endyng.
Finis.

