THE LECTVRES OF SAMVEL BIRD OF IPSWIDGE UPON the 8. and 9. chap ters of the
second Epistle to the Co rinthians.

Printed by John Legate, Prin ter to the University of Cambridge. 1598

printer's device of John Legate, a compartment featuring heads, flowers and
cornucopias, with the Royal Arms at the top, and four other blazons or coats of
arms below (similar to McKerrow 185, with different crests) HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y
PENSE


TO THE WORSHIPFUL Mis. MOORE AT TAL mage Hall in Briset.
THe motherly affection that you have borne toward many, and toward my
self (good Mis. Moore) puts me out of all doubt, that this speech of
bountifulnes and liberality shall find good entertainment at your hands. And
I the more willingly commend these my labors unto you, because of the blessed
memory of your good husband M. Moore, unto whose doings the Lord has set a
most visible seal, by that blessing wherewith he has blessed your children.
For whereas commonly the kindred, especially the children, are wont to cool
the liberality of bountiful persons, yet it has pleased God so to bless
your children, that they have rather strengthened your hands in this work.
This speech may perhaps seem to some to have some cunning in it. But being
privy to my self of my simplicity in this matter, and knowing that the
Apostle does for the like respect make an open proclamation to all the world of
the bountifulnes of the Macedonian Churches, I have thereby been encouraged to
say as I have said. Thus desiring the Lord to stre^gthen you in every good
duty, and nothing doubting but that the God of all mercy which has promised
to show mercy to the merciful, will most assuredly comfort you in any
distress of sickness, or any other trouble that your old years may bring in
upon you, especially at the great day, 2. Tim. 1. 18. with thanks for all your
friendship, I heartily wish you well to fare in the Lord.

1597. December. 16. Samuel Bird.

To the Christian Reader.
TO the end, good Christian Reader, thou might see the strong arguments and
the great variety of the^ which the Apostle does use in this treatise of
liberality and beuntifulnes, I thought it good first of all to Epitomize and
to anatomise these two chapters: and as it were in a glass first generally to
set them before thine eyes, before I come to the particular handling of them.
For how soever colored and rhetorical bravery as paintings loose their
grace, unless they be looked upon a fare off: for after the sound of them, if
a man would call to mind what is the substance of that which he has heard, if
a man in this manner shall come any thing near to take a good view and survay
of any such speech, and shall look upon the joints of it, the force thereof is
gone. On the other side toward sound arguments the nearer that a man approaches
unto the^, the more mighty are they to allure the beholder to a liking of
them. The second sight of them pleases a man better then the first.

2. Corinthians. chap. 8. Verse. 1. First therefore the Apostle does move the
Corinthians from the great work and grace of God bestowed upon the Macedonian
Churches.

2 Who notwithstanding they were in affliction and in great poverty, in which
kind of estate men commonly think that they are to be borne withal though
they do not think upon the poor estate of other men, yet even in this poor
estate they relieved their brethren.

3 And that more then their estate with ease could bear.

4 Neither did they tarry until they were haled thereunto by the persuasion
of other men: but of their own accord they offered, and that with great
entreaty that their relief for these poor men, who notwithstanding their
diverse infirmities, were yet the Saints of God, upon whom all our delight
should be set. They desired therefore that their relief for them might be
received.

5 Thus was their bountifulnes even beyond our exspectation, neither were they
thus liberal to be favored by the virtue thereof in some corruption, as some
have been, which would give rivers of oil that they might be dispensed
withal in their sins. But they resigned even themselves to the will of God.

6 Neither did they content themselves with that that they were hardly able to
give, but they moved others also to do this duty.

7 Wherefore, Oye Corinthians, to the intent that no disgrace may arise to that
knowledge, and faith, and diligence that is in you, let not this grace be
wanting.

8 Though it be the commandment of God that you should give, yet that this
duty may come more willingly from you, I have thought it good therefore rather
to allure you thereunto by the examples of others.

9 If a man shall think that the poor are not such worthy men, that for their
sake a man should diminish that which he has: how much more then might Christ
our Lord have so thought.

10 If you shall perform this duty, you shall have this comfort, that it was a
thing done by advise and counsel: and therefore you may be bold to venture
upon it, being such a duty as you your selves also are already persuaded that it
ought to be done.

11 I would have you to consider, that when you have purposed to do this thing,
yet it is not therefore done except you stir up your selves anew to the doing
of it.

12 As for the charges of housekeeping or any such matter, never object it,
for god only requires that we should give of that which we have.

13 The Lord his meaning is, not that we should give unto those that have less
need then our selves.

14 But that they in like manner, should give unto you, when you have need to
be relieved by them.

15 That there might be equality, and all indifferency used that may be.

16 You may see that god his meaning is, that you shoud give, in that he has
raised up such an excellent man, to move you to this duty.

17 For he was quickly moved even of his own accord, to perform that duty,
that is wont to be accounted so thankeles: whereby you may understand what a
good forwardness he hoped for at your hands.

18 It should be a means to make you give more liberally, because you see that
the collectours are excellent men, and will most certainly deliver that which
you shall give.

19 For how much you do detract from giving: so much do you detract from the
glory of god, that is, to be magnified in the fidellity of those men: and so
much the further of also are you, from showing a ready mind, having such
encouragements to go by. For by the greatness of those that go upon this
embassage, you may well think that the matter is great that is to be dealt in.

20 21 The manner also of the dealing of these men, in the delivery of that
they are put in trust with all: is such as none may doubt of their fidellitie
in this business.

22 The diligence also that they will use, being encouraged thereunto, by the
good hope that they conceive of you, should not a little move you.

23 In that Titus was such a one, as the Apostle thought to be a meet man to
be his companion, and fellow helper, in that great work of the ministry. And
that toward themselves, which had so good experience of him: no man therefore
needs to doubt of his fidellitie in this business. As for the other two
brethren, they were the messengers, not of particular men, but of the whole
churches.

24 He does therefore infer upon his former speech, that that which was done
before them, was done before all the churches, whose messengers they were: who
are even the glory of Christ.

2. Corinthians. chap. 9. If there were not some other special occasion, it were
superfluous for me to write unto you touching ministering to the saints.

2 For the redines of your mind this way is such, that I boast my self of
your preparation, (and that so long ago) to those of Macedonia, and this your
zeal has provoked many.

3 4 But yet lest those, to whom I have so much boasted of you, should at
their coming (to your and my further shame) find you unprepared: to prevent
this great inconvenience, I have sent the brethren to give you knowledge of
this thing before they come.

5 That you may finish your benevole^ce, lest it being to be finished at their
coming, they should account you a sparing and not a forward people.

6 Remember therefore that your benevolence, is as seed which is not lost when
it is thrown into the ground; but the less you sow, the less crop shall you
have: and the more you sow, the more plentiful will your harvest be.

7 Always provided, that the manner of your sowing be with purpose of heart,
and not only to avoid the hard opinion that those of Macedonia might
otherwise have of you, for God requires of you that it should be your own will
and your own deed.

8 Neither be you afraid if you be bou^tifull, that then you shall never hold
out in this duty, for God that has given you a promise, is able also to
perform it.

9 For there is a general proclamation of this mercy, to all that will
perform this duty.

10 And we have a pledge of this his favor, in that he blesses the sowing of
the husbandma^: so that thereby he has wherwithall to maintain his family,
and also to sow again (and that more plentifully) the next year after, he
that does the one will also perform the other.

11 That thereby you might be made rich in the best thing, even in the
liberality which being practiced toward a people, that by the preaching of
the Gospel have learned whom to thank for it, god also by this means may
have that honor that is due unto him.

12 For this sacrifice (as I may term it) is not only not a wasting in vain
of the things that we have, being bestowed where need is, and fitting the
necessities of those that are even our own flesh; but God also thereby has
that duty performed unto him, even the duty of thankefulnes, that of all duties
he does most highly account of: and that not also by a few but by many.

13 Howsoever god accepts very well of thanks for every of his common
mercies, yet when his great gift of humbling any unto the Gospel is
acknowledged, because the world does not make any reckoning of it: this
thankefulnes is acceptable unto God in the highest degree. Seeing therefore that
thanks this ways shall be given unto God by means of our bou^tifulnesse,
which being given in this manner is a token of the submitting of you selves
thereunto. If any thing, then this thing should encourage you unto this duty.
Besides this God shall also have thank for the good that redoundes thereby
even unto the bodies of men.

14 In respect of your selves, also your releife shall be to great purpose, for
the lord has put a blessing into the hands of afflicted persons, to bestow
upon those that do relieve the^. And those that of all men ca^ do most with
God shall pray for you. Besides this to have good men long to be in our company,
to delight to heat of us, i^ is a greater blessing then we take it to be,
which notwithstanding shall come to pass by means of this duty.

15 I am not able to express the excellency of the great gift of God, when he
opens men's hearts to relieve their poor brethren: and I nothing doubt, but
that God will work this great thing in you. And therefore thanks be unto God
so this vspeakable gift.

THE LECTVRES OF SAMVEL BIRD Upon the 8. and 9. chapters of the second epistle
to the Corinthians.
1 We do you also to wit brethren, of the grace of God bestowed upon the
Churches of Maceaonia.

2 Because in great trial of affliction their joy abounded, and their most
extreme poverty abounded unto their rich liberality.

3 For to their power I bear record, yea and beyond their power they were
vvilling.

4 And prayed us with great instance that we would receive the grace and
fellowship of the ministering which is toward the Saints.

1 THe scarsitie of all things having been so long time upon our land, as our
fathers never knew the like, it must needs be a very necessary doctrine that
shall affoard us help and comfort against it: especially if we consider how
acceptable a service the relieuing of our brethren will be at that time when we
would most gladly be comforted. For though the Lord in mercy will reward every
good work of his servants, yet by a certain kind of excellency the
relieuing of the poor members of Christ Jesus is in a most special manner
remembered, Matthew. 25. Because therefore the holy Ghost has set down his will
unto us more fully and particularly touching this duty then in any one place
of the whole Bible throughout: having purposed through the assistance of God
his grace to speak of the doctrine of relief, I thought it good to make
choice of this portion of scripture. In these two chapters the Apostle goes
forward to take up the handling of those things that he had mentioned in his
first epistle and the last chapter, the beginning of the chapter: and this was
the occasion of his speech. The prophet Agabus told of a famine that should be
throughout all the world, by means whereof the poor churches of Jerusalem
were in great danger of perishing, if they were not greatly relieved: whereupon
the Apostle took order that the Gentiles might be moved to contribute unto
them. Act. 11. 28. Gal. 2. 10. The Apostle therefore having moved the
Corinthians in this matter, 1. Cor. 16. 1. and finding them not so forward as
was to be wished, he prouokes them again unto this duty, with a large
exhortation, and with many arguments. 1 And because examples are of great force
to draw men unto duty, he therefore certifieth them what the poor churches of
Macedonia had done in this matter; by the which practice of the Apostle, we are
taught this lesson: namely, that when we understand of any, that have dealt
liberally and bountifully with their poor brethren in these hard times, that
we should be talking to them of this matter, for it is a forcible motive to
move them to this duty. When the commandment of giving is only stood upon,
answer is wont to be made, that we should do so. But who does it? when
therefore we bring forth the parties that have done so, that shift is taken
away. The argument that the Apostle does here use is of very great force, in so
much that when no other argument will prevail, this is thought meet even then
to persuade, Romans 11. 14. when the Jews had rejected the Gospel. The Apostle
thought that the telling of them that the Gentiles had received it, would be of
force to recover them again. And to speak more particularly concerning this
present duty; Solomon when he will move even the hard hearted usurer to leave
off his hard dealing, and to be merciful to the poor, he uses no other
reason but this that the Apostle has here, Prove. 28. 8. namely to provoke him
by the example of others: He, says Solomon, that increases his riches by
usury and interest, gathers them for him that will be merciful to the
poor. The usurer has no such meaning that his goods should be so employed,
but Solomon tells him that it will fall out so. And it were better that he
himself should bestow his goods well, then that others should do it when it
shall be no thank to him. If it should move the usurer when he is told what
will fall out hereafter, when men therefore be told what has been done
already, it should much more affect them. Men commonly are wont to certify
their neighbors of the estate of those that purchase and grow in wealth: but
this is a means to work envy in them, and to move them to the like
worldlines. The certificate that is here spoken of, is a thousand times better:
for it raises up the affections of men to the love of mercy. We are also
further to note out of the first verse, that the Apostle does account it a
benefit to the giver that he does give. For the Saints of Jerusalem were the
men that were relieved, yet the Apostle says, I certify you of the grace or
gift of God bestowed upon the churches of Macedonia that were the giuers. And
this is agreeable to that saying of our Savior Christ, It is an happier thing
to give then to receive, Act. 20. 35. And Paul confirms this matter, Philip.
4. 17. when he tells them that he was desirous to have them bountiful, not
says he, that I desire a gift: but I desire the fruit that may further your
reckning. The spech that the Apostle does use is borrowed from the practice of
such as use traffic one with an other in this world. As he that utters
wares to any chappeman, the more he utters the greater will his gain be in
the account when he comes to reckon: so is it in this matter. Men commonly
account it a burden, a loss and an hindrance, but the Apostle calls it a
grace and a gift, that poor me^ should give as they did. If men had had the
inditing of this story, they would only have told us what a great gift the
Saints of Jerusalem received of the Macedonians: but to have written thus, I
do you to wit concerning the grace of God bestowed upon the Churches of the
Macedonians: it would never have come into their head but we are taught to
acquaint our mouths with such speeches. Besides other reasons if it be
considered that in the fearful fall of many, it is used as an argument to
assure men that they are not of that number when they are bountiful to the
Saints of God, Hebr. 6. 9. and 10. we shall then see that not without cause it
is called a grace or a gift. 2 He does now tell us what that grace was that
was bestowed upon them, namely that though they were in affliction, yet were
they not oppressed therewith, but had faith in the Lord, and rejoiced in him
with joy of others, opened their hearts to give plentifully of that little
which they had unto their brethren. By rejoicing in God, they provided very
well for themselves in their affliction against worldy sorrow; for as in the
body, cold diseases are healed by hot things: so in the soul, worldly grief
is healed by godly joy. If men in their troubles would rejoice in the Lord,
they would not then think other things, health, wealth, liberty, or any other
worldly commodity so delightful: that for the want thereof they would fret
against God. And if me^ will examine when they are overtaken of fretting, they
shall find that at that time they did not rejoice in the Lord, that they did
not delight in his word, musing much upon his faithful promises, until they
were delighted therewith. A man cannot be always in grief, and we would gladly
delight in something: if not in God, then in worldly matters, which when we see
that we have not, then we fret; and here we see a difference between
spiritual and fleshly joy. The one, if any thing falls out otherwise then
well, the life of it is clean taken away: the other though it be hindered with
troubles yet it still remains. The joy that he speaks of was in the Lord,
which always remains good and gracious unto his servants, to minister matter
of rejoicing unto them. Phillip. 4. 4. The rejoicing in trouble, and their
bou^tifulnesse are both joined together, and are made one and the same grace:
for when the heart is bent to bestow any thing, there is joy, the heart is
opened and enlarged. On the other side, when the heart is oppressed with
grief, it is so pe^t up that it is nothing ready to any duty. Hebr. 12. 12.
Lift up your weak hands and your weak knees says the Apostle. The wicked by
buisiyng themselves about other matters, labor to avoid the sense of evil,
with sporting themselves, and by driving away phansies as they say: but the
godly even from the affliction gather matter of comfort; The Lord will do me
good eue^ for this man's railing, says the Prophet, 2. Sam. 16. They comfort
themselves with this, that whom the Lord does love, he does chastise. When men
are in trouble, they think that they are to be borne withal though they mind
no man's matters but their own: but wherefore do you look so sad, says
Joseph, to those that were in prison, Genesis 40. 7. And Paul a prisoner writes
comfortably for Onesimus. And the Macedonians in afflictions comforted and
relieved the poor Saints of Jerusalem. 3 By saying that they gave above their
strength, his meaning is, not that they gave so that they were forced to take
of others, as may appear in the 12. verse: for that were to rob Peter and to
pay Paul. But this his meaning is, that besides giving as much as they were
able: they wished also that they could give more; for as in strait hearted men,
their will is not so large as their gift, though it be but a little that they
do give. So in open hearted men, though they give as much as they are able,
yet is their desire to do good, larger then the gift: they are so mindeful to
pleasure the party whom they love, that they forget themselves, 1. Cor. 13. 5.
The Apostle does offer himself to be a witness to testify in this matter. He
no doubt, required of their estate, that he might be able to testify:
otherwise the Corinthes might have objected, that every man, even those that
have money enough, when any good bargain is offered; yet when there is any
speech of giving, they will then be accounted poor men. The Apostle says,
that he ca^ testify that it was not so with the Macedonians. And we are to
observe, that although other Churches did contribute as well as those of
Macedonia, as namely the Galatians, 1. Cor. 16. 1. and the Romans, Romans 1. 5.
26. yet because those of Macedonia (though poor) were forwarder then the rest,
therefore does he make choice of propounding their example both to the
Corinths, and also to the Romans: for the Lord looks not to the greatness of
the gift, but to the greatness of the affection, which cannot be great in a rich
man except he gives very much. And therefore the Apostle does not speak of
the quantity of money which they gave, but he propounds unto them their
giving above their strength, that thereby he might raise up the like bountiful
affections among the Corinthians. 4 Their readiness in giving is further
commended: for they did not stay until they were entreated, but they offer and
that earnestly their liberality before they were entreated. The common manner
is to think that men have need when they beg, or some others make request
in their behalf, but these men saw that the Church of Jerusalem could not
choose but want, without any admonition. This forcing of men to go a begging
is a very disorderly course: for those that have least need will be forwardest
in begging: and therefore he that will not labor let him not eat, says the
Apostle. On the other side, many will be in very great extremity before they
will beg. This forcing of men to ask is a shaming of them, nay it is a
shaming of a man when another beggeth for him in his presence. For if a man be
ashamed when a man must bring forth his own meat, being but a poor diet,
and eat it in the presence of those that have a more liberal diet before
them, 1. Cor. 11. 22. then is it a shame to beg other men's meat. The
relieuing of widows is called an honoring of them, 1. Tim. 5. when we
account them worthy to be relieved: but shaming and honoring of them cannot
stand together. That relief is most acceptable unto God, that is most
comfortable to the parties that be relieved: but giving without begging is most
comfortable: therefore that must needs be most acceptable. A man his friend may
do many things for another which himself may not so well do, amongst which
things this that is here spoken of, is one of them. In that the Macedonians did
offer so earnestly before the Apostle would take it, it may appear that though
the Apostle would feign have the poor relieved, yet he was wary and
circumspect of whom he did take it; so that all that is offered, must not be
taken neither for our selves nor for others, but consideration must be had what
is convenient. When Absolon bad David to a feast he refused to go, 2. Sam. 13.
25. for fear of being ouerchargeable: for when inferiors inuit their
superiors in a bravery, they are wont to be above measure in their provision:
David therefore would give no encouragement to any such course. Otherwise
except there be some special occasion, there is want of love in it. And
therefore the Apostle does make an apology in his own defense, when he
refuses the kindness of the Corinthes, 2. Cor. 11. 11. The cause wherefore he
does not receive the liberality of the Macedonians, before it was forced upon
him with great entreaty was, because of their poor estate. Other causes also
there may be of this refusal, as namely when a man sees that the party that
offers the gift, his other behavior is not answerable and suitable to this
pretented kindness: but that he seeks thereby to insult upon his brother, and
to give him to understand thereby, that he is able to bestow somewhat upon
him. When a man by receiving a gift, shall abridge himself of that liberty
that it is meet a man should have in his dealings and conversation with him,
then a man is to give no allowance to any such matter, as may appear by the
example of Abraham, Genesis 14. 23. For it is al one as if a man should sell his
birth right for a mess of pottage. It falls out sometimes that when a man is
to deal with a chapman, he will bid him to dinner, but he will make him pay
dearly for it in the bargain. He does again call the gift of the Macedonians
a grace, thereby to draw men the rather to give. For that which makes men so
loath to give is, because they think that it is their own, not considering that
they are only disposers of the manifold graces of god, 1. Pet. 4. 10. as
stewards, and must be countable to their master for them, whether they have
used them to the best advantage of their masters credit. Luke, 16. 1. The name
of grace will also take away the opinion of desert; Romans 11. 6. And therefore
David when he had made such goodly preparation for the most glorious temple
that ever was in the world. 1. Chro. 29. 14. yet says he, we have given thee
that which is thine own. He calls it the fellowship of the ministering,
because the Apostle did go with the relief that was gathered, 1. Cor. 16. 4.
For then will men be willing, when they know that the party that does carry
it, will distribute it faithfully. On the other side, we see how unwilling men
be to give to proctours, of whose trust and faithfulness they may very well
doubt: and that the poor houses for whom they gather shall have but a little
of the collection. If therefore we will have men willing to give, we must be
very careful to appoint such collectours as are of great credit with the
consciences of such as are to give. It is not also to be omitted, that the
poor here and throughout these two chapters, are termed by the name of
Saints, which is an honorable title: and therefore when he will put the
Corinths in mind of the excellency of their estate, he tells them that they
are Saints by calling, 1. Cor. 1. 2. by sanctification is the image of God
renewed within us. The Saints of God be those upon whom all our delight should
be set, Psalm. 16. 3. to move therefore our selves and others to give to the
poor, we are to consider that they are the Saints of God. The thing that makes
us despise them and be careless of them, is the forgetting that they are rich in
faith, and heirs apparent to the kingdom of heaven, Iam. 5. 2. The Apostle
was not ignorant that diverse of those whom he speaks of were vnvnruly, and
a man may think it a strange thing, that the Apostle needed to be prayed for
in this matter; for who would doubt that coming with relief, of his being
welcome unto them, yet we see he prays the Romans, cap. 15. 31. to pray for
him that this his service might be accepted of the Saints, Act. 6. 1. If men be
moved to contribute to poor scholars in the universities, from whence the
Gospel has sounded into all parts of the kingdom, answer is wont to be made,
that they are so proud in their apparel, that it is pity that they should
have any relief: now though some forget themselves that ways, yet all do
not, and they make choice of the best. If men would accustom themselves to
account them the poor saints of the universities, as the Apostle does call the
poor people of Jerusalem by that name; and that also when he does think upon
their wa^ts, Romans 15. 31. then would men be more ready to give. The like may be
said of the poor people of God every where. We account as well of other
things, when they be in the hands of the poor, as we do when they be in the
hands of the rich. In a market or fair, if a poor man will buy any thing,
his money shall be as well esteemed of as the money of the rich: and if he will
give but a penny more for a thing, he shall have it before another: his coin
is as good silver as an other man's. And why should not sanctification be
esteemed of as well in the poorer sort as in other men? The Apostle calls
them Saints which do now live, and needed relief, which is good also to
observe. For if a man should be of the opinion of the papists in this point
namely, to account no man a Saint whilst he lives, what great heart should a
man have to relieve any. On the other side, to consider that in the scripture
the servants of God are not called Saints after their death, but only whilst
they be alive: and after their death they have other names given them, as
Kemnisius against the counsel of Trent, does very well observe, may be a
means to pull men from Idollatry. True it is, that corruption is mingled with
holiness, as water is mingled with wine; yet we call it wine and not water: so
must we account the other Saints, though they have wants in them. The meaning
of the Apostle, is not that only the saints of God should be relieved: for if
thine enemy hunger, feed him. But howsoever we must do good unto all, yet
especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6. they must have the privilege of
an elder brother, even a double portion. If the alms of some few of the
Papists which are forwarder in giving then their fellows, were examined by this
rule, it would not dazzle the eyes of some men as it does.

5 And this they did not as we looked for: but gave their own selves, first to
the Lord, and after unto us by the will of God.

6 That we should exhort Titus, that as he had begun, so he would accomplish
the same grace among you also.

They are commended for being bountiful beyond the exhortation of the Apostle.
The profession of the Gospel does as it were, promis the releeuing of their
poor brethren, so that all that here of the one, will hope of the other: so
that those professers which do not perform this duty, are called in the
scripture clouds without rain. And it is dangerous in the highest degree to
disapoint me^ of the hope which they conceive of them; for they are subject to
the curse which was denounced by Christ against the fig tree, never fruit
grow on thee hereafter. But these people are here commended for performing
more then ever the Apostle did look for. And we know he looked that even a
laboring man should give to him which has more need then himself, Ephesians. 4.
The cause of their liberality is said to be this, namely that they gave over
themselves unto the Lord, they rezined their will to the will of God: when a man
denies himself, he will soon be brought to give where need is, and good
reason it is that we should do so, for we are not our own 1. Cor. 6. We must
not live to our selves but to the Lord, referring al to his honor, Romans 12. 1.
here I am to do thy will, O Lord. When men were once subdued by the Gospel,
they laid their money down at the Apostles feet, Act. 4. 35. and therefore
it is said, they gave themselves first unto the Lord, and after to us by the
will of God. Shall I, says David, give unto God that that costeth me nothing,
2. Sam. 24. 24. 6 They are said to have done good, not only by their example,
but also by their speech. For they entreated the Apostle to deal with Titus to
go forward with that which he had begun. By this speech we may first of all
observe the great modesty that was in the Apostle, who desired not to be
accounted the only man that dealt with the matter of relief: but did most
willingly acknowledge the forwardness of other men in this matter. When
therefore we understand that others have dealt a long time together in
inflaming the minds of men to a merciful regard of their poor brethren, it
is meet that it should be thought upon. The minds of men are like to a fire
of green wood; if in such a fire a man bestows much blowing and puffing, it
may be that at the last a little blast sets all on a flame: yet will no wise
man attribute the flaming of that wood to that little blast, but to the long
puffing that went before: so is it in this matter. Therefore our Savior Christ
when he will teach his disciples to be humble and modest, Other men, says he,
have labored (meaning the prophets which were before them) and you have entrea
into their labors, Ioh. 4. 38. It was of great force to move the Corinthians
to liberality, when they were told that the church of the Macedonians did
look to have it so: for men are loath but that other churches should have a
good opinion of them. Besides this, though Titus was very ready to perform
this duty, yet because he was loath to ouercharge any, it was to be thought
that he would be more sparing in his speeches this ways: but when he was
encouraged thereunto by other, and those also poorer Churches, this no doubt
did greatly embolden him unto this duty. By this means also the Corinthians
could take the less exception against his speech. For if Titus alone of his
own accord only had made this motion, answer might have bin made, that Titus
had no experience this ways, namely how many ways charges go out with them
that have dealing in the world. But when other Churches which know what these
charges do mean, do yet account it needeful to contribute, this stops the
mouths of such as would gainesay this exhortation. These men did not only
give, but they did also procure other men to give. If they had only given,
though this had been much in respect of their poverty, yet otherwise the
parties to whom they gave, should have received but a little. But when besides
their own gift, they move others to give, this amounts to a great deal. To
move others to give is highly accounted of, 2. King. 4. 8. for because of this
duty is the Sunamite so highly accounted of. And as in war, drummers are
necessary to make others fight: but then are they most necessary when they
also themselves will fight: then are such as stir up others to give most
necessary. If men in a town or parish have any sparkle of zeal in them, such
drummers will make them give. And if men can not stir up others to give
immediately by themselves for want of acquaintance, yet should they be so
zealous as to stir up by others, as the Macedonians moved Titus by Paul. It
is no reproach but an honorable service, to beg for other men. For this that
is here said of the Macedonians, is not spoken to their disgrace, but to their
commendation. They were not of their minds that except they be the first
moouers, they will do nothing. A covetous heart is glad to take occasion to
keep himself from duty by such excuses. These men that be so affected, may
well be compared to restie horses, that will neither go of their own accord
without the spur, and yet if they be spurred, then they will go backward.
The baddest servants think most scorn to be quickened up unto duty: but an
humble minded man or woman will soon acknowledge that they stand in need of
admonition: for otherwise we must take away preaching and all admonition. The
manner also of moving Paul to deal with Titus is not to be omitted: for they
acknowledge the forwardnes of Titus in that he had already begun; so that
they do not stir him up in a bragging manner, as if under the pretense of
moving of him their meaning was to vaunt themselves above him: for such a
kind of dealing would have hindered the persuasion. Besides this it should
also have been dangerous to their own souls: they only as it were put him
in mind of that which he had begun to do before in other churches.

7 Therefore as ye aboundin every thing, in faith and word, and knowledge, and
in all diligence, and in your love toward us: so even see that you abound in
this grate also.

8 This I say not by commandment: but because of the diligence of others,
therefore prove I the naturalnes of your love.

As before he does exhort them from the liberality of other Churches, so does
he now persuade them by their own forwardnes in other things: that as they
had faith, and had knowledge, and utterance, to impart this their faith unto
others: and were also not idle, but diligent in their affairs and also loved
the Apostle of whom they learned these things: so he would have them also
abound in distributing unto other their poor brethren. When a man hears or
sees others which are plentiful in giving, yet they cannot speak of matters
of religion in so ple^tifull a manner as we can. We are then in great danger to
set so light by this grace of God in them For we think they want that
knowledge which we have, but the Apostle teaches us a contrary lesson, namely
that to those graces which he had commended in them, they should add this
grace of giving also, 1. Cor. ^. 5. When a man heateth of any man of account,
that can speak of matters of religion, more fully and plentifully then any of
their profession and calling throughout the whole country, that he is a grave
and a learned man, and of great judgment in the scriptures yet he shall be
noted in liberality to be nothing suitable to that portion which God has given
him, not nothing answerable to the frankenesse of other men, which have neither
that wealth nor knowledge which he has: this is a great blemish unto him. And
it makes men set less by those excellent gifts of knowledge and speech a great
deal, then otherwise they would do. No doubt but that these men amongst the
Corinthians which were thus rich in knowledge, gave something to good uses: or
else the Apostle would never have vouchsafed to have made any honorable mention
of their other gifts. But because they were more scant in giving, then men of
meaner understanding, the Apostle would have them to abound in this duty also,
which would give as great a grace unto them in the eyes of God and man, as any
knowledge, or speech, or any, or all the gifts they had, putting them all
together: for that that is to be desired of a man, is his goodness. Those that
have knowledge and speech in great abundance, are wont to be noted as chief
men among the professors: when men therefore shall note them to be somewhat
skant in giving, they will easily imagine that all other professors are far
more skant, as in knowledge, so in giving: thus do men bring disgrace to the
whole church of God. And it grieves a man when he hears a man of knowledge
noted for hardness, and be except he would be partial, cannot tell what to say
in his behalf. 8 The Apostle would have this duty of giving to come naturally
from them, as it were of their own accord: and therefore he says, I say not
this by commandment. He might no doubt have commanded them as they would
answer to the contrary at their uttermost peril, when Christ shall come to
judgment, 1. Tim. 6. 17. but for loves sake he chooses to deal otherwise,
that this duty might not be of necessity, but willingly, Philemon 14.
Generosus animus, as one says, facilius sequitur quam trahitur: therefore the
Apostle does labor sweetly to allure them by the example of other churches.

9 For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he being rich for your
sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might be made rich.

To strengthen the example of the Macedonians, he does warrant it as good by
his example that is to order all the Churches in the world. The Apostles, as it
may appear by their writing, in all duties did much look upon the pattern
Christ Jesus, even as painters look much upon the party whom they mean to
paint out. When they would not have us stand upon our reputation, they allege
the example of Christ, Philip. 2. 7. When they will move servants quietly to
put up the wrongs and injuries of their masters, they bring forth the example
of Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 21. When they will move husbands to love their wives,
they allege the example of Christ. When they would have us not love in word
but in deed, and to lay down our lives for our brethren, if need be, they
propound unto us the example of Christ, Ioh. 3. When they will have us to
begin to love our brethren, and not to tarry until they begin to love us,
they propound unto us the example of Christ: So here moving us to liberality,
he does set before our eyes the example of Christ, who being the heir of the
world, Hebr. 1. yet to make us rich, was content not to have an house to put
his head in. If we think that the poor are not such worthy men, that for
their sakes a man should diminish that which he has, then much more might
Christ think so. As therefore the Apostle says in another place, Consider him,
that is to say the greatness of him, Hebr. 12. that endured such speaking
against of sinners: so is it said here, that even our Lord being rich, for
our sakes became poor: and therefore when men will not give of their
superfluity, they are far from following the example of Christ.

10 And I show my mind herein: for this is expedient for you which have begun
not to do only, but also to will a year ago.

11 Now therefore perform to do it al^ so, that as there was a readiness to
will, even so you may perform it of that which you have.

12 For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a
man has, and not according to that he has not.

In that the Apostle does offer the matter unto their consideration, aduising
the^ by saying, I show you my mind herein, we must not think but that this
advise of his is to have the force and authority of a commandment. When the
prophet David says, that the word of God is his counselor, psalm. 119. 24. his
meaning is not but that it should command him. But only his meaning is to
allure them sweetly, and not to draw them by commandment to the duty of
giving. He speaks as a mean man may speak to any supericur, for the counsel
we know may advise the prince, though otherwise she be to command them: and
when she does follow their advise she is not drawn against her will: but
sweetly allured by that equity, and reason, which she sees to be in their
speeches. In this manner does the Apostle persuade them to this duty in this
place: so that though he does advise them, yet must we know that this his
advise, is to have the place of a commandment. We must not gather as the
Papists do from such speeches, that their be in the scripture, counsels and
commandments: the commandments we must of necessity do, but for counsels,
we are at liberty whether we will do them or no. And therefore those which follow
the counsel and advise that is set down in the scripture, because they do
more then the law requires, do therefore works of supererogation, as those
do that live a single life, that love their enemies, and do such like things.
This is no such advise as men may choose whether they will do it or no: na,
this and such like speeches does magnify the word of God in that it is called
our counsel, and in that the interpreters thereof, are called our
cou^selloures: for thereby we have the prerogative of kings and princes. Who
when any matter is brought unto them, are wo^t to send to their secretary to
call their counsel together. So when we have any thing to do, we must call
for our counselors the Prophets and Apostles, and such as can interpret their
writings unto us: for they are the counselors of the world. In all thy ways,
says Solomon, acknowledge the Lord and he shall direct thee in his ways. And
in these hard times, if men would know what regard they should have of their
poor brethren, they should consult with these two chapters, wherein the holy
ghost of purpose has set down his holy will and pleasure unto us. The world
thinks, that the ministers of the Gospel, take too much upon them, when they
advise men in these matters: as if men were not wise enough to bestow that
they mean to give, but that the ministers must advise them. But there is more
wisdom required in this thing then the world is aware of: we know what became
of him which refused to follow the counsel of the ancient, 1. King. 12. So
when men shall choose rather to follow the counsel of wild young men, that
would have a man spend that he has at drinkings which are needless, then upon
their poor brethren; we know what they may look for, with that rich man in
the 6. of Luke. To move them the rather to follow his advise, he tells them
that it is expedient or profitable, for he that is wise is wise for himself as
Solomon says, Proverbs 9. This argument that is drawn from profit, is wont
to be in steed of a 1000. arguments: for tell a man thus, you are not your
own friend if you take not this course, you have said enough: if he be
persuaded of the truth of this saying, it shall be in steed of a thousand
sayings. When Parents would have their children to work, they will let them
have their own earnings, they know that if any thing will draw them to
work, that will do it. How it is expedient or profitable, we may see in the
9. chapter and eight verse, he tells them that they were willing to this duty a
year a go, only it was laid a side by reason of other matters, so that they
were already persuaded that the thing ought to be done: so that he needed not
to spend his time in proouing that it ought to be done; for this was already
agreed upon. A man may give for fear of law or for fear of discredit, for
what will me^ say if I should give nothing: In this manner a man will give his
purse to a theife, but to do this thing willingly is thankeworthy. This
willingness is necessary as in all duties, so in this: otherwise a man shall
have many pulbackes to keep him from this duty; the children and kindred
think that all is to little for them, and yet we read that Job had seven
sons and three daughters, Job. 1. 2. yet did he not eat his mursels alone,
but the fatherless, did grow up with him, he saw none to perish for want of
clothing, the stranger did not lodge in the street; men that are of that
place which Job was of, think that by reason of that countinance that they are
to bare, and their children both whilst they live with them, and after their
death, that little or nothing is to be given, especially when they have so many
sons as Job had and 3. daughters: But Job was willing to give, and therefore
was not pulled away by any such temptation from this duty. 11. Though they had
a mind to give, yet were they slack in performing their purpose, for this
makes men secure, when they have once a mind to give, they then never do
mistrust themselves, they think then it must needs be done without any
further endeavor. But we must strike the iron whilst it is hot, if we tarry
whilst it be cold, it must have a new heating before we can work upon it: we
must pray unto God when he has given us the will, that he would also give us
the deed. In respect of men, also there is cause why we should do things with
expedition; for the deferring of hope is the fainting of the soul, and we
should not weary the eyes of the widdowe. The reason why sometimes it is
dangerous to do a thing suddenly, is because we have not thought of it
sufficiently: but when a thing is rightly purposed there can be no danger in
using all the expedition that may be. 12. Men are wont to object the charges of
their family, which makes them that they cannot give much, and they are ashamed
to give a little. The Apostle takes away all such delays, by telling them that
a man must give according to that he has, and not according to that he has
not: and this may minister good comfort to a man, for when one gives what he
may, it is nothing accounted of of the Lord because it is so little: but the
Apostle does assure us that if a man give according to his abillitie, God
accepts of it; And as in strength a poor man which uses that little
strength which he has, is better accounted of both of God and man, then some
idle lusty fellow which has four times his strength, and does not use it. So
he that has but a little wealth, and yet does well employ that little which he
has, is a great deal more to be accounted of then those idle wealthy men,
that will not put forth themselves. Men in this matter must consider that they
have to deal with God, from whom they can hide nothing: and therefore if they
say that they give according to that which they have, being notwithstanding
privy to themselves that they have a great deal more then that which is
suitable to that which they give, men may then deceive themselves: but as the
Apostle says, God is not mocked, Galat. 6. 7.

13 Neither is it that other men should be eased, and you grieved.

14 But upon like condition at this time your abundance supplieth their lack,
that also their abundance may be for your lack, that there may be equality.

15 As it is written, He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that
gathered little had not the less.

When any is relieved the Apostle would not have it to be with the burdening
of others. When men be behind hand, they are wont to get a license to keep
an alehouse, that thereby they may maintain themselves and their charge: for
other poor men must come to their houses to spend that which they have, not
caring in the mean time what shall become of their wives and children. This is
contrary to the rule of the Apostle, for when the poor oppress the poor, it
is like a raging rain that leaves no food. In some places poor men will
bestow their money at marriages, when the parties that are married, are a
great deal wealthier then themselves: and their masters, though they say other
men shall be as bold with them when they marry their children or servants, yet
there is no likelihood that poor men will ever be so bold with them. The
Apostle has no such craft in his speech. Not but that we must give without
looking for any such recompense. 14 Only the Apostle assures the^ that there
is no partiality in this thing. For if it should please god to humble the
Corinthswith like want, he would then be as earnest with those of Jerusalem to
contribute unto them. 15 He brings forth good proof, that this mutual help
ought to be amongst the servants of God, Exodus 16. 18. The people of Israel
were fed with Manna for a time, that thereby they might understand in their
ordinary food for ever, even when this Manna should cease, that they were not
fed by their own labor or industry, but by the blessing of God, as we are
taught, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. By this their Manna we may see as it were in a glass, how
to order our selves in our ordinary food. All the children of Israel were
willed to gather Manna, and some of them gathered more according as they were
more nimble or more strong then others, and so they laid it all on an heap:
howsoever some gathered more then some other, yet none had more then an Homer
full for his private use; by which means all had enough and none wanted. The
Apostle would have us to make use of this matter: and although we have no Homer
to measure our goods withal, yet seeing neither we nor our children after us,
should be intemperate in eating and drinking, in apparel, in building in
household stuff, or in any other matter, that overplus which we have should be
bestowed upon others. True it is that we are to keep possession of that which
God has blessed us withal, as a strong man is to keep possession of his
strength: but touching the use of our goods, we must do as has been said.
And if it please God to humble us with poverty, then those that have more then
an Homer full, that is to say, more then they need, they must then do the
like for us. If they did reserve of their Manna it did stink, it did them no
good, Exodus 16. 20. it was full of worms: so when men reserve couetously more
then needs, Thieves, as Christ says, break thorough and steal, the rust
eats their coin, the moath consumes their garments: not but that among the
Jews some had more wealth then some other: for the elder brother was to have a
double portion: but because he did maintain more in his family then did his
younger brother, in the end all came to one reckoning. When in the Lord his
prayer the rich make this petition, Give us this day our daily bread, they pray
not only for themselves, but for their poor brethren. But when they have
means in their hand to relieve them, and do it not, how then can they be said
truly to make this petition? For as a man that prays for his own food, if
he use not the means, he may truly be said to tempt God: so when a man desires
the Lord to relieve his poor brethren, and God having put means into his
hands to relieve them withal, and yet he will not employ them, what does he
else but dally with the Lord? And we are to consider that this bountifulnes that
is here spoken of, is to be understood of the Saints that do now live, least
imagining them only to be Saints that are dead, we do as the Papists do, who
in the scarsitie of all things, had their dead imagined saints clad and covered
with gold, silk garments, precious jewels, having wax candles set before
the^ within and without the church at noone days, when many true Saints of God
had no succor bestowed upon the^.

16 And thanks be unto God which has put in the heart of Titus the same care
for you.

17. Because he accepted the exhortation, yea he was so careful, that of his
own accord he went unto you.

To move the Corinthians to relieve their brethren, he tells them what
excellent men God raised up to deal in this matter with them: and as before he
accounted it a grace to give, so does he now account it a grace to stir up to
giving. Men are loath to deal in such a matter as men commonly are hardly
drawn to perform: and a man of a good disposition, if he has wherwithall,
had rather give all out of his own purse, then to be troubled with such a kind
of business, if duty did not move him thereunto. What a tedious piece of
work is it for a man to gather that which men are rated at, notwithstanding
they cannot choose but account it as due debt that which they are set at: how
loath may men then be thought to be to part from that wherein they think that
they have more liberty. It is the Lord without whose providence not so much as
a sparrow lights upon the ground. He has a work in every man's mind as it
pleases him. When Apollos was requested to go to the Corinthians, he had no
mind to go at that time, 1. Cor. 16. 12. The Lord might have disposed so in
like manner of the heart of Titus. But in that the Lord did otherwise dispose
of his heart, they must needs see that it came of God; and therefore they were
to yield to the motion of Titus in this matter, Genesis 24, 50. As the Apostle
tells the Galathians, that they were not to do as they did, because it came not
of God, Gal. 5. 8. James 3. 6. So they were to yield to Titus, because God
stirred him up in this duty. And he thanks God for it: for the good works of
the servants of god should cause us to glorify our father which is in heaven,
and is the author of the^, Mat. 5. 16. Titus was moved by mem, but it was the
Lord which put into his heart to yield to the exhortation. And we are to mark,
the exhortation and the work of God his spirit are joined together. 17. He is
said to be very ready of his own accord without any great hailing thereunto,
And yet as there is no matter be it never so ready to take fire, that can be
set on fire, be put to it: no though a man be ready to every good work, yet he
had need to be exhorted thereunto: and the Lord accepts of it when by
exhortation we are brought unto duty, Heb. 11. 11. Act. 16. 14. The readiness
which was in Titus to come is worthy of observation: for commonly our hearts
are like paper oyled, that hardly receives the print of the pen. Fire is the
thing whereby we dispatch most of our business in our houses, and a slack fire
does hinder our matters greatly: so does a slack affection about any duty. And
it was to great purpose to tell the Corinthes how willing Titus was to come
unto them: for it was a sign that he had a good liking of them A man is loath
to go to a place where he thinks he shall not be welcome. It is hope which
sets a man a work to go to any place: It is that which lifts up their feet
to go any journey, which was a very good means to make them answer that good
exhortation which he had of them.

18 And we have also sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the Gospel
throughout all the Churches.

19 And not so only, But is also chosen of the churches to be a fellow in our
journey, concerning this grace that is ministered by us unto the glory of the
same Lord, and declaration of your prompt mind.

18 Barnabas is the party that he speaks of Act. 11. 30. whose praise was in
preaching of the Gospel. For not only the history, but the preaching of the
Gospel, is called the gospel, Romans 2. 16. Gal. 3. 1. because it is a means
to make them give more liberally, when they see that such are the collectours
as will certainly deliver it to the parties to whom it is given: therefore he
means these excellent men. And to the end that they might not doubt of the
delivery of that which was given, he tells the^ that those shall go with it whom
they themselves shall appoint, 1. 16. 3. Diverse will not give, though they be
never so faithful which are appointed the distributers of it; they are wont to
allege that they will give it themselves where they think meet. But if
every man should do so, what a confusion would there be? And we see how the
poor are forced to steal, and to beg, when every one that should give is left
in this manner to his own devotion. For this is a true saying, that which all
men regard, no man regardes. But when there be parties appointed fit for the
purpose, then the poor shall be regarded. Men are wont to allege, that they
mean to give more then all the world shall be acquainted withal: but indeed
the truth is, that none give less privately then those that draw back in a
public collection. The thing which Christ reprooueth Matthew. 6. is, when men
give privately to be seen of men they will do it in such manner as all the
world must know it: such boasting in deed is like the cackling of an hen,
who when she has laid an egg every body must know what a worthy act she
has done. But otherwise for a man to give as his neighbors do, in a public
collection upon a public agreement, this is not to blow a trumpet before him
when he gives his alms: and if he means to give any further relief
privately, he may do it as closely and as secretly as he does desire. Christ
does not condemn, but he does greatly allow the fact of the poor widow that
in a public collection showed her forwardnes, in giving as others did
publicly, and more franckly (considering her poor estate) then any of the
rest. 19 He, the ambassador I mean, that was to go with the money, was not
only commended for preaching, but he was accounted wise and faithful, and
therefore fit for this present business. As much therefore as they did detract
from this business and ministration, so much did they detract from the glory of
God, and from the declaration of their ready mind that was sought therein.
For according to the greatness of those which were to go upon that embassage,
they might well gather of the greatness of the matter that was to be dealt in,
and of that great desire they had to have the embassage to take place, Numb.
22. 15. This wisdom in appointing such excellent men, as it is to be followed
in many things, so is it to be followed when men make their Wills. For let me^
give never so large legacies, yet if there be failing in the execution, all
comes to nothing. The children which are to be fatherless, commonly are left
to the courtesy of those which have iittle affection to them, but to that which
they have: and have by virtue of their executorship most knowledge and
oppertunity to spoil them, ovem lupo, or it may be said of them that they
commit the geese to the keeping of the fox. By marking thoroughly whether men
deal justly and truly in their affairs, they shall know whether they be
meet men to be their executors.

20 Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance that is
ministered by us.

21 Providing for honest things, not only before the Lord, but also before men.

What his meaning is, we may see 1. Cor. 16. 3. for there he says, whom
soever ye shall allow by letters, them will I send to bring your liberality to
Jerusalem. The Apostle himself was desired to carry this money, but he would
not be alone in this business: but he would have witnesses that the money was
faithfully bestowed. He which refuses to offer himself to trial in such a
matter, may well be suspected. It is but a vain thing to say god knows my
heart, when I may make my truth and simplicity known also unto men. When men
have any authority over those to whom they are to approve themselves, then
they are wont to disdain to approve their doings unto their consciences. But
if Paul that had the authority of an Apostle, might stand upon his own bare
credit for the faithful delivery of that he was betrusted withal, better then
any man in the world how dare any the^ that may a thousand times be rather
suspected then the Apostle, stand so upon their own bare word, that no man may
be so bold as to say unto them, how have you bestowed the money that you were
betrusted withal. We are to consider of this the rather, because thorough the
goodness of God, we are toward a reasonable order for providing for the poor.
If those that have the money in their hands do not from time to time very
carefully, as much as they may, approve themselves to the consciences of those
whose money they have received, it is to be feared, that in a little time all
will come to nothing: and therefore this is one of the things that must as
strictly be observed, as any other thing whatsoever that belongs to this
business. And therefore I beseech those in the fear of God, that have and are
to have the money that is gathered in their hands, as they love their own
credit, and as they delight that men should be encouraged to the duty of
giving, that the poor Saints of God may be relieved, that they would cause
their simplicity this ways to be so seen, that he that runs may read it,
as the Prophet speaks. Men can not be too careful of this duty: and
therefore if they did cause to be drawn in a table what every man does give,
and what every poor man receives, and caused every such table to be set upon
every church door throughout the town, it were a very simple and sincere and
commendable order. The keeping of some overplus in their hands to relieve
according as extraordinary occasion shall fall out, will mar all, except the
people whose money it is do like of this order, and see as plainly how this
overplus is bestowed as well as the other that is ordinarily bestowed. All
executors may learn a good lesson from hence: they think they are not bound
to pay any legacies, except men ask it them: notwithstanding it falls out
many times, that men know not whether they have any thing given them or no: or
it may be they know not the time when it is due. And all that have to deal
with receiving of money, have here a notable example given them by the Apostle.
Men are wont to fly to the report of such, as either know not their doings,
or else will not speak rightly of them. But the Apostle provided that no man
might think otherwise then well of him. He had before his eyes continually the
coming of Christ, which caused him to have a clear conscience both toward
God and toward men, Act. 24. verse. 16.

22 And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved
to be diligent in many things: but now much more diligent, for the great
confidence I have in you.

It is as we have heard, to great purpose, to know who be the parties which
shall distribute that which is given: for it will encourage men the rather to
give. If men shall distribute it at leisure they know not when, this will
cause men to have little mind to give. He must therefore be quick and round
and ready in his office that is this ways to be employed. Men had need to
give good attendance upon those that are to give, or else their affection will
cool quickly: and the poor that should have that which is given, can not
forbear it any long time. So that the diligence the Apostle speaks of we see
is very necessary. And he does put them in good hope of the party whom he
does commmend, because he had experience of his diligence in the like affairs:
and he does assure them that they may now much more look for the like
diligence, because of that forwardnes that he did not doubt to be in them. For
seeing he was diligent when he had to do with a backward people, he knew that
it would do him good to be diligent when he should have to do with such a
forward people. Men commonly appoint such collectours for the poor as are of
some pretty wealth; but to appoint such as will stay the dealings of their own
private affairs to attend upon this public work, that will inquire who be
sick, or who have more special need, and that will every manner of way
bestirre themselves in this work, this is the thing that is not once thought
upon.

23 Whether any do inquire of Titus, he is my fellow and helper to you ward:
or of our brethren, they are messengers of the Churches, and of the glory of
Christ.

24 Wherefore show toward them, and before the Churches the proof of your
love, and of the rejoicing that we have of you.

That which the Apostle did speak before of those three excellent men in a
large manner, adding other matters in the bringing of them in. Now to the end
that they might the rather be moved with their excellency, he speaks of them
altogether without the mingling of any other matter in the speaking of them,
that their mind might not be distracted; but that it might wholly be taken up
with thinking of the^. Concerning Titus, he reports of him that he was his
fellow and helper, and that to them ward. They were yoked together as it were
in one and in the self same work. If therefore they made any reckoning of the
Apostle himself, then they must needs think well of Titus, whom the Apostle
made choice of to be his companion in so great a work. And he working in the
work of the ministry amongst themselves, they need no other witnesses to
approve of him but themselves: for he was the Apostles fellow and helper to
them ward. As for the other brethren, they are the messengers not of particular
men, but of whole Churches. If therefore the testimony of the churches be of
account with them, they must then regard that testimony that is given unto
them. 24 He does therefore infer this upon his former speech, namely that that
which is done before them, is done before all the churches. They were to the
churches as committies be to the Parliament house. The whole ordering of the
matter was committed to their fidelity. If in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word should stand, how much more ought it to stand in the
testimony of whole churches. The churches are of the counsel of Christ, Ioh.
15. 15. and we know that a messenger coming from any one of the Counsel is
greatly to be accounted of, but coming from the whole body of the Counsel he
is much more to be esteemed. He would have them therefore to consider, that in
these messengers they had to do with all the churches: and when they were
before them, they were before all the Churches, who looked upon to give
testimony how they stood affected to the relieuing of the poor Saints of
Jerusalem. To this end he makes mention of the glory of Christ: for if one
man be the image and glory of God; if the Lord will have his glory shine
forth in the pre-eminence of any one Christian, how much more is his glory
represented unto us in the ambassadors of whole churches, 1. Cor. 11. 7. When
any one of the poor members of Christ are offered unto us, Christ himself
presents himself then unto us, as Math. 25. But here he presented himself
after a more glorious manner. The Lord does as it were glory in his faithful
servants. Have thou considered my servant Job, says the Lord unto satan, Job.
1. Such excellent men are those that are here mentioned. They were such as
would glorify Christ for any good work that they saw in any of his servants.

CHAP. 9.
1 For as touching the ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for me to
write unto you.

2 For I know your readiness of mind, whereof I boast my self of you unto
them of Macedonia, and say, that Achaia was prepared a year ago, and your
zeal has provoked many.

The use of writing is to certify the party to whom he does write, of that
whereof he is either ignorant, or else had need to be stirred up unto: but in
neither of these respects was there any cause wherefore he should write to the
Corinthians: therefore he says touching the ministering to the Saints that it
was superfluous for him to write unto them, yet because he had given forth
every where to other churches how forward the Corinthians were; and by boasting
thus of them he had as it were entered into bonds for their forwardnes. In this
respect it was meet that he should put them in mind of this matter. He uses
a certain kind of speech called praeteritio: for he says, that it is
superfluous for him to write, and yet he writes. His meaning is, that it was
superfluous to stand long upon this matter in writing. He does grant that they
were ready enough of their own accord, and need not to be stirred up by
writing; yet because he had boasted so confidently of them, and did thereby as
it were enter into bonds in their behalf; in this respect he deals as one
that is entered into bonds for another. And in such a case though a man thinks
well of the party for whom he is bound, and doubts not but that he will pay
the debt, yet because the forgetting of such a matter would be exceeding
dangerous to the party himself, and to the party that was bound for him: the
consideration of the greatness of the danger, will cause him to put the party
in mind of the debt, though otherwise he would say nothing. He calls the gift
of the Corinths a ministering to the Saints, giving them thereby to understand,
that they are but stewards to bestow the riches of God that he has betrusted
them withal, 1. Pet. 4. 10. The Lord had given him his riches as it were by a
letter of administration, to give where need was. 2 Least the Corinthians
should think much of the commendation that he gave of the Macedonians, as if
he had made the Corinthians no body in respect of them: or as if he had
discredited them unto those of Macedonia, he tells them that he was so far
from it, that he did boast of them unto those of Macedonia. And as he took an
occasion to stir up the Corinths by the example of the Macedonians, so did he
in like manner stir up the Macedonians by the forwardnes of the Corinthians.
Corinthum was in Achaia. The Apostle would not have spoken so of them, except
he had seen some good forwardnes in them. Company makes even a dull beast to
go faster: and therefore the Apostle is much in provoking by examples. And
here we see how wisely the Apostle deals with the churches of God. We see in
both these epistles how plainly he does reprove the Corinthians, and yet when
he speaks to the Macedonians of them, he says that Achaia was prepared a
year ago: so that as he commended the Macedonians to the Corinthians for that
they had already done, so does he commend the Corinths for that they were
prepared for to do. And here we may see the right manner of dealing with the
churches of God. When we are to deal with themselves, we are to open unto them
their wants most faithfully: but when we are to speak to others of them, we
are then to commend that that is good in them. To encourage Titus that was to
go amongst the Corinthians, he speaks reverently of them. If, says the
Apostle, I have boasted anything to Titus of you, I have not been ashamed: for
our boasting was true. But when he deals with themselves, howsoever he gives
God thanks for that good that was amongst them, yet does he plainly admonish
them, 2. Cor. 7. 14. We see how the Apostle does move by the example of
others: and therefore when we have an example of strangers that dwell in our
own kingdom, we are very bad scholars if we learn nothing by them: their
poor are well set a work, none of them goes a begging: they go sweet and
clean, so that they may be admitted into any honest company.

3 Now I have sent the brethren, least our rejoicing over you should be in
vain in this behalf, that ye as I have said be ready.

4 Least if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared: we, (I
need not to say you) should be ashamed in this my constant boasting.

5 Wherefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren to come before unto
you, and to finish your benevolence appointed before, that it might be ready
and come as of benenolence, and not of sparing.

3 Before we heard what hope he had of them, now he does join a godly fear to
this his hope: res est solliciti plenatimoris amor. Howsoever the suspicion and
fear that is void of love, is condemned in the scripture, 2. Sam. 10. 3. yet
that jealousy that is joined with love, and that does stir us up to duty and
watchfulnes over those toward whom we carry this godly jealousy, is greatly
commended in the scripture, 2. Corinthians. 11. 2. Job 1. 5. It may be, says Job,
that my sons have sinned. Shame we know is a casting down of the mind, and
leaves it void of all comfort to support it self withal. The fear of this
shame made Ezra rather choose to hazard life and goods and all that he had,
rather then he would bring upon himself this shame, Ezr. 9. 22. This shame
caused him that he would not ask any help of the King to whom before he had
said, The hand of our good Goa shall be upon us without any such help from
man. To prevent therefore this so uncomfortable a thing, he thought it good to
send the brethren before-hande to prepare them, least that those of Macedonia
finding them unprepared they should be ashamed.

6 This yet remember, that he which sows sparingly shall reap also
sparingly, and he which sows liberally shall reap also liberally.

7 As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.

6 To move them the rather unto liberality, he does liken it unto sowing, and
he tells them that as the husband does not think that his seed is lost when
he does scatter it into the ground, but that he shall gain greatly by it: and
therefore he will not sow sparingly, least he should have but a thin harvest,
but he will sow as much as he is able that he may reap accordingly. He tells
them that the case so stands in giving. The hope that the husbandman has of
his harvest causes him to break up his ground to fallow it, and to twy fallow
it, and to sow it, and to harrow it: and all this pains is taken in hope of a
good harvest: for harvest is that that promises great joy unto them: in so
much that that great joy that is brought unto us by Christ Jesus, is likened to
the joy in harvest, Esai 9. 3. 7 He tells them in what manner they should
give, as a man wishes in his heart. A man must not tarry till the time of
collection does come, and then to give as shall come into his mind: but as in
all other duties, so in this he must purpose before hand what he means to
do: Dum in dubio est animus paulo huc atque illuc impellitur: and therefore
men are willed with purpose of heart to clean unto God, Act. 11. 23. And
therefore we read that Daniel determined before he came to the trial what he
meant to do, Dan. 1. 8. He would not have them give as of necessity, his
meaning is not but that we should inioyne our selves of necessity to serve
God, as in all other duty, so in this. And because we have a naughty nature
that is against all duty, therefore ought we to offer violence and to force
our selves to do well. But when a man shall give by reason of that opinion
that his neighbors would otherwise have of him, desiring in the mean time to
have spared it, if by any means this might have stood with the saving of his
credit: to give of necessity in this manner is that that is here condemned: he
moves us therefore to chearefulnes in giving, by telling us that God loves a
cheerful giver. The love of God is so comfortable a thing, that it is able to
sweeten the most sour receipts of affliction: and therefore the Apostle tells
men that they should hold themselves very well contented with affliction,
because it is an argument of his love. Whom God does once love he does always
love: and therefore his unchangeable decree is described by loving of Jacob,
Romans 9. The end of giving is to cheer the parties to whom we do give: when
a man therefore shall give a thing in such manner, as if he thought the party
to whom he does give unworthy of it, then the end of giving is not observed.
When men shall give a gift with their hand, and call it back again with their
speech or countenance, this takes away the comfort of the gift: gratia ab
officio quodmor a tardat abest. He that is under, may soon think that he is
despised and accounted a burden to the world. Men therefore should give in such
manner as all such thoughts may be kept from them. When men have never a word
with them which may persuade their gestes that they are welco^e, it makes their
cheer a great deal less then it should be: for it is a true saying, that
welcome and the signification thereof is the best cheer. How therefore was
the father in the entertayning of his son, he brought forth the robe, he put
rings on his fingers, he caused a fat calfe to be killed, come says he let us
eat and be merry. It is reported of a merciful man that he was wont to say to
the parties to whom he gave any thing, I am as willing to give it as any man
is to take it. How cheereful was Lidia in entertayning of the Apostle: If says
she, you think that I am faithful to the Lord, then come into my house and
make account that I make reckoning of the company of the servants of god. Thus
she constrained them to eat of her meat, Act. 16. 15. How comfortably did
Abraham entertain his gests, he did run to meet them, that they might see
how welcome they should be unto him, though he knew them not, and therefore
could look for no benefit from them. The Lord would make Abraham a pattern of
this cheerfulness: and therefore though the angels which he sent unto him,
stood not in any need of his meat: yet to take a trial what comfortable
entertaynment he would give unto them, he offers them unto him in such a manner
as if they had stood in need of his entertainment. So in like manner the Lord
could give every man enough to live of himself if pleased him and that with as
little cost or trouble to him, as if he gave him nothing. But because his
meaning is to take a trial how well and lovingly men will bestow their
goods: he does therefore offer his servants in their wants unto them Abraham
considered that these men were weary in their journey, that their feet were
weary with their travel, especially traveling in the heat of the day, Genesis
18. 1. 7. To refresh them that ways he offers them water for their feet, and
a cool fear to sit in under a green tree that they might rest themselves:
and because he saw their hearts needed to be comforted after their travel, he
tells them that they shall have a little bread to comfort them that ways. His
meaning was to make them good cheer, but least that the fear of putting him
to too much cost should stay them from coming in unto him as it stayed David
from going to Absolon, 2. Sam. 13. 25. He therefore only makes mention of a
little bread: and he does reason with them from the providence of God, that God
his meaning was that they should come into his house, and therefore he gave
them occasion to come that ways. We see how courteously he behaved himself
toward them as if he had been beholding to them and not they to him for
coming into his house. It is a rare thing not to be somewhat insolent, and to
think that they may somewhat over look the parties to whom they have given
entertainment disdaining in the mean time to take the like entertainment at
their hands upon the like occasion. Nowithstanding the Apostle would have it
to be made mutual and so consequently cherefull cheerful, 1. Pet. 4. 9. For
it takes liberty away from a man when he has to deal with those which are
otherwise his equals, if there be refusal to have the entertainment mutual.
Abraham makes mention to his gests only of a little bread, but he goes in to
his wife and wills her to make ready with all the speed that might be five
cakes, and he caused butter, and milk, and veale to be brought in before them:
he would not say to his guests you fare not so well every day at home; but he
makes little of that which he set before them: he stands by them to bear them
company, for it appears he had dined before they came. This cherfulnesse is
highly commended by Christ Iefus, and is more regarded then the meat it self,
Luke, 7. 44. For though the Pharise set meat before Christ, yet because he
used no cheerfulness in entertaining of him: he therefore magnifieth the
poor woman before him and says, I entered into thy house and thou gave me no
water for my feet, thou gave me no kiss, thou did not anoint my head
with oil as she has done. Thus we see how and why the Lord loves a
cheerful giver, and that if we will have assurance that God does love us,
which love of his is the cause of all the benefits which we receive from him,
then may we give cherefully.

8 And God is able to make all grace to abound toward you, that you always
having all sufficiency in all things, may abou^d in every good work.

The cause of the vncheerefulnesse in the giver, is because he fears himself
should want; the Apostle tells them that God is of tha power, that they need
not fear any such matter, but that they shall have enough both for themselves
and others. The cause of all error is because men do not believe the
scripture, nor the power of God, as Christ tells the Saduces: he does first
therefore commend the power of God unto them, and afterward the scriptures. The
principal proppe that Abraham had to uphold his faith, was to persuade
himself, that he which promised was able also to perform. In all the articles
of our faith, it is most necessary that we should be persuaded of the power of
God, for how shall we believe that God made heaven and earth, that Christ was
borne of a virgin, but by believing that the power of the highest did ouershadow
her: the like may be said of all the other articles of our faith. We having
therefore the same word of god to warrant that which the Apostle here speaks
of; why should we not believe the one as well as the other. The mening of the
Apostle is not to reason only from the power of god as the Papists do when
they would make us believe that the bread in the sacrament is turned into the
body of Christ, because god is able to make it so, for Christ could have turned
stones into bread as Satan would have had him to have done, but he would not do
it: so that although it be a good argument to reason from the power of god,
when we are already certified of his willingness in the thing, yet when we
cannot be persuaded of his willingness in a thing, it is in vain to speak of
his power. The scripture tells us that it is not the will of god, to have his
body to be made of a piece of bread that the heavens must hold him until his
second coming. The word of god tells us, that all the miracles that Christ
wrought, they were apparent to the outward senses of men, in so much that they
were astonished, and said we never saw the like in Israel. In that therefore
there is no such thing seen in the sacrament, it is plain that there is no
transubstantiation; but in a thousand places we are taught that god will
abundantly recompense the liberal person. We see therefore that the reason of
the Apostle is good, although the reasons of the Popish Church be not good: the
Lord is able to fill them will all sufficiency, for he is called the god of all
sufficient. By sufficiency he does not mean that they shall have that which is
sufficient for their own use, which notwithstanding is a great mercy of God to
soul and body. For we see how many torment themselves that have not a
contented mind: they are never satisfied, for he that loves silver shall
never be satisfied with silver, as Ecclesiastes says, neither shall such have
any use of that they have, Ecclesiastes 5. 9. On the other side, he whose heart
God fills with sufficiency, has as much joy continually as any other man
has, for that little time he is at a feast, Prove. 15. 15. For the Lord
therefore to give us a contented mind, is a great benefit even in respect of
our own private use. But the sufficiency that is here spoken of is also to
give to others, as appears by the latter part of the verse, by which words we
may also see to what end we should use that sufficiency that the Lord has
given us, namly to abound in every good work. We see what good thoughts be in
the hearts of the servants of God, when God gives them abundance in respect
of the thoughts that be in the minds of wicked men in their abundance. Is not
this great Babel, says Nabuchadnezzar, that I have built, Dan. 4. 27. Hamon
bragged that he was promoted above the princes of the King, Ester 4. 11. Soul,
soul, take thy rest, says the rich man, Luke 12. 19. But what says David
after his glorious victories, what an indignity is it, says he, that I should
dwell in an house of Cedar, and that the ark of God should remain in
curtains, 2. Sam. 7. 2. Is there any left of Saul's house, says he, that I may
show kindness unto him for Ionathans sake, 2. Sam. 9. 1. He sent to all the
places where he had been entertained, 2. Sam. 30. 26. We must not bestow a
little and the worst of our goods upon the poor and upon good uses, but our
first fruits, or the chief of our goods, Prove. 3. 9. Exodus 34. 26. Genesis 4. 4.
the fattest must be bestowed upon the service of god, Malach. 3. 10. Worldly
minded men that are only given to getting, when they should entertain
strangers which have occasion to come to town, think the time lost that is
spent that ways, and that such matters should not be stood upon:
notwithstanding the Apostle says, give your selves to hospitality, Romans 12.
13. And why should men think that the bestowing of time about the well using
of their goods, should not be much more acceptable unto God, then the getting
of them, especially seeing the Scripture when it speaks of the getting of
them, it says. use the world as if you used it not, 1. Cor. 7. But when it
speaks of the well employment of them it says, give your selves thereunto, be
not forgetful of it, Ebr. 13. 2.

9 As it is written, He has sparsed abroad, and has given to the poor: his
benevolence remains for ever.

The Apostle proves the truth of that which he had affirmed in the former
verse, namely that those which give shall have wherewithal to give still. He
does prove it by the scripture. The scripture is so certain a thing, that if
any that has lived amongst us, with whom we have been very well acquainted,
should rise from the dead, and tell us from the experience of that which he had
seen, that unmerciful rich men are tormented in fire, yet should we believe
the scripture a thousand times more then his report. They have the writings of
Moses and the Puophets, says Christ, if they believe not them, neither will
they believe though one rise from the dead, Luke 16. The Church of Rome does
go about to lesson the authority of this argument, by saying that if any make
a question about the meaning of any place of Scripture, then the scripture must
not be judge in this case, but the Church. But we read in the 4. of Matthew,
that when Satan abused the scripture and said, It is written, He shall give
his angels charge over thee, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone, that
Christ did not fly to the judgment of any other, but makes the scripture
alone of it self to justify and to uphold it self: It is written, says he,
thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. He that gives to the poor, says
Solomon, lends unto the Lord. The Lord gives them a bill of his hand that he
will see them paid with advantage. And it is a strange case that men will
believe every mean man upon a bill of his hand, and yet the Lord as if he were
a bankerout, when he offers his bill it will not be taken. The blessings that
the Lord has bestowed already upon the rich, in making them as it were the
elder brothers should make them to be good to their yo^ger brothers. But this
because it is blackeworke, the Lord will not stand upon it: and because in any
case he would have them provided for, he is content to enter into bonds, and
to become surety for the payment thereof. The poor are the men that we should
give unto: for howesoeuer rich friends may feast one another sometimes, yet our
usual feasting should be for the poor, Luke 14. 12. We being much given to
outward things, because bidding of the poor has not so much show nor glory
in it as has the bidding of the rich, therefore we are wont to delight more in
the one then in the other. But if we shall consider we must avoid the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, and that those things
which are highly accounted of amongst men, are abominable unto god: then we
shall be of another mind: give strong arinke unto him that is ready to
perish, Prove. 31. says Solomon. We must bid the poor to our houses
notwithstandingour collection money: for there was a collection in Christ his
time, Mark, 12. 43. And yet we are taught that we should bid the poor, the
blind, and the lame; many be the things which may encourage us unto this duty.
In respect of God, he likes best of those duties which are done to our
brethren, without having any respect unto our selves, when they are done with a
single eye, not to rebound upon our selves. In respect also of the poor, it
must needs be more comfortable to them, then to other guestes: for it may be
they eat not one good meal in a month, and the full dispiseth an honyco^be,
but to the hungry man every sour thing is sweet. It will help men also
against that disdain which is naturally in men, for when we admit them to eat
at our table, it is a token that we do not disdain them. It is a means to
stir up our selves otherwise to be merciful unto them: for when we see
nothing but plenty, when we hear of nothing but plenty, it is an hard matter
then to consider of the estate of poor men: but when we see the^, and talk
with them, if it be done warily without vpbraiding of the^ by their poor
estate, then are we besides feeding of them, otherwise comfortable unto them,
for because they were not brought up as we have been, they cannot tell how to
apply themselves in their speech unto us, therefore should we apply our selves
unto the^. We must consider that as no other duty, so is not this pleasant unto
our nature, but when Christ commands it, that should make it pleasant: If we
would consider that every duty does consist the denying of our selves, then we
shall easily see that this pleases God better then the being in more
delightful company: and it should make it delightful, when we consider that
those that do thus, Christ will set them down at his table, he good himself
and in his own person attend upon them, Luke 1237. his meaning is that he will
give them most comfortable entertainment. It remains now to speak of the
end, for the which this testimony of scripture was especially alleged by the
Apostle, namely to assure those which give, that they shall have wherewithal
to give still. And we may see the truth of this, as it were by a demonstration:
when rich men be much in bidding one another, it asks great expe^ses, for
they look for a sumpteous entertainment being accustomed to a plentiful diet
at home: but the poor being acquainted with a mean diet, a little provision
will content them: so that by this means, besides the excess of riot which is
wont to be by reason of the great variety of dishes, and length of time great
charges are also prevented. When men bid their rich friends, they are wont
to set out their wealth and their port with plate and other furniture, as he
did of whom we read in the first of Hester, to show the glory of his
kingdom. Al these things be avoided by bidding of the poor, so that men
shall be able to bid them still, that their benevolence may remain for ever:
neither shall they only have wherewithal to give, but they also shall have a
mind and a good will to give, which is as great a gift as a man can wish to he
in a man. A man is in no request which is not ready to bind others unto him by
kindness. Kindness to other gifts is as the face to other parts of the body:
This kindness also is unto all other gifts, as the spirit is unto the body; for
it is the life and moouer of them, for otherwise they be as dead in our selves.
Only by kindness are they conveyed to others, even justice it self without
this bountifulness is as an handsome: and comely body is that has a crabbed
face upon it; even the withered vine tree is more regarded then is thestately
oak, because of the goodness thereof.

11 Also he that finds seed to the sower, will minister likewise bread for
food, and multiply your seed, and increase the fruits of your benevolence.

12 That on all parts you may be made rich unto all liberallitie, which
causes through us thanksgiving unto god.

10 He confirms his former speech answering an objection; for it might be
objected that there is not the like reason of the poor, that their is of the
field, for the one is not so yielding as is the other: he tells us therefore
that it is god that causes the earth to be thus yeldable: and we having the
promise of god that he will cause that to be as yeeldable unto us, as that is
which is scattered upon the earth, is as mighty and as willing to perform it
the one way as the other. Whether we understand the speech in wishing manner,
that God will minister food, or whether it be set down as a promise, it is not
material: for we must pray for nothing, but for that for the which we have a
promise: and if we have a promise for any thing, we may be bold to pray for
it, and we are sure that we shall have it. As the Lord therefore does give to
the husbandma^ that sows his ground not only that which is sufficient for
the maintenance of his family, but he gives him also seed to sow his ground
again, and so does he from year to year: so he that does as it were sow his
money upon the poor, the Lord does not only give him wherewithal to
maintain his family, but he gives him also to sow upon the poor from year
to year, he gives him ability and also mind to do it, for to him that has
shall be given. On the other side, he that is miserable continues miserable
still, though he has never a child and knows not for whom he gathers his
money: yet he has no heart to bestow any thing, god will not honor him with
any such honorable service. 11 This having of an heart to bestow his goods,
is the thing that deserves the name of riches, as Christ teaches us, Luke 16.
12. For as an owner is worthy to be accounted more welthy the^ a little farmer
that is tenant at will or during his life; so is it in this case, for these
riches a man carries to the grave with him, Rev. 14. 13. and God in mercy will
reward them with an everlasting reward. But of the other riches, it is said,
naked came I into to this world, and naked shall I go out again. He does
stire them up to bountifulness by the blessed fruit, and from the comfortable
effect thereof; for it causes even the most excellent duty, even the duty of
thanksgiving unto God, which duty because it is repeated in the next verse, I
will therefore then speak of it. In the mean time we are not to omit it, that
he says it causes thanksgiving through us, meaning through the ministry of
the gospel: if it should be bestowed upon a profane people, where by reason of
their unthankfulness god should have had no honor by them, this might well
have cooled their affection from giving: for without the gospel men are
unthankful, Luke 6. 35. they swallowe up the blessings of god without sense.
But if relief be bestowed where the gospel is, then god shall not loose his
honor: for your releife through us causes thanksgiving unto god, says the
Apostle. If releife be bestowed upon rogues and vagabonds, god can have no such
honor by it; but when releife is bestowed upon such have been taught, that the
means whereby men are comforted are as it were the hands of god whereby he
conueieth nourishment unto them, then god shall have honor.

12 For the ministration of this service, not only supplieth the necessities
of the Saints, But also is abundant by the thanksgiving of many unto God.

13 Which by the experiment of this ministration, praise god for your voluntary
submission to the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution to
them, and to all men.

14 And by their prayer for you, desiring after you greatly for the abundant
grace of God in you.

15 Thanks therefore be unto God for his unspeakably gift.

He commends giving of releife, first because their necessities are releiued,
and the^ because thereby also god is glorified. But before we speak of either
of these, we are to consider of this word service; the word does indifferently
signify any sacrifice that is offered unto god or any public office that a
man is called unto. But because the drift of the Apostle is to stir up unto
releife, we are to take it in the first sense, for that is fitter for this
purpose then is the other: especially seeing this term, a word I mean of
the like signification is used to set out the excellency of releife, Hebr. 13.
16. Act. 10. 4. Least the baseness of the parties upon whom we are exercised in
giving of alms should hinder this duty, we are told that in this duty we are
attennding upon the person of god himself, in the doing thereof we do as it
were offer sacrifices unto god himself. In a family every man is desirous to
be employed about those duties that concern the master or the mistres her
self, as to be their chamber servants, to attend upon them there: but to be
further removed from them, and to be occupied in duties in outhouses where
they shall seldom see their master, though these services belong to the
serving of their master, yet being out of their masters sight they think that
they are out of their mind: and therefore they had rather choose the former
services that were spoken of before rather the^ the other. The Apostle therefore
tells us that the giving of alms is the best kind of service that a man can
devise. Christ calls those the great commandments that concern god himself,
and the other that concerns men are like unto them. This therefore in some
sense being one of those great commandments, the Lord in mercy must needs
give a great reward thereunto; it is said that releife supplieth the
necessities of god his servants: men it may be had rather do duty to those that
have not such need of their help, but this kind of service is more
acceptable unto God, for it is a better proof and argument of sound love, then
that service is which is employed about those that be rich: and so by
consequence the lord must needs like better of the one then of the other. It is
a common saying, that true love does descend and not ascend; and therefore it
is observed that the grandfather or the father does love the child or the
nephew, better then the child or the nephewe does love the gra^dfather or the
father. In giving we must have respect to the necessities of me^, which is a
thing not so well thought upon, whereof it comes to pass that men will have
much speech about the provision for some, but about the provision for some
other they will have no speech at all though their necessity be much greater.
To hane respect unto the necessities of men in giving, is much more acceptable
the^ to give hand over head: and therefore if men would sit down and inquire
and take the names of such as stand in need of help, in the places where they
dwell, to consider of the^ accordingly: this though it be troublesome yet it is
a great deal more acceptable then penny or two-pe^ny doole. For the thing
which a man must aim at in giving, is to distribute to the necessities of the
Saints, Romans 12. 13. Act. 2. 45. For men must honor the poor in their kind,
as they honor the rich in their kind. And as to give the more honor to him
which is less honorable, can not be done without offering wrong to the more
honorable person. So to honor those poor saints that have most need with the
les releife, can not be done without offeringe contempt unto them. The other
good that comes by giving is thanksgiving unto god, we must be tha^kful unto
the means as the scripture techeth us, Kings 8. 66. Rom 16. 4. But the lord
must be the centure and the restinge place of our thanks, this thankfulness is
said to be better then any sacrifise psalm 50. we are much called upon for it,
as psalm 107. the passover, the sacrament of the supper, were of purpose
ordained to stir us up to thankfulness. The cause wherefore the forbidding of
meats is acounted the doctrine of diuils, is because it takes away occasion of
thankfulness. 1. Timo 4. 3. The thing whereby the servants of god have moved the
lord to look mercifully upon them in their affliction has been the vowing of
thankfulness. The thing which has troubled the godly in their troubles and
griefs has been this; namely, that the duty of thankfulness has then been
greatly diminished, Joel, 1. 13. Seeing therefore that this excellent duty is
procured by giving releife, this should be a notable motion to make us forward
this ways: and he does amplify the matter when he says that thanks shall be
given by many. Many knowing the hardness of those times, no doubt prayed unto
God to open the hearts of men to regard their poor brethren: and when they
heard that God had opened men's hearts they could not choose but be thankful,
2. Cor. 1. 11. When many join together in the duty of tankefulnesse, it makes
those which do give thanks, to be more fervent in that duty: even as many
sticks being laid upon the fire makes the flame the greater; and the Lord
loves fervent prayer and fervent thankfulness, Iam. 5. 16. The honor of a
King consists in the multitude of subjects; so does the honor of God consist
in the multitude os those which are truly thankful unto him.

13 They will praise God not only for their maintenance and releife but
because that thereby they testify their true subjection to the Gospel, as
chap. 8. 5. for the gospel came from the Jews whom they were to relieve: for
we read, Act. 8. 4. that by the persecution of Steven those that kept
altogether at Jerusalem before, were now scattered, and preached the word every
where amongst the Gentiles, in so much that it is alleged as a reason by the
Apostle: wherefore he would have the Gentiles contribute to Jerusalem, because
the Law came out of Sion. If the Gentiles be made partakers of their spiritual
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things, Romans 15.
27. says the Apostle. We of the Gentiles were wild olives, and therefore were
to be planted into the natural olive before we could thrive. It is said
Zachar. 8. 23. that ten men of all languages of the nations, shall take hold
of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and say we will go with you, for we have
heard that God is with you: so that we see that the thanks that God should have
by this, should not be only for relieuing of them, but for a greater and a
more excellent consideration. So that we are taught hereby, especially such of
us as are ministers of the word of God, wherefore and for what cause we should
especially rejoice when God mooues his people to have any comfortable
consideration of us, namely not so much because our bodies receives some
refreshing thereby, as it is an argument that they have felt sweetness and
comfort in our ministry, this should make us triumph for joy, for it makes
the Angels in heaven to rejoice, Luke 15. as it did also the people of the
Jews, Act. 11. They did profess the gospel before, but this that the Apostle
here speaks of was an argument that it was the gospel I mean with much power
amongst them. In that the Apostle does so much commend the [voluntarie]
submitting of a man's self to the truth, it is a question with some whether men
are to be forced to the exercises of religion: but it is plain that they are
to be forced thereunto by such as have authority. For though the Lord does not
like of that man's service that comes to the place where his honor dwells
with a constreyned mind, yet he likes well of the service of the magistrates
in this form of duty, which is so willing to have others be brought to
religion that he forces them thereunto when they will not be otherwise
allured: and even those that at the first are drawn by violence to hear the
word of God, in continuance of time will come willingly thereunto: for it is
only the word of god which must procure an appetite. No man comes unto me,
says Christ, except my father araweth him. And there is none of us which do
now most willingly submit our selves unto the gospel, but at the first we came
to hear it of custom, because others did so, or for novelty, or for some
other such respect: and we may hope so, because the Lord has promised a
blessing to correction. Correct the scorner, sath Solomon, and the foolish will
take heed, chasten this child for there is hope. But as for these men their
giving was an argument or manifest show of their voluntary submitting of
themselves to the Gospel, because this releife was to be gathered by the
consent or agreement of all churches, chap. 8. 24. The reasons which have been
alleged to bring men by force unto the gospel, may serve also to prove the
like inforcement for releife, if otherwise men will not be brought or
encouraged thereunto. 14 If we would but consider that the Lord has put a
blessing into the hands of distressed persons, to bestow upon such as do
relieve them, Job, 29. 13. then men would soon be brought to give to the poor
that they may pray for them, Ezra, 6. 10. It was the thing which made Darius so
bountiful, that they might pray for the kings life and for the life of his
son. This releife shall make all good men desire after them greatly, which
may be a very cheereful and comfortable assurance unto us that god himself
does regard us, when the servants of god does long after us. As the Lord of
Hoastes lives, says Elisha unto Ahab, in whose sight sight I stand; If it
were not that I regard the presence of Iehosaphat the king of Judah, I would
not have looked toward thee nor seen thee. It is a great favor to have such
a one speak a good word for us, to whose speech the prince will most willingly
harken: but the poor being such as God has promised to give the hearing
unto, it is therefore a greater benefit then we take it to be, to have them
pray for us. Those which reserve all their gifts until after their death, do
neither give any testimony that they trust not in uncertain riches but in the
living Lord, neither have they this benefit of prayer which is is here spoken
of: for to what purpose should men pray for them at such time when prayer will
do them no good. As this benefit of prayer should set more a work at all times
to be bountiful, so when men are visited with sickness or any other great
trouble, the hope of finding releife thereby should set them aworke to be
bountiful, for the Lord has promised mercy to the merciful. 15 The Apostle
being persuaded that he should not loose his words, as if the thing which he
perswads them unto had been already done, he breaks forth into thanksgiving
for it: and least any should think that he had spoken as much for releife as
can possibly be said or conceived: he says that is an unspeakable gift of God,
and none of his ordinary gifts to releive the poor Saints of god: the widows
showed the garments for the poor which Dorcas had made, and that not after her
death, but whilst she was alive with them, Act. 9. 39. thinking that if any
thing would be a means to cause Peter to lift up fervent groans unto the Lord,
as he might restore her to them again, that would do it.

FINIS.

