A COURTEOUS CONFERENCE with the English Catholics Roman, about the six
Articles ministered unto the Seminary priests, wherein it is apparently proved
by their own divinity, and the principles of their own religion, that the
Pope cannot depose her Majesty, or release her subjects of their allegiance
unto her. And finally, that the Bull of Pius Quintus pronounced against her
Majesty is of no force either in law or conscience, all Catholic scruples
to the contrary being thoroughly and perfectly cleared and resolved, and many
memorial matters exactly discussed, which have not been handled by any man
heretofore. Written by John Bishop a recusant papist.

printer's device of Robert Dexter, featuring a hand pointing to a star
(McKerrow 260) DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS
R D



LONDON, Imprinted for Robert Dexter dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1598.

The Six propositions handled in this Book.
^at the Pope and all the Bishops and priests are subject by the we of God
unto the temperall magistrate, in whose Realm and Dominions they do dwell. 2
That they cannot deprive Christian princes of their principalities. ^ That the
Pope cannot loose subjects of their natural faith and obed^ence unto their
prince. 4 That it is no determination of faith, that the Pope may depose
princes. 5 That the Canon made at the counsel of Laterane, touching the
deposing of princes (the which has bredde the greatest scruple in the
consciences of our Catholics Roman) neither is, nor ever was (...) ^^^^e
within this land. ^ That the sentence pronounced against her Majesty, was
neither lawfully, nor orderly done, according unto the Laterane Canon.
The Preface to the Reader.
THIS Book (Christian Reader) was written by one John Bishop a recusant
papist, what sufficient reason there is (notwithstanding) to commit it to the
press, and from thence to the open veiw of all men, in the diligent perusing,
and consideration thereof thou may plainly perceive and understand. It is a
book which (in the judgment of many godly and learned men) is very necessary
to come abroad, neither has any objection been made against the publishing of
the same, but only this, that it is to be feared, it will be a means to bring
the papists into more favor, as discovering them to be nothing such dangerous
enemies to the state, as of the greatest part they are reputed: but surely I
see no cause to stand in fear of any such effect, but rather to rest fully
resolved upon the contrary, that for as much as, howsoever some one of them
being astonished with the light of Gods truth, and looking back to the former
times, shows himself nothing so absurd as other, yet seeing the professed
doctrine of their Church is otherwise, and the continual practice of the Pope,
and all his adherentes is directly to the contrary, by murders, treasons, and
rebellions, and by the invasions and open force of cruel enemies seeking the
utter destruction of the Queens most excellent Majesty (whom God many years
yet preserve) and of all others that profess in truth the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ: accounting the Popes Bulls a sufficient warrant for the
ouerturning of Gods ordinances, and his pardons, a strong bulwark against the
wrath of God, against hell and condemnation. These things I say considered, I
see no reason to fear any increase of their favor and credit by this means,
but rather to hope (as there is just cause to desire) the increase of their
discredit, and more straiter laws for the restraining of them. The magistrate
has had too much experience, that howsoever the judgments of some of the best
learned among the papists may peradventure agree with the author of this
book, yet the profession and practice of them all, both learned and unlearned
is far otherwise, as by open and outrageous attempts there wants no good will
in them to testify more plainly unto the whole world, if the day were once
come they have so long looked for, and if they saw any likelihood of
prevailing, but as the Lord for Sions sake has hitherto defeyted their
purposes, and returned their mischievous imaginations to their own cunfusion,
so I nothing doubt, but he will continue for us a brazen wall of defense from
time to time hereafter even until the second coming of his son in the
clouds.

Whether the author would himself have published this book, it is uncertain,
that at the writing hereof he was so determined, it is very probable by that
part of his preface which is come to our hands, where he begins thus. When I
saw two or three years past many seminary priests: that which next ensued after
these words was rent off and cannot be found, but on the other side of the
paper it follows thus. And whiles I, following Horace his counsel
no^nunqua^ premitur in annu^: did let this treatise lie by me in seasoning,
that it might at length pass abroad perfect, fully refuting all objections of
moment which old shops had shapened, or new forges had framed, etc. By this I
say it appears that at the time of the writing thereof, he was fully
determined to imprint this book, but afterward it should see me his mind was
altered, persuading himself that the publishing would greatly tend to the
offense and disquieting of his Catholic brethren. For how is it possible, that
they should take it patie^tly to see one of their own profession, so eagerly
fight against the^, and put the^ to the foil with their own weapons, and by
the exprsse testimony also of the holy scriptures, and by so many approved
authorities and examples, discovering to the world, the tyranny, the malicious,
the proud and arrogant practices of their holy father. Surely so far would they
have been from taking it in good part at his hand whiles he was alive, that I
am fully persuaded, they neither can, nor will, with hold their tongues from
exclaiming against him now he is dead, either accounting him to be an Apostata,
or else making themselves bel^ue that this work is falsey fathered upon him.
But to put them out of doubt both of the one, and the other. That he was no
backslider from their religion but unto his dying day continued a recusant
papist, it is so well known at Battle in Sussex, where he was borne and often
co^uersant, and at London where he spent a great part of his time, as also in
all the country near unto Battle, as that there needs not any further
testimony. And that he was in very truth the author of this book, and of every
part thereof, is manifestly, to be proved by his own hand writing, so well
known at Battle and in the cuntry therabouts and also of many in London, as
that there is no need to fear the clearing also of this scruple. Let any man
that knows his hand, and is desirous to be resolved of the truth, repair to
Northhiham in Sussex, and at the house of George Bishop brother to the deceased
author, he shall at his pleasure have a sight of the same. To conclude, this
also wisely and diligently is the reader to understand, that although he write
very directly against the Pope and popery, yet in many respects does he show
himself a papist, as in following of corrupt translations, in the places of
scripture which he alleges, and in misapplying many of them, contrary to the
true sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, wherein although some warni^g is
given by a few marginall notes added of purpose and signed wit^ this letter,
yet cannot the godly reader for all that be too weary and circumspect in the
particular consideration of the same.

Faults escaped.
Page 2. for every, read (every). Page 3. for iu?, read ni? Pa. 4. for Iunius,
read. Fumus Page 7. for (...)

A COURTEOUS conference with the English Catholics Roman about the six
Articles ministered unto the Seminary priests, wherein it is apparently proved
by their own divinity and the principles of their own religi^n that the Pope
cannot depos^ her Majesty or relea^e her subjects of their Allegiance unto her.
NOw then to prove my first proposition that the Pope and all the Bishops and
Priests are subject by the law of God unto the temporal magistr^te, All
persons subject to the temporal magistrate.
in whose realm and dominions they do dwell, thus I prove, Solomon. Prou.
24. says my son fear the Lord and King, and intermeddle not or be not among
detractors, for their destruction will arise suddenly and who knows the ruin
of them both. Likewise Saint Paul the Apostle in his writing to the Romans
thus exhorts or rather commands them Chap. 13. Let every soul be subject
to the higher power for there is noe power but from God: but those which are,
were ordained by God etc. So then he that resists the power resists the
ordinance of God but they which do resist do get themselves damnation: for
princes be no fear of good work but of il, but will thou not fear the power?
do well and then shall thou have praise thereby, for he is the minister of God
unto thee to good; but if thou have done ill, then fear for he bears not the
sword without cause; he is the minister of God, a revenger in wrath to him that
does ill. And therefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath but also
for conscience, for therefore do yea also pay tribute, for they are the
ministers of God serving for this very purpose. Also in his epistle to Titus
Cap. 3. he writes: warn them to be subject to principalities and powers, to
obey their commandments. Moreover S. Pet^r from whom the Pope clameth his
mo^arc^^ thus writes in his first universal epistle Cap. 2. Be ye ^ub ect to
every humain creature for the Lord, whether it be (...) most excellent or unto
the presidents, as sent (...) him, to the revenge of evil deeds, but to the
praise of (...) good because so is the will of God, that ye doing well, ^ay
make m^re the ignorance of the unskillful as free men, (...) as men that have
liberty for a cloak of naughtiness, but a^ the bondmen of God, and anon
after, fear God and honor the King. Ye do see how the old and new law do
agree in the supreeme authority of princes, over all persons borne or abiding
within their dominions. Paul using this universal every, excepting none, and
Solomon and Peter an indefinite, in this place equal unto an universal. And
Peter and Paul do in express words give unto him the supreeme Emp^re of
administering justice in punishing the wicked and rewarding the good; and that
he is so the Apostle does prove by that ^ll men pay him tribute, the which also
he commands to be paid, and also charge all men to be obedient unto him*
and not for fear only, lest otherwise the prince would make them smart, but
also for conscience sake, because the^ are in duty bound so to do, for that
God had ordained them to be his lieuetenants in government. And therefore if
they were not obedient unto them, they must needs be accounted and reputed for
rebels unto God, that would not accept him for their sovereign whom God had
set over them. And Peter to suppres the carnal cogitation of the Jews unto
whom he wrote that thought that the messiah had enfranchised them, by his
redemption from al subjection to man and also to prevent the proud opinion of
the clergy that should come after, who would clame exemption from earthly
subjection, because they were appointed and ordained dispensers of the
mysteries of the Messiah: he flatly affirms the claming of such liberty to
be nothing else put a plain pretense and cloak for their naughtiness: For he
would they should remember that although they were delivered by Christ from
the bondage and tyranny of sin, death and the Devil, yet they remained still
his and his fathers bondmen, and therefore ought duetifully to obey still the
civil magistrates, whom God has placed in his own throne, his king and his
lieuetenant over them. And therefore Solomon in the place before alleged, An
appellation in secular causes cannot be made to the Pope.
joins them together saying: fear God and the King. God principally (says
Lyra writing on that place) and secundarily the King who is his Vicar in
temporal things. This being so, I cannot choose but much marvel at that
saying in Cap. Licet de sor. comp. that an appellation may be made from all
princes temporal. Yea and such as do acknowledge no superior in
temporalities, when none other can be had, and the matter is of some weight. For
if as Tertullian says in his Apology that there is no man above the Emperor,
et quem soli Deo subiicio and whom I make under none but God, and in annother
place of the same Apology he says of the Emperors of Rome, in Dei solius
potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi ante omnes, et super omnes
deos, quid in? cum super omnes homines, they are under God only, unto whom they
are second after whom they are first, before all men, and above all gods, and
why not? seeing they are above all men. And again if it be true that the grave
and learned light of our Lawiers Bracton, that lived almost four hundredth
years ago, in the reign of Henry the third, does affirm in the beginning
of his book, that a King cannot be a King, if he have any superior in those
things that do appertain unto his crown and kingdom, and may not have in
his kingdom any equal much less any superior especially in administration
of justice, that it may be said of him: Great is our Lord and great is his
power etc. And that he does aff^irme him to be the vicar of God on earth; This
place Psalm. 14^.5 (...) o^ ^od.
I can not see by what right or reason, an appellation in a secular cause can
be made from an Emperor, King or any supreme temporal magistrate unto the
Pope seeing he is not their superior in temporalities. For all the world
knows that an appellation can not be made but from an inferior judge, unto
an higher, and also his superior in that kind of jurisdiction. But much more
am I amassed at that impudent assertion Cap. tibi domino. 63. D. and inserted by
Iunius into his armilla aurea in the title of Papa, Omnis potestas jurat
fidelitatem Papae, et obedientiam, recognoscens ab eo omne quod hab^t. Not yet
n spiritu^ll matters.
Et si aliquando aliquis imperator donabit Ecclesiae vt de Constantine dicitur,
non fuit donatio sed restitutio. Every power does sweat feaulty and obedience
unto the Pope acknowledgeing from him all that he has. And if at any time some
Emperor gave unto the Church as is reported of Constantine it was no giving
but a restoring: For this is so repugnant unto the holy scriptures and the
common opinion of all divines both ancient and modern that most of our
Catholics Romans I think will be so far from defending it, that they
namely, the unlearned sort will as soon as ever they read it cry out at me,
as a most shamlesse liar for alleging of so shameful a sentence. But
although as I said our Catholic Roman will not perhaps affirm that, Papae
est terra and plenitudo eius, orbis terrarum^^ vniuersi qui habitant in ea, the
earth is the Popes and the fullness thereof, the orb of the earthes and all
that dwell therein.

Yet ^ do nothing doubt but diverse of them do hold being taught by their
schoolmaster Pighius and other that albeit Peter and the Apostles were subject
unto the Emperors and under other heathen states under whom they were borne and
abode, yet alter that the Emperors and Kings of the earth became Christians
and did voluntarily put their necks under the yoke of Christ, The pops nor
bishops have any secular kingdom.
they straightway became ipso facto subject unto the Pope Christ his
Lieuetenant general in earth: according to the prophecy of Esaias. Cap. 60. the
nation and kingdom that will not serve thee Jerusalem shall perish: but how
truly let us consider. For first that the sense of this saying of the prophet
is not such as Pighius supposes but rather this, A place of Esaias answered.
that every nation that will not acknowledge Christ for their God, Lord and
Savior, and be obedient unto his precepts and ordinances shall perish, I do
think is so apparent that it needs no proof and spoken only of his
spiritual kingdom on the earth which his father gave unto him as Messiah as
it is written in the second Psalm. Thou art my son this day did I beget
thee, ask of me and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and
the bounds of the earth for thy possession: and then as also in this place of
Esaias he commands the kings to serve him in fear, and to accept him for
their prince, and embrace his discipline and doctrine or else they should
perish. Now seeing this was a new kingdom, and inheritance given him by his
father lately, it cannot be understood of the bodily and earthly kingdom,
for he as God was possessed of that before, and from the beginning; according
to that saying of David. The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the
orb of the earth and all that dwell therein. But of his new and newly
restored kingdom consisting of believing souls, and called the kingdom of
heaven, whereof he thus speaks, unto his Apostles and messengers after his
resurrection: all power is given me in heaven and in earth, wherefore go ye
and proclaim, publish and make known unto nations, how my father has given me
the Empire of the whole earth, and that those which shall refuse to wear my
badge of baptism, and to observe and keep my laws and ordinances while they
live on earth, shall after death be shut out of heaven and blisfull paradise.
And so have all both old and late writers that ever I saw interpreted this
place, and not of any earthly and servile subjection, as Hierome, the nations
and kings that will not serve the Church in a good and profitable bondage or
service that they may be transferred into the Apostolical dignity: as Haimo
shall serve thee by faith and good works: As Leo de Castro, who interprets
that by this place of the Gospel: He that will believe and be baptized shall be
saved; but he that will not believe shall be condemned. And as Frererius an
other learned Spanish Friar, that those which will not come into and continue
in the true Church of Christ shall perich: And this to be the true meaning of
the Prophet does the next sentence before plainly convince. Thy gates shall
stand open continually, day and night shall they not be shut, that the strength
of the nations or gentiles may be brought unto thee, and the kings of them led
unto thee for the nation, etc. Neither is Pighius his cause any thing better
advanced by an authority of Nazianzene borrowed out of Gratian, A place of
Nazianzene an^wered.
but afterward alleged by Saunders and Allen more according to the truth of
the text which they do set down in these words. What will you not be content
that I do speak my mind freely: for the law of Christ does subject you to
my power, and unto my bar: for we also have an empire, yea and I do say more
a more excellent and perfect then yours: unless it be meet that the spirit do
submit it self to the flesh, and that heavenly things give place to earthly.
For who is so blind that cannot see that Nazianzene does in this speech
challenge none other then a spiritual government, such as our Bishops have
here over their diocesses, and priests over their parishes a charge of
souls, and therefore because it has the care and ordering of spiritual and
heavenly things, he does affirm it to be more excellent and perfect then the
Empire of kings who do rule over the bodies and goods of men: So that no words
can more manifestly deprive the Pope and priests of all earthly empire and
command in temporal things then these do which do affirm them to belong
to the civil magistrate, their office being only occupied in saving of souls,
by spiritual means, and only in matters spiritual and heavenly, as
preaching, praying, administration of the sacraments, and ecclesiastical
discipline, and such like appropriated to priesthood; and that this was his
meaning and mind it is apparent by the words which he uses before to the
Citizens of Nazanse in the which he does acknowledge himself, and all the
clergy subject unto the secular sovereign saying thus. But among other laws
of our doctrine, we have also this most laudable law inacted, by the which as
bondmen are commanded to obey and to be obedient unto their masters, and wives
unto their husbands, and the Church unto Christ and disciples and scholars to
their schoolemasters and pastors; so are we also prescribed to obey the
superexcellent powers, not only for wrath but also for conscience, as we that
are bound to payment of tribute. Neither let us so behave our selves, that we
for our wickedness and lewd factes, do deadly hate the law and look for the
revenging sword, but rather so lead our lives that we may get praise of the
power and magistrate: And then after he has very eloquently showed by many
similitudes that they ought not to blame the harmless of the sword, but to
impute the smart thereof unto their own faultiness; he leaves as he says
the subjects and turns his speech unto the Emperor and the governors, for
ye must understand that this oration was pronounced in the presence of the
people of Nazanse, trembling for fear of the Emperors great displeasure and
also of the angry Emperor and his officers, least he should be thought (these
are his words) to deal altogether partially either not seeming to have the
like care over them to whom he ought more hoofully to look unto, as they that
could do most either harm or good, as he had of the other inferior sort: or
else to have lost through fear or shame the freedom that he had from Christ
not daring to admonish them of their duty, because of their great dignity and
power. And then he uses the words alleged by our adversaries; what will ye
not be content etc. But I do not doubt but your majesty will take this my
free speaking in good part, as a holy sheep of my holy flock, and a weaneling
of the great sheepeheard. And then he uses very effectual reasons to move him
to mercy, and finally falls to pitiful obtestations, by his own hoary head,
his immaculate priesthood which the Angels etc. by Christ his bitter passion,
etc. in most suppliant sort, without any one word that any whit sauoureth or
sounds of authority, power or command, wisely and godly teaching the
subjects duetifull obedience, and the Emperor and his officers mercy and
moderation in government. Furthermore the better to boult out the truth, in
the controversy I think it will not be amiss to search out, whether in the
old law the high priest who was a type and figure of Christ, and head of all
the priests, and had the supreme ministration of the mysteries of God, The
high priest subject to the temporal magistrate.
and in whose name of Pontifex, the Bishop of Rome has succeeded, was subject
unto the civil magistrate or not. And that he was is plainly proved in the 2.
Cap. of 3. Kings where Solomon deposes Abiather the high priest, of his
office, and confirms him into Anathotb because he had gone about to make
Adoniah King, and also told him that he had deserved to die; but he would not
put him to death, because he had borne the Ark of the Lord God, before his
father David, and had been a continual partaker of all his fathers troubles.
Then if Solomon might lawfully execute the high priest for treason there is no
doubt but that the high priests were subject unto the kings, as unto their
sovereigns.

But although I will pass over in silence, the putting to death of the high
priest Achimelech and Azarias by Saul and Ioas because they will cavil they
were tyrannical, yer I will stay a little upon the suppliant speech of
Achimelech because it argues subjection in the speaker. Saul upon the occasion
of Doeg sent for Achimelech the son of Achitob, 1. Reg. 22. 19. Cap.
and all the hole house of his father being priests which were in Nob, who
came every man unto the king, and Saul said: Listen thou son of Achitob: who
answered I am here my Lord. And Saul said why have thou and the son of
Ishai conspired against me: and have given him being a traitor (and so
continuing to this day) bread and a sword, and have asked counsel of God for
him, that he might rise up against me? And Achimelech answering the king thus
spoke? Let this crime be far from me, neither let the king suspect any such
thing against his bondsman, nor of any man of the whole house of my father: For
thy bondsman knew neither less nor much of this matter, etc. Does there not
appear in these words almost a servile subjection of the high priests unto
the king? for by what baser term can he call himself then his bondsman? or by
what higher and more sovereign name could he speak unto the king then calling
him his Lord? a word that does signify the prince to have his subjects in
such seruilitie: that Octauian the Emperor that did accept the names of
Augustus or divine, of father of his country etc. to have his name sworn by
and his images sacrificed unto as a God: 19 Cap. 2. Crome.
Yet would never admit as Suetonius and Dion do affirm the title of Lord but
abhorred it as reproachful, although now time and custom have mollified the
word. But that the high priest had nothing to din matters of state, we have it
set down in flat words in the 19. of the second Paralip, or the Chronicles
where this we do read. But Amarias the priest and your high priest shall be
president or chief in those things which do appertain to God, but Zebadias
the son of Ishmaell who is captain of the house of Judah, shall be over those
works which do belong unto the king. But now that we have sufficiently proved
the subjection of the high priest of the Jews, let us come to Christ himself
by pretense of being whose vicar and deputy in earth the Pope claims this
proud prerogative of pearching over princes, Christ no earthly king.
and discuss whether that he, as Christ and Messiah, (for I think the Pope
does not challenge to be Gods but Christ's vicar,) was an earthly Monarch or not; that he was none, it is apparently proved, by his refusing to give
judgment on a woman accused of adultery, John. 8.
and also by denying himse^fe to be a competent judge between two brothers,
that contended about an inheritance. And finally in that he confessed unto
Pilate in express words that his kingdom was not of this world. John. 18.
As for the paying of four drachmes for himself and Peter at Capernaum, I
think with Theophylactus and some other that it was for the half sycle (which
is two drachmes) due unto the Lord for every man that was twenty years of
age, as we read in Exodus rather then for tribute due to the Emperor, because
me thinks it does better agree with Christ's interrogation to Peter, what
think thou Peter, of whom do the kings of the earth take tribute, of
their own children or of strangers, and he said of strangers: Jesus said
unto him then are the children free. As though he should have said. This
expositi^n is utterly repugnant to the meaning and purpose of Christ, as the
godly reader, does well understand
If Kings children do not pay tribute to their fathers, neither ought I to
pay unto God any, because I am his son: But if any man will contend that he
affirmed that he ought to pay no tribute to the Emperor, because he was the
son of the supreme Emperor God Almighty, I will not greatly strive with
him, but I will in noe wise grant Felicius that he claims to be discharged,
by right of any earthly Empire that he possessed as Christ; for that by no
means can be gathered out of the text, yea what say you that that famous friar
Dominicus Soto does hold in learned work de Iustit. and Iure, that the
kingdom of Christ was mere spiritual, and writes that he had proved it at
large in his commentaries upon Matthew. Moreover the matter is so manifest that
Pighius himself is forced to confess that Christ his kingdom was only
spiritual, and yet he gives to him whom he would have to be his deputy,
temporal superiority over all Christian princes in that he is Christ his
Lieuetenant, with as great absurdidie as if a man should deny that the
Archbishop of Canterbury can hear and determine of felonies, and yet hold
that his official may, or deprive the Constable of authority to enter
forciblie into any man's house, otherwise then in cases of treason and felony,
and yet grant it to the Constables deputy, or to say that her Majesty can
not put in or out at her pleasure, any soldiers into her town of Barwicke,
and yet maintain that her Lieuetenaunt of the Town may do it. And see I pray
you how he answers this objection out of the Gospel, as my father sent me so
I send you. Whereas they say that Christ came not to exercise authority and
empire over Monarchs, Kings and princes, but as he was sent by the father,
Christ gave no temporal power to Bishops nor Pope
so he does witness that the Apostles were sent by him, neither therefore had
they authority over kings and princes they gather not aright, for that word
(as) does not import a likeness in all points between them whih were sent,
Chist and his Apostles: but does show the senders or the authority of the
senders: As if he had said, my father sent me but I send you, otherwise Christ
was sent by his father to redeem mankind by his death, but not so neither to
that end were the Apostles sent by Christ, but for this purpose, that they
should out of all nations gather together his kingdom in the which all men
should be made partakers of his benefits: unto the which kingdom yet he
himself had prescribed laws, and had ordained Peter to be governor thereof.
Yet had Peter no more authority then the rest of the Apostles.
I deny not but that the sending of Christ did in some points surmount the
sending of the Apostles, but that Christ sent forth his Apostles with a larger
commission and power, then his father had given him, that no man I think will
lightly grant Pighius, that knows that rule of the Canon Law, yea and I do
think of all laws: Nemo potest pius iuris confer in alium quam sibi
competere dignoscatur. (No man can give more right unto another, then may be
known is in himself, and the saying of Christ, that the scholar is not above
his schoolmaster, nor the bondsman above his Lord; but it is enough for the
scholar to be as his master is, and the bondsman as his Lord. And John. 13.
Verily verily I say unto you, the servant is not greater then his master,
neither the Apostle nor legate or messenger greater then him that sent him. And
with what authority he sent them, it appears by the words that immediately
follow: when he had said these words, he blew upon them and said unto them,
receive the holy ghost: whose sins ye shall remit they are remitted, and whose
sins ye shall retain, they are retained: and can any man call this power an
earthly empire? And because Pighius says that Christ had ordained Peter
governor of his kingdom, I pray let us consider what power he gave unto him
at the time of his institution or inauguration, his words be these, Mat. 16.
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon the earth shall also be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall loose upon the earth shall be also loosed in heaven, ye apparently see
that Christ gave unto Peter not the keys of the earthly kingdom or Empire to
advance and depose Princes, but of the Kingdom of heaven to let in or shut
out from heaven, neither had he a sword or Scepter given him as ensign of a
King, but a key a token of a porter. So that except the Pope can show annother
Chapter then that which was given to Peter he will want words to carry away a
terrene monarch. But although Pighius do grant Christ his kingdom to be
spiriuall, yet Felisius in his book upon the ten commandments, Felisius
obiectio^s of Christ's kingdom answered.
on the Commandment honor thy father and thy mother, will not yield
thereunto; but endeavors to prove his secular power and monarchy by his
practice, in deciding all kind of causes as of life and death when he badde
Peter put up his sword* of criminal when he willed the woman taken in
adultery to be gone: and of civil when he determined the controuersi between
the Pharisees and the Herodians, whether the Jews ought to pay tribute unto
the Emperors of Rome or not. Doubtless if Felisius were not accounted for a
great learned man among the Catholics Roman I would not vouchsafe to shape
these objections an answer, they are so frivolous. For who sees not that
Christ his commanding of Peter to put up his sword does no more prove that
Christ had authority of public Justice, then the bidding of any simple
gentleman in the City of London that his man put up his sword which he had
drawn in a fray against his enemy, will convince him to be a Justice of the
peace of the same City, But that Christ said unto the woman taken in adultery
that she might begone her way, for seeing noe man had condemned her neither
would he: He does plainly declare that he had noe authority to condemn or
detain her, but that she might be gone for any thing he had to say or deal
with her. Now for the matter of paying tribute it was not brought before him as
a competent Judge by parties sueing and sued by process awarded, or upon
distress taken, but only moved unto him as a skilful Doctor and learned
divine to be determined, as a doubt between the two sects of the Pharisees
and the Herodians; As if a Protestant and Catholic should privately come to
Doctor Felisius to know his opinion whether the Pope may depose Christian
Princes or not, but in very deed they came not to Christ to be resolved of the
doubt but only to entrappe him and to see if happily they could bring him
within the compass of treason; by denying the payment of tribute unto the
Emperor, and so procure his death by the Roman president, as seditious; And
therefore he asked them why they tempted him, and willed them to show him a
penny, and then he demanded of them whose image was stamped on the piece, and
they answered the Emperors; then said he, give the Emperor that which is
his, and so likewise ynto god that which is gods: a very obscure sentence given
by a judge in a suit: but a wise and witty answer for such false traterous
Interrogants. And with the like trisles does the same Felisius also trouble us,
when he goes about to prove the exemption of the clergy from free subjection
of secular princes because Melchisdech was both a king and a priest, and so
likewise Moses a priest and supreme governor of the Iseralites: And finally
Hely was both high priest, and also secular Prince or judge of the Jews: For
if Melchisedech were both a King and a Priest what is that to the controversy
that we have now in hand, whether that Priests be subject unto the temporal
Prince: (but perhaps it touched the matter if we had disputed whether that a
Bishop may be also a temporal Prince, See Fenestella.
As for a King to be a Priest was an usual thing in many countries among the
heathen: Yea all the Roman Kings had the chief charge of the sacrifices,
temples and worship of the gods, and therefore when the Kings were expelled
they ordained a priest whom they called the sacrificing King, who should
execute those public sacrifices which did of right belong unto the Kings
function, but for hatred of their kings made him subject unto the chief Priest
or Pontifiex Maximus: the which office of Pontifiex Maximus all the heathen
Roman Emperors continually had. See Dion. etc.
But that Moses was both the civil magistrate and also a priest it makes very
much against himself, for although we do grant that Moses was a Priest, yet
it is most manifest that he was not high Priest, but his brother Aaron whom
yet to be subject unto Moses all men seen in the sacred scriptures do know,
so that nothing can make more for the superiority of the civil magistrate
then this example that Aaron being high Priest and head and chief of all
Priests, was yet subject to Moses an ordinary Priest, Moses was a prophet and
not a priest.
because he had the sovereignty temporal. Likewise what is it to the purpose
if that Hely the high Priest was also created secular magistrate, for so were
all the high Priests after the return of the people from Babylon, until they
were conquered by the Romans and the kingdom was given by them unto Herodes
a stranger and Idumean.

Now seeing we have abundantly proved in general, the superiority of the
civil magistrate over all men living within their dominions, both by express
places of scripture, and authorities of ancient fathers, and also convinced
the subjection of the high Priest in the old law unto the civil Prince, and
clearly showed Christ's kingdom to be spiritual and that he gave none other to
Peter and the rest of the Apostles and their successors, and have fully
answered all objections of the adversaries, I will descend unto practice and
prove the superiority of Emperors and Italian Kings over the Popes and
Bishops of Rome by the prescripsion of seven hundredth years after Christ
(...) kind of proof which we Catholics Roman exact of the Protestants
crying unto them to show their successiion. But because Pighius the Popes
proctor in the secular primacy does subject his client unto the heathen
Emperors, The Pops subject to the Emperors and Italian kings.
I need fetch my limmitation noe higher then Constantine the great the first
Christian Emperor. Now to show how he banished Bishops perhaps will be
thought to small purpose, because they do give this earthly Empire not unto
the Clergy but only unto the Bishop of Rome as Christ's lieuetenant general
in all causes as well spiritual as temporal. See for, these histories Paul:
Dia^ Platina and Sabellicus.
But I do find that his son and successor Constantius did banish Liberius
the Bishop of Rome because he would not subscribe to the deposition of
Athanasius and caused another to be c^osen in his place. Moreover when the
City of Rome and the Country of Italy came by conquest into the possession of
the Ostrogothes in Anno Domin. 483. Liberius.
Theodoricus the King of the Ostrogothes or of Italy commanded to come before
him to Rauenna whether he had transferred the seat of the Empire of Italy,
leaving the city of Rome in the government of the Senate, Symmachus.
And least some man unskillful of antiquities should dream, that it was then
the Popes by the donation of Constantine, Theodoricus I say summoned before him
at Rauenna Symmachus and Laurentius who contended for the Bishopperickes of
Rome to the division of the whole City, John.
that he as soueraing might determine the controversy upon hearing of the
matter. And afterward when Justinius Emperor of Constantinople had banished the
Arrians out of all his dominions, Theodoricus sent John the bishop of Rome
and their Senators Ambassadors unto Justinius willing them in threatening sort
to tell the Emperor from him that unless he did spedily restore to the
Arrians their Churches, and suffer them to live in peace, that he would
extinguish (...) Italy. They coming to (...) honorably received by him, did
with (...) being very hoofull for the safety of themselves and (...)
countrymen, entreat the Emperor graciously to grant the ^^nor of their
Embassage, although it were unjust, and to have regard and compassion of Italy
which otherwise would utterly perish, with whose tears the Emperor being
moved granted them their request. But when the Bishop with his associates
were returned to Rauenna to make relation unto the King of the Emperors
answer* Theodoricus moved with malice because (...) a defender of the
Catholic piety had received him so honorably* killed him and his fellows
with painful imprisonment. Then Theodotus, annother king of the Ostrogothes
sent Agapetus Agapetus
the Bishop of Rome Ambassador as his subject unto Justinian the Emperor,
which Justinian not long after having recovered Rome from the Ostrogothes, did
not by his Lieuetenant, but by his Lieuetenant Belsarius his wife spoil
Siluerius Silberius:
the Bishop of Rome of his Bishopprick^, and Bishops robes: and putting him
in monastical needs confined him into an out Island Charging him that he would
have betrayed the gate Asmaria that adjoined unto his house unto the
Ostrogothes, but in deed perhaps there was some other privy grudge hidden in
the Empress her heart. But the manner of the doing does manifestly declare for
how small Princes Popes were reputed in those days, for Belsarius sending an
officer for him the Bishop was brought into his bed Chamber, because
Belsarius sat by his wife who being that day come from Naples wary was laid
down on her bed. But the proud Dame had no sooner seen the Bishop, but
she began to (...) and said, oh sirrah wherein have I or my Belisarius so so^e
offended your maistershippe, that you should betraye us unto the Goths and
immediately b^d away with him, not suffering him to speak one word, And in his
room was one Vigilius Vigilius.
placed, who not long after refusing to restore unto his seat Anthenius who
had been deprived of the Bishopbricke of Constantinople for the heresy of
Eutiches; Th^odora the Empress who favored Anthenius commanded to be arrested
at Rome and sent prisoner to Constantinople, where when being urged with this
unjust request he had broken out into this impatient speech that he had thought
he had come to Justinian, but that now he well perceived it was to Dioclesian.
He was so well whipped for forgetting his lesson in the two and twentieth of
Exodus Non maledices principi populi tui thou shall not speak ill to the
prince of thy people; that he was almost slain (I do think noe Christian or
civil Emperor much less Justinian would so seruilely have v^ed him whom he
reputed the monarch of the world) and anon after was ignominiously drawn
along the cyty in a halter and then put in prison where he continued many
years with only bread and water Anno Domini. 591. Pelagius Pelagius
the Bishop of Rome sent Gregory who succeeded him in the sea unto Mauritius
the Emperor of the east, to desire him not to be offended for that he had
suffered himself to be denounced Bishop before he had obtained his consent
and confirmation; for he could not send before that time to Constantinople,
because the city of Rome had been straitely beseiged by the Lombards: Now in
those days says Platina and all other Historians, writing of those times and
affairs the election of the Bishop of Rome was void without the Emperors
assent and conformation. And now we are come to Gregory himself surnamed the
great a man in such credit with the Popes of latter times and the Catholics
Roman, Greg^^y the great.
that they and we do more follow him in the divine service and ceremonies,
then all the rest that ever satte in that see before him, and therefore I do
hope that you will the more willingly allow and embrace his opinion and
judgment of the secular soueraignytye. As I do not doubt but ye will cauell
at many of my former examples as unjust and tyrannical, the which I will, not
greatly stick to grant you, and yet they do strongly prove the superiority
of those princes, and that they were there lawful, although lawless
sovereigns, for as substantially do the banishmentes of the Catholic
Bishops by the heretical Emperors convince the soueraignetie of the
Emperors over the Bishops: as the confining of the heriticall Bishops by
the Catholic Emperors, Neither am I less assured of the subjection of the
Bishops of Asia unto the Emperor of Constantinople for that I read that
Valens banished the Catholic Bishops thereof, then I am when I find that
Theodosius banished the Arrian Bishops of Asia. For never shall we find
that when the Empire was divided that ever the Emperors of the East of what
Religion soever they were did bannish the Bishops of the West nor contrary
wise; but either dealte only with them that were under their own Empire, and
who would have a better proof that this Island was subject unto the Roman
Empire then the havoc that Dioclesian made here of the Christians, and there
Church and does not he as sufficiently show himself to be a lawefull judge
that hangs up twenty true men, a^ he that executes as many thieves: Neither
do we read that these Emperors and Kings were reproved for injuriously
punishing them, over whom they had noe authority by right: but because they
punished them against law and right: for matters that deserved noe punishment.
But leaving this let us go to Gregory, who had not learned to date his
let^ers as the Popes do now with Anno Pontificatus nostri in the year of our
Popedom but regnante domino nostro Mauritio Tiberio piissimo Anno decimo
quarto, post Consulatum eiusdem domini nostri decimo tertio, in the year of
the reign of our Lord Mauretius Tiberius the most godly Emperor the
fourtenth, and after the consulshippe of the same Lord of ours the thirtenth,
as his four letters in the ecclesiastical history of Beda are dated: wherein
I do nore three things: first that he does not write the date of his own
creation or inauguration as sovereigns do; and secondly as subjects do that
he writteth the date of the reign of their Prince: and thirdly that he called
him Lord: a word so hautie and high, that Augustus made an edict that noe man
should call him so, noe nor would not suffer his Children nor Childrens
Children to call him so, Suetonius
neither in earnest nor in sport. Moreover with what duetifull humility are
all his letters fraught that he directs unto the Emperor calling him in the
plural number after an unwonted manner, to declare his unwonted lowliness and
wonted subjection. Domini my Lords, and yet because noe man should think he
called him so rather of humility then of duty, it is apparent he uses not
that term to any other: But writing unto Ethelbert the King of Kent he
calls him in Beda, son, a name of obedience and duetifulnesse, but yet also
of love as he also calls Ch^lderbert the King of France. ^plaplib. 4.
Indicto 12. eplam 96. et 97.
But omitting many of his letters I will only rehearse somewhat out of his
threescore and one of the second book, wherein he finding great fault with
the Emperor for making an unjust Law as he says: that noe Soldier should
enter into Religion, the which would have made him to have forgotten all
humility, if he had been as proudly spirited as some of his successors have
been, he thus begins his letters. Omnipotenti Deo reus est qui serenissimis
Dominis in omni quod agit and loquitur purus non est. Ego autem indignus
pietatis vestrae famulus. etc. He is guilty unto God that is not pure unto my
renowned Lords in all things that he does and speaks, but I an unworthy
servant of your godliness, etc. And anon after, Fatemur Dominis meis, and
Dominorum pietas sanxit, I do confess unto my Lords, and the godliness of
my Lords has decreed. And again, Ego vero Dominis meis loquens quid sum nisi
puluis and verniis: sed tamen quia contra authorem omnium Deum hanc intendere
constitutionem sentio Dominis tacere non possum. But I speaking unto my Lords
what am I but dust and a worm; but because I do perceive that this
constitution does tend against God the creator of all, I cannot hold my peace
unto my Lords: Is this the speech of a sovereign or a subject. And a little
after. Ad hac per me se^uum vltimum suum and vestrum respondebit Christus
dicens, ego te and sacerdotes meos manus tua commisi, tu a meo seruitio milites
tuos subtrahis. And ego indignus famulus vester sci^ etc. unto this will Christ
himself answer by me his vilest bondsman and yours, saying, I have advanced
thee from, etc. unto the empire, etc. I have committed my priests into thy
hands, and thou do withdraw thy soldiers from my service. And I your
unworthy servant do know. And at the foot of the letter he writes that
which strikes this present controversy stone dead: Ego quidem Ius^ioni
subiectus eandem legem per diuersas terrarum parts transmitti feci and quia
lex ipsa omnipotenti Deo minime concordat, ecce per suggestionis meae paginam
serenissimis dominis meis nunciaui, vtribique ergo quae debui exolui, qui and
imperatori obedientiam pribus, and pro Deo quae sensui minime tacui: I being
subject to commandment have caused the same law to be sent through diverse
parts of the world, and because the same law does nothing agree with God,
behold I have signified it unto my renowned Lord by the letter of my
suggestion, wherefore I have in both things discharged that which I ought, who
have showed obedience unto the Emperor, and yet have never a whit left
unspoken that which I thought in Gods behalf: In this authority I note first,
that the Pope does acknowledge himself subject and servant unto the Emperor
being a Christian and does call him his liege Lord. Secondly he does affirm
that God had subjected the priests and clergy unto the Christian princes for
to serve them: for otherwise it can not answer the other member: and thou
do withdraw thy soldiers from my service: And thirdly that Gregory a
Pope does acknowledge and affirm himself to be subject unto the Emperors
commandment, yea and thought himself so bound to obey him, that he might
not with a safe conscience refuse to publish such decrees of his as he thought
in his conscience ungodly, M^lanus diuini ie, that Gregory offended not in
obeying a wicked and an ^ngodly commandment.
the which thing if any cunning Catholic think that Gregory might not
lawfully do, let him read Molanus a learned Catholic of Louayne his book
de fide hereticis and rebellibus seruanda, of keeping promise with heretics
and rebels, and there he shall find his fact defended, moreover the like
subjection of himself and the clergy unto the Emperiour does he acknowledge
writing of this very same matter and Law unto Theodorus the Emperors
physician in these words words, Valde autem mihi durum videtur vt ab eius
seruitio milites suos prohibeat, qui ei and omnia tribuit, and dominarie^ non
solum militibus, Eplapelib. 2. Ind^^. in eplape^^lt.
sed etiam sacerdotibus concesset. In english this, But it seems to me to be
hard that he should forbid his soldiers his service, who has both given him
all that he has, and also granted him to be Lord over not only the
soldiers but also the priests. In the same letter also he does call the king
my Lord; and our Lord. But although I hope that this assertion and judgment of
Grego^^e surnamed the great, a Pope, a canonized saint, and one of the four
approved Doctors of the latin Church, will satisfy all reasonable Catholics
Roman. Yet I will proceed further with the ecclesiastical practice. Anon
after Gregory and about the year of our Lord. 608. Bonifacius the third was a
very earnest suter unto Phocas the Emperor, Bonifacius.

Paulus diaconus.


to decree that the sea of Rome should be the head Church of Christendom,
the which at length he obtained with much a do: but in good faith he might
have saved much labor, if he had been Monarch of the world, for then he could
have done it of himself without once God have mercy to the Emperor. Paulus
diaconus.
And his successor Bonifacius the fourth put up a supplication to the same
Phocas that he would vouchsafe to command that the Temple of Pantheon at Rome,
which had been dedicated to all the Pagan Gods, should be converted to the
Church of the virgin Mary, and of all the holy Martyrs. Seuerinus
I trow this example is of some moment, Anno. 636. Seuerinus was chosen Bishop
of Rome, to ratify the which election says Sabellicus, there must be had the
assent of the Emperors Lieuetenant in Italy, called the Eparch. Isaac that
then had that charge came therefore to Rome as he said, but because he would
be paid for his pains, he took out all the treasure out of the vestrie of
the Laterane Church, dividing part of it among his soldiers, and sending
part unto the Emperor, and least he should be called an ill cook, he also
licked his own fingers; and yet the Pope stirred not one whit, such powerless
princes were Popes in those days, Sabell.
and such servile subjects unto Emperors: Again about Anno Domini. 650.
Constans the Emperor commanded his Eparch Olympius to command upon their
allegiance, Martin the Bishop of Rome and all the rest of the Italian Bishops
to embrace the heresy of the Monothlites; Martin.
which if they should refuse to do that then he should take order, that the
Bishop of Rome might be taken prisoner; or if that could not be done without
great uproar, by reason of the good will and defense of the people, (for much
was the authority and majesty of the Emperors decayed with the people of
Rome, by there far distance, there small Empire in Italy being cooped in a
narrow corner, by the Lomberdes, their heresies and ungodliness; and finally
because they had made the seat of their Lieuetenant to be at Rauenna) that
then he should cause him suddenly to be slain by some slight, he came to Rome
declared the Emperors commandment, the which the Bishop refused to
accomplish, but to apprehende him the Eparch durst not, and of murdering him he
missed. But two years after Theodorus the Eparch entered the City,
apprehended him, sent him in Irons unto the Emperor, who confined him into the
Chersonesus of Thrace, where for poverty he perished. Anno. 667. Diac.
Constans the Emperor after he had unfortunately fought in Italy with the
Lombardes, came unto Rome the Bishop Vitalian with all the clergy going
forth six miles to receive him, who shortly after deceived them, for he
spoiled the Church called Pantheon of all the sacred ornaments, Vitalian.
and uncovered it taking of the tile of copper, yea and all the ancient pieces
of work, either of copper or marble, that he could find in the whole City,
and sent to Constantinople: so that he defaced Rome more in seven days, then
all the Barbarians had ever done since the declination of the Empire: and the
like hauock he made in all the the Churches subject unto him in Italy,
Sicileye, and Sardinia, and yet for all this Peter drew not the sword, for
he yet remembered how bitterly his master had once checked him before for
fighting, Anno Dom. 700. Iustinianus the Emperor (says Diaconus) commanding
Constantine the Pope to come unto him honorably received him, Constantine.
and sent him back; whom he being prostrated on the ground, desired to be an
intercessor unto God for his sins, renewed all the privileges of his Church,
why then the privileges were first given by the Emperor and not by God
himself. But that the Emperor fell down at the Bishops feet, it was done in
respect not of his greatness, but of his godliness: a thing usually done by
great princes unto ancient Monks and Hermites, renowned for their strict life,
and rare piety, whereof all Christian histories yield us store of examples:
and this to be so does his request of intercession unto GOD for his sins
manifestly show. But to return again to our practice about Anno Domini. 690.
another Justinian the Emperor sent Zacharias his Protospatharius or high
Constable, into Italy, for to bring Sergius the Bishop of Rome, Sergius.
unto him in Irons, because he would not subscribe unto a lewd counsel held
by him at Constantinople; Sabell.
and he had done it if that the Imperial Army in Italy what for hatred of the
Emperor, and the good will of the Pope, and his cause, had not speedily
marched to Rome, to withstand his apprehension: yet this Emperor did
afterward renew for Constantine the Bishop a confirmation of all the
p^iuiledges of the Sea of Rome: This Constantine was the first Bishop of Rome
(says Omphrius) the new Chronicler of the Popes, Qui in os ausus est
resistere, which durst resist the Emperors of Constantinople to their faces,
for he at the importunate petition of the people of Rome, who requested it with
great outcries, decreede that the name of Philippicus the Emperor should not
be mentioned at the Altar, nor in any writing or records, nor his image set
up in their Churches, because he had commanded the Bishop to consent unto his
Arrianisme, and the abolishing of the Images of Saints. But Paulus Diaconus
who lived near that time writes that statuit populus, the people decreede,
and not the Pope.

About Anno Domini. 7^5. Leo Isauricus the Emperor commanded Gregory the
Bishop of Rome, Gregory the second
to destroy all the images of the Saints, the which he refused to do. But
although the Emperor did execute many therefore, and about that matter
banished the patriarch of Constantinople, and had sundry times practiced the
Popes death, both covertly, and also by open forces, causing the Eparch to
bring his Army before the City of Rome, where he was repelled by the
Lombardes; yet would the Pope by no means be won to consent that a new
Emperor should be chosen in Ital^e, the which was now in a good forwardness,
the people having slain Martin the governor of the City of Rome, and his
son the Lieuetenant of Campania, and the Citizens of Rauenna the Eparch: and
had chosen them almost in every City new officers: But Gregory would by no
means consent thereunto, but won them to be quiet with much a do. But when
the Emperor would not desist from forcing of his edict, for the abolishment
of Images upon the Romans, and the Italians, Gregory the third successor
unto the other, held a Counsel in Italy, wherein he excommunicated the
Emperor, and then the Citizens of Rome and all the teritorie about, called by
the name of the Duchy of Rome, revolted from the Emperor, who was negligent in
defending them against the Lombardes, that had sweeped him almost out of all
Italy, from Rome to the Alps, and so the Pope became prince of the City and
Duchy of Rome, S. Sigon. de regno Italiae.
and subject unto no man about the year, 730. And to establish the state of
the Roman principality, by stopping of titles, Zacharias the Pope won his
Creator Pepine the french king to spoil Aistulfus the king of the Lombardes of
Rauenna, by right whereof, being the siege of the Gotish kingdom and the
imperial exarchate in Italy; The Pope cannot depose princes.
he claims tribute of the Romans, and for to bestow it upon him and his
successors, for to take away all quarrel for ever. Thus ye see that the
Bishops of Rome were always subject unto the temporal princes of the City,
until such time as the reuolting people had created him their prince, as all
other Bishops in civil sovereign, so that the Popes are not exempted of
temporal subjection by the institution of GOD, but by the election of men; as
the high priests became to be sovereigns after the return of the Jews from
Babylon, there being ordained to be the temporal prince: Then seeing by the
ordinance of God the Pope was a subject, and by the creation of men being made
a sovereign, only over some certain provinces; I cannot see how either by
Gods Law or man's, he can rightly claim any authority to depose Christian
princes at his pleasure, no more then any other subject can his sovereign, or
several sovereigns one another: to grant either of which is so absurd, that
I should show my self to have very little wit, if I should go about to
refute either, as though any man that had common sense would doubt of them.
For to reason that Sixtus Quintus, because he is secular sovereign over these
provinces which are called the patrimony of Peter, may therefore depose all
other Christian princes, is as good an argument as if I should say, ELIZABETH
is Queen of England, therefore she may depose the prince of the patrimony,
and all other Christian princes. So that by proving my first proposition, that
Christ gave unto Peter and his successors no soueraignetie secular, I have also
convinced the second, that they can not deprive Christian princes of their
principalities. The Pope cannot depose the temporal sovereign
Neither is the Popes claim any thing advanced by those two sayings of
Christ unto Peter, which I do find alleged by Gregory the seventh, when
he first of any Pope deposed Henry the fourth Emperor, as the warrant of his
doings. Plati.
The first is feed my sheep, wherein he did not, said Gregory exempt
Kings. And the other, whatsoever thou shall bind on the earth, shall be bound
in Heaven, and whatsoever thou do loose in the earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven. For I have proved before that Christ his kingdom was spiritual; and
so a spiritual charge of souls he committed to Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles and their successors, and noe Empire over the bodies and goods of any
men. But Doctor S^u^ders takes great hold of the Greek word (...).
Poimaine which the Apostle uses when Christ bad Peter the second time to feed
his sheep for that word (says he) signifies also to govern. It does
indeed properly signify to keep sheep, as we term it wherein we include
not only the feeding of them, but also the care of looking to them that they
take noe harm, the dressing of them when they be ill; and all other things
belonging to the charge and duty of a sheepehearde; and properly no other
signification has it; but by a Metaphore to show with how great care,
mildness and lenity kings ought to govern their subjects. Homer and Plato
do often call kings sheepeheardes of the people; and so likewise the sacred
scriptures. In the twentieth of the Acts we have the same words: where we
read, Therefore look unto your selves, and the whole flock wherein the holy
Ghost has placed you Bishops (and overseers) in greek poimaine the Church
of God which he has purchased him with his blood. Now that the Apostles or
any Bishops had any secular power, Pighius himself does deny, as long as
the temporal princes had not received the Gospel: so that this word can by
no means importe any earthly superiority. And in this Oration Paul does
plainly declare, what kind of kingdom Christ's is, when he says to govern
the Church of God, which he purchased with his blood: for he purchased none
with his blood but t^^s spiritual kingdom; for as GOD he was possessed o^
the Empire of the whole world from the beginning. But the place of binding and
losing we have examined already, and proved that it cannot be understood
otherwise then Christ himself does interpret it, in the twenteth of John,
whose sins ye shall remitte are remitted; and whose sins ye shall retain
are retained, and a receiving into the Church and kingdom of heaven, and a
shutting out of it. And therefore he says; whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth shall be bound in Heaven; and not, shall be bound in earth, least any
man should dream that he gave Peter secular power over earthly Empires, and
that all the commandments and ordinances and decrees of his successors,
touching worldly matters, should be received and kept, throughout the whole
world. Neither if the Pope had any such authority given him by any general
Counsel, A general counsel cannot depose Princes.
as I am assured he has not (for as for the canon made in the counsel of
Laterane, we will anon make a large several treatise thereof, were it good
and sufficient to bind all Princes to obedience, because it lies not in the
power of a general counsel to dispose of secular matters. For seeing general
counsels do altogether consist of persons ecclesiastical, and they do allow
noe temporal prince any voice therein; and that all the Bishops that are
assembled there, do sit as Bishops and spiritual Lords, and not as temporal,
and that they be secular subjects, and not sovereigns; and that the kingdom of
the Church is a distinct kingdom, as all the Catholics say, from the
kingdoms of the world; It is as absurd to hold that they can makes laws
touching temporalities, to be observed of all temporal Princes under temporal
pains; as if a mad man would affirm that the assembly of the three states
of France, may ordain statutes for the Queens majesty of England, and her
realm, and that they are bound in conscience to observe all laws made there.
For doubtless the temporal and the ecclesiastical kingdoms are as several
kingdoms as England and France, and which have more alliance together then
the other two, because they are both secular, both bodily, both ruled, by one
sword, but of the other the one is spiritual, the other bodily, the one of the
world, the other of heaven; the one swayed by the civil and material sword,
^he other by the spiritual, the one slaying the soul, the other the body. But
now I would not have any fond man to imagine, that I do go about to spoil
the temporal prince of his high prerogative, in ordaining of wholesome laws,
for the maintenance of the true faith of Christ; and the sincere observation of
all the rest of his holy commandementes; the which I do think him bound in
conscience to do: but that I do firmly believe and openly profess, that by
the right given him by God, he may punish all persons, both ecclesiastical and
temporal, within his dominions, that shall offend, either in faith or manners,
by fine, imprisonment, banishment, confiscation of lands and goods, attainder
of blood, death, or finally any other temporal pains; as the noble princes of
this land have always used to do. And therefore Justice Brian in Decimo of
Henry the seventh does call the King a mixed person, for he is (says Brian) a
person united with the priests of holy Church. But I deny him the
administration of gods holy sacraments, and the exercise of the spiritual
sword* which I do appropriate unto the ecclesiastical officers. Wherefore
much less can the Bishops in a general counsel, give away the crowns of
their Kings; seeing according to the before rehearsed rule of the Canon law noe
man can give that right unto another, which he has not himself. But if there
were ordained a body politic of all the Christian princes and states, what
they being assembled in a counsel general might do is annother question,
the which we will leave to be disputed of them that shall see this hap
institution. And in the mean time they must pardon us, if we do not lightly
believe that the Pope has power to depose Princes; seeing we can find no
warrant therefore, neither in the scriptures, the ancient counsels, the old
fathers, the practice of the Church of God, neither before Christ, neither
seven hundredth years after him, although there reigned many Idolatrous,
heretical, and wicked Princes. Of the Jewish Kings very few were good, but
rather such men as GOD had straightly commanded that they should not spare,
if they were their Brothers, or such a friend as he looued as dearly as his
own soul; but that his hand should be first upon him to stone him to death,
and yet we do not read that any one of them was deposed, by the high
Priests, or his subjects; armed against him by them: And yet were they so
zealous men of their dignity, that they would in noe wise suffer the King to
usurp ought upon him, in so much that one of them openly withstoode Ozias the
King, The history of king Ozias handled.
that would unlawfully execute his office, in offering incense unto GOD;
neither does the expelling of this King out of the temple by the Priests,
because God had for his proud part stricken him with leprosy, and that
thereupon he sequestered himself from company, and left the government of
matters of state unto his son, prove ought against the prerogative of
Princes, The text says 2. Coro. 26.20. that they caused hastily to depart
thence and he was even compelled to go out.
as the English author of the ecclesiastical discipline does infer. For he
was not expelled out of the temple because he offered incense, but because the
wraith of GOD had made him a leper, the which kind of men by the express
commandment of GOD might not converse with other. And if we will receive the
report and assertion of Josephus, a learned Priest and historian of the Jews,
the priests did not thrust him out of the temple, but admonished him to
depart, the which he did soon obey when he saw himself made so loathsome on
a sudden and was astonished with the manifest wraith of God; and hereunto the
text seameth to assent which says and hastily they expelled him etc. But he
himself also made have to go out, because he had presently felt the plague or
struck of God. But that he was as some seem to say, deposed of his Kingdom
therefore, we do read neither in the scriptures, nor in Josephus. But only
this says Paralyp. So King Ozias was a leeper even to his dying day, and dwelt
in an house by himself, because he was full of leprosy, for the which he had
been cast out of the house of the Lord, Furthermore Ioathan his son governed
the kings house, and judged the people of the land. And almost the same words
we read in the book of the kings, So that by the words of the text it does
not appear that he was either deposed or did give up the Kingdom, but only
abandoned al resort, by reason of his contagious sickness and ignominy, gave
up the maneging of matters of state and the princely port unto his son, and
so accordingly whosoever does mark diligently the supputiaton of years, which
the book of the Kings makes, shall manifestly see, that he reckons Ozias
his reign even until his dying day. Neither if that Ozias had been deposed
because of his leprosy, would it so much further their cause, as they feign
in saying that heresy is inward leprosy, then, Idolatry is. And yet can they
not find that ever any King of the Jews was deposed by the high Priest for
Idolatry, nor any Christian prince by the Pope for any cause for the space of
seven hundredth years after Christ, although those times yielded many ungodly
Princes, as we have showed you before of Emperors, one flatly fallen, from the
faith unto Paganism, sundry Arrians, some Monothlets, and Eutiches, and many
cruel persecutors of the Catholics. And so likewise many of the Ostrogothes
in Italy were Arrians, and many more in the same province of the Lombard kings.
And yet a far longer race of the Westgotish Kings in Spain. But if any man
will rub his face and say, that the Bishops of Rome in those ages either
had not so much knowledge in the word of GOD, or else so great zeal as there
successors since, all men that shall hear them will shoute at them. They write
that when Nero whipped Senatoures, executed noble men, spoiled Citizens, wasted
provinces, without cause or color, and finally in all things made his lust
law: he triumphing at this iolitie, boasted that never any man before him did
know what an Emperor might do. Act. 5.
Certes the holy and learned fathers, in ancient time knew not this divinity,
that when there princes wrongfully oppressed them, they should straightway cast
off their yoke, but rather patiently bear whatsoever ill should be inflicted
on them for Gods cause. Mat. 5.
They remembered that the Apostles from whom they set their light and learning,
being whipped at a convocation of the Jewish Pristes and Elders, went away
rejoicing because they were counted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of
Jesus. Athanatius in epla. 2. ad vlit vit Agent
They had not forgotten the saying of their Savior Mat. 5. Blessed are they
that suffer persecution for righteousness; for theires is the Kingdom of
heaven. Ye are blessed when men shall curse you, and persecute you, and lying,
shall say all manner of evil against you for me. Rejoice and be glad because
your reward in heaven is abundant: for so they persecuted the Prophets that
were before you. When Constantius the wicked Emperor urged Hosius the holy
Bishop of Cordula, the Bishop of Rome his deputy, and the three hundredth
Bishops assembled at Sa^dica, with bitter banishment (as he had already
served many of there colleges) unless they would subscribe to the wicked
error of Arrius: they all refused to do it, but they did not menace the
Emperor with deposition, if he would not relinquish his false faith, and
revoke the godly banished Bishops: bur contrariwise confessed unto him. Non
nob^s fas est imperium in te^riis tenere it is not lawful for us to hold
Empire on the earth. And not withstanding all his hurtful wickedness; yet
they affirmed that he that should cast but a malignant eye at his Empire did
resist the ordinance of God; so far were they from thinking that his
subjects might openly take arms against him. Don John De Austria in his
wars in the low Cuntries, Don John's ensigns.
bare in his ensign a devise of a cross with this word. In hoc signo vici^
Turcos, in h c signo vincam hereticos, with this sign I overcame the Turks,
with this sign I will vanquish the heretics: so if the latter Popes had
said, with this virtue and weapon of patience, our ancestors overcame the
heathen, and heriticall Emperors; and with the same we will overcome the
Emperors that will intrude upon our temporalities, perhaps their state had
not been now so staggering: for whosoever shall mark the course of the history
of the Church of God, shall find that it has grown great by patience, but
has rather decreased then increased by arms and violence. Moreover if the
Popes will vouchsafe to read their old records, they shall see and
understand that such of their predecessors as armed themselves with patience,
and used none other but the spiritual sword and that also sparingly and
seldom; were had of all men in greater reputation and reverence, and could do
more in the world, then their successors, that after the spiritual sword which
Christ had delivered unto them sharp and dreadful to be used only in
extremity, and but in his cause and quarrel, had through there continual
abusing and drawing at every light private braule, became so hagled, blunt and
contemptible, that every boy laughed at it, did furiously fall to catching of
the secular sword out of the temporal magistrates hand. Like as they report
of Julius the second whether merely devised or done in deed I (says Ferou)
know not: that when he went in person into the field against the French, armed
with a pair of keys in his hand, and a sword by his side, he threw his
keys into the river of Tiber, and therewith all drawing his sword said:
seeing Peter's keys have done noe good, Paul's sword shall help me. And
surely therein the Pope fared like, Ioakin the King of Judah who trusted in a
rotten reed the king of Egypt to defend him against the Assyrian: And so they
incurred with him the curse pronounced in that place by the Prophet Jeremy. The
practice of deposing Princes never came of charity.
Cursed is the man that trusts in man and makes flesh his arm. And because
Cardinal Hosius will have Luthers doctrine tried, whether it be good or bad
by the root that bredde it, I pray let us also see from what root this
practice of deposing of Princes did spring. There be two roots says Agustine
upon John, and out of him Hosius, which two husbandmen the holy Ghost and the
devil, set in man's heart, the one charity or love, the other inordinate
desire; Henry.
of the one comes all good of the other all ill, now whether of these roots
brought forth deposition of Princes I pray let us consider. The first Pope
that did it in practice about Anno Domini 108^. was Gregory the seventh against
Henry the fourth Emperor, because he being exasperated against the Pope, for
excommunicating of five of his chief counselors; whom he thought ruled him
to much, and for commanding him upon pain of excommunication to appear
before him at Rome, the twesday in second week of Lent; to purge himself of
such chrimes as his rebellious subjects the Saxons had accused him of; See
Platina and Sigonius.
had called a counsel in Germany where Gregory was deposed being accused there
by Hugh Blancke a Cardinal, and many Italian Bishops, of Necromancy, heresy,
lechery symony, tyranny, and I know not what else, nor force how truly: but
most true it is, that this was the cause of the Emperors deposing, as it does
appear by the Popes bull wherein we find these words. Because he has too
audaciously and rashly laid hands on the Church (the Pope speaks to Peter) and
because he has not obeyed my authority as becomes a Christian. etc.
therefore in thy name I do accurse him, depose him, discharge all men of
obedience toward him, and forbid them to obey him, that all nations may know
that thou art Peter. etc. Now to depose the Emperor because he had caused him
to be deposed, was this charity or inordinate desire of revenge? did any of
his predecessors before him the like? God says revenge is mine, and I will
repey it: and S. Paul, charity seeks not her own. I pray you tell me what
Charity was it toward the Church and Christendom, rather then he would forsake
his sea, yea or revoke his choleric censure, that he would see all Germany
and Italy, See Sabel
almost utterly destroyed by civil wars, his favorers in Germany broken in
seven blody battelles, his two Idol Emperors slain, and all the forces of
his Italian staff and stay, the mighty countess Mawde utterly defayted;
great part of the Citizens of Rome consumed by three years seige, the Burgo
San: Pietro twice sacked and defaced, all the house of the Corsy, the noblest
Citizens of Rome and his fastest friends raced to the ground: the miracle of
the world the septisolium, taken and deformed, his nephew taken prisoner, the
cyty of Rome twice set on fire, by Suiscardo, whom being excommunicated and
now reconciled, he had procured to come to discharge him out of the castle of
San. Angelo: with two huge wastes, remain yet to be seen at this day in the
fairest part of the City for a perpetual reproach for the first deposing of
Princes: and yet would not his stout heart stoop, but when at the
importunate prayers of the oppressed Romans, he had granted to receive the
Emperor into grace upon his submission, he afterward utterly refused it,
because the Citizens requested, that the Emperor might do it, in his
imperial robes and fled first into the Castle San: Angelo, and afterward unto
Salerne, where he died in voluntary banishment, not daring to abide at Rome,
for fear of the Citizens who for these manifold calamities with which he had
overwhelmed them, did deadly hate him. What an hard heart had he, that would
not relent at so many and extreme mischieues and miseries? Did he not blush to
remember how the noble Quintus Metellus a pagane, being wrongfully forbididden
fire and water by Apulieus the Tribune of the commonaltie, to be revenged on
Meitellus for putting him out of the senate for his lewd life; chose rather
willingly to go into bannishment, having the stronger faction, then that any
tumult should be stirred up in the City for him. Again how many of his
predecessors did for righteousness sake suffer banishment, imprisonment, yea and
painful death, when they might have shrouded and saved themselves, we have
already showed by many examples. And also Marcellinus a pagane does report,
that Constantius the Emperor could hardly in the dead time of the night
carry Liberius out of the City of Rome, with great difficulty, for the good
will of the people that burned in his love: so that it is likely that if the
Bishop would with force have resisted, he would have been to hot and to heavy
for the Emperor to carry away. But neither God nor Devil had yet reueeled
unto the Bishop of Rome, this new dignity of Gregory's: See Platina and Sigon.
that they could by Apostolical power bind all men, not only in spirit but
also in body, and all the goods of fortune: that they might depose Emperorus
for their pride and co^tumacy, in not obeying of their commandments as
Gregory did Henry, and give the Empire unto another, for his humility and
obedience, as Gregory did to Rodulph, because he had promised to give his
sons pledges for assurance that he would stand to the Popes arbiterment: for
they yet knew not this reason that Gregory alleged quite void of reason,
in these words. Wherefore (O Peter and Paul) the most holy and chief of the
Apostles, confirm by your authority, that which I have spoken, that all men
may now at the length understand, that if ye can bind and loose in heaven,
that then we also can in earth take away, and give Empieres and Kingdoms, and
whatsoever else men have. For if ye can judge those things which do
appertain to God, what is to be thought we may do, in these inferior and
profane things? And if it belong to you to judge Angels, that reign over
proud princes, what is it seemly that we do with their bondmen? Therefore
let kings and all princes of the world learn by this Emperous example what
ye can do in heaven, and how great ye are with God, and henceforth fear to
contemn the commandments of the holy Church. Doubtless these words (now at
length may learn) and (henceforth may fear) were very significantly put in by
G^^gorie, for indeed before this time, this doctrine was unknown to the world,
as also that learned Hermit of Rome the Popes Chronicler Omphrius, a man
inferior to none in the knowledge of the Roman antiquities, does confess in
his book of Cardinals in these words: Bishops cardinales did at the first
take their place among other Bishops, according to the anciency of their
creation; but afterward by little and little they came to take place above all
Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarchs, which began to
be used by little and little, about the time of Gregory the seventh, and Vrbane
the second in which times the election of the Pope (whose authority did then
begin to be supreme as well in spiritual things as temporal, the Emperors
being depressed or trodden down) was taken out of the hands and power of the
Emperors, and granted especially to the Cardinals. And anon after a Priest
Cardinal was a mean place between a Bishop and other Priests not Cardinals.
But in the time of Alexander the third under whom the Church of Rome was
advanced to the highest top or step in earth, the most mighty Emperor
Frederick Redbeard, and he also a most infestious foe of the Church of Rome,
being trode^ under foot, and vanquished, and forced to desire peace of the
Church: then first contrariwise Priest Cardinals were made of Bishops, for the
dignity of the Cardinals did still grow with the dignity of the Church and
Bishops of Rome, but that was greatest in those days. Thus far Omphrius. But
because Platina and others do affirm, that the Pope and the Emperor first
fell out, about symony or inuesting of Bishops, let us see how injuriously
herein, the Pope dealt with the Emperor. It does appear both by the Books of
the canon law and also by Sigonius and other historians the Popes chief
favorers, that Pope Hadria^ gave unto Charles the great the king of the french
men, and Emperor of Rome, and Leo the eight unto Otho the great the king of
the Tuischtmen and Emperor for ever the inuesture of the Bishops of Rome, and
of al other Bishops, within their dominions decreeing that no Bishop chosen by
the clargy and people should be consecrated, unless he were first nominated
and invested (that is had the crosier and ring delivered him) by the Emperor,
this authority and privilege enioied al Emperors from Charles the great unto
this Henry being the 17 in succession; and that he used it no otherwise it is
aparant by the election of the Bishop of Cullen by the clergy and the people, a
little while before this broile, whereof we do read mention made in Lambertus
Snatchburgensis. A thing always used in England, that neither Bishop nor Abot,
should be chosen without a conge de ler, or license to chose, first obtained of
the king, nor reputed for Bishop before the king had confirmed him. So likewise
Hosius contra Brentium does affirm, that the kings of Poland have always had
the nominating of all Bishps with in their kingdom. Now of this ancient part of
his patrimony of the Empire, would Gregory spoil Henry, yea and all lay men,
making a decree that he should be accursed, that did take any ecclesiastical
dignity or benefice, at the hand of any lay man, See Platina and Sabell.
and did also excommunicate the lay man that should give any, now I pray you
which of them two, showed most charity? Henry that for quietness sake was
contented to loose the right which he and his ancestors had so long time held,
in confirming of the Bishops of Rome in the cause and bloody schism of
Alexander, Gregory's immediate predecessor? or Gregory that was not contented
and satisfied with this rare indulgence of the Emperor, in one and the
greatest Bishoppricke, but would depose him unless he would also surrender his
right in all the rest, and either would have his will or else would set all
Christendom in an uproar? And put case he had sold two or three small
Bishopprickes as his enemies did charge him for, the great electors sees, they
themselves being his enemies confessed he had not sold* was that a sufficient
cause to make him forsake him and his successors, for ever an ancient right and
inheritance, belonging to the imperial crown, as the presenting unto
benefices, is an inheritance of many secular subjects? And could the Church of
Christ be so much endamaged thereby, as with thirty years bloody wars, in
all parts of Germany and Italy, through the troubles whereof, neither the
Popes nor other Bishops could employ their functions? But letting this pass;
Philippe.
the next deposition was of Philip the Emperor for inuading Peter's patrimony,
before he was Emperor, and while he was duke of Tuscan. But because some will
say he was never Emperor, because through the Popes menaces but five of the
electors had chosen him, we will let him pass and come unto Otho Otho.
the Duke of Saxon: whom two of the electors afterward at the great instance of
the Pope, had chosen Emperor, and whom he almost immediately after he had
crowned him deposed, because he invaded the lands of his puple and vassal the
king of Naples. Did this come of charity or of a private quarrel? It is
apparent that the Popes used not nor now do to censure any prince, for
enuading of his neighbor, unless he were a vassal or privileged prince of
his. And then to make up the good, three comes on a row Fredelicke the second
Emperor, Frederick
and also king of Naples, for inuesting of Bishops in Naples, and leuying
money of the clergy. And after the controversy was ended, again, because he
did not perform his vow to go into the holy land; and that also satisfied for
making wars against the rebellious Lombardes, or to make the very worst of
it, for practicing with the Frangipanes and other Romans to revolt from the
Pope, whom he distrusted, did secretly aid his rebels in Lombardy. And did
not flesh and blood and private revenge reign in all these actions? were any
of these causes so weighty, that for them should be raised up the pernicious
factions of Guelses and Ghibbelines? to set at enmity for ever, not only
every prince* prouinc^ and City of Italy but also every name and family, for
to embrace their murdering swords. The last deposed Emperor was Jews the
fourth, Jews. See Platina and Nauill.
because he intermedled in Italy before the Pope had crowned him (a usual
thing) and that which was the very cause indeed, because he openly professed
himself a favorer of the Ghibbelines, and namely the vicecount whom the Pope
deadly hated, and had excommunicated for taking arms against the Guelses, and
put the Florentines, and the Neopolitanes and the other Guelses in fear, least
he would says Platina ex^ct of them Iura imperia^a the rightes belonging to
the Empire. And who sees not here partiality and not charity? Moreover Peter
Peter.
the king of Aragon was deposed and his kingdom of Aragon given unto Charles of
Valois the French kings brother, because he had received the Sicilians,
reuolting from the tyranny of Charles the Duke of Aniou whom the Pope had
placed prince there. And does not also smell of private revenge? Is this the
common good, that Pighius bears us in hand, the Church of Christ reapeth by
this prerogative of the Pope, that he does thereby revenge the private
displeasures of himself, his friends and vassalls. At the same time the
french king Philip le Beau, had spoiled Edward the first, king of England
injuriously of the greatest part of Guienne, and also Guy the Ear of
Fuaunders almost of his whole Earldome, and was not deposed therefore. The
cause is apparent, Sicily was held of the Church of Rome, and so was neither
Guienne nor Flaunders. But although he escaped scotfree for these wrongs, and
the long detayning in prison the Earl of Flaunders, and two of his sons, yet
he was deprived of his kingdom by Pope Boniface the eight, Philip the fair.
for imprisoning of a french Bishop, that rayled at him and menaced him, when
he could not win him to grant to go with an Army into the holy land, on the
which message the Pope had sent him unto the king as says Platina. But the
french Chronicles report that the king caused him to be apprehended at home, at
his own house, for that he understood, that he used often to speak very ill
of him, and to rail outragiously on hm, and delivered him unto his primate the
Bishop of Tolouse to punish him with his advise. The kingdom of France was
given unto Albert the Emperor, perhaps for a reward of his wickedness in
slaying of his sovereign Adolph the Emperor; for other punishment I do not
find that Pope did put him unto therefore. See Mun^ter cos^^ ^mog. lib. 3. in All. 2.
But yet I do not doubt but the fault was more heinous then emprisoning of a
Bishop, for railing against his prince and Lord. Yea and that God did so
account it he made it manifest unto the world by his severe punishment of all
the conspiratours. For Albert himself was murdered by his own Cosen germane;
the Archbishop of Ments found dead sitting in his chair. The Bishop
Stasburge was slain by a pesant at F^^^^nge in Brisgow. The Earl of Linengen
died ma^de. The Earl of Sweibrucken was drowned in a river. The Earl of
Ochsenstein had his deaths wound in the battle. And the Earl H^^gerloch was
slain on the way by Otho the Duke of Danao. But to proceed Jews th 12 of
France was excommunicated, denounced a scismatike, and his kingdom and goods
exposer for a common spoil to all Christians and the like penalty pronounced
on all them that did or should take his part or aid him. Jews the twelfih.
And therefore John the king of Navarre lost his kingdom, for procuring of a
general counsel, to be called and held, without the consent of the Pope
against the Pope that there his infestious foe Iul^us the second might be
deposed, and an other more friendly placed in his room. And does not this
altogether smell of private revenge and not of charity? But perhaps you will
say, it was a foul part of him, that would be called the most Christian king,
to sow sedition and scisme throughout all Christendom, for his own private
quarrel: and that this doing of his was so ill thought of, by most of the pri^
(...) of Christendom, that they entered therefore into league against him, and
had almost set him besides his saddle. In truth I can neither praise the
practice nor the policy of the French, who sought to repress the injurious
attemptes of the Pope against him rather by color of law, to the disturbance
of all Christendom then by arms, and inuading the Popes territories (as
Philippe the modern king of Spain wisely did in the like case) and fondely
thought it less enuyous, Anno Domini. 556.
and more agreeable unto his surname of the most Christian king, which his
ancest^rs had purchasesed, by defending the Popes and Peter's patrimony with
arms; to raise up a scisme, then to force the Pope to frindship by material
force.

But that the Pope compelled him to this outrage, all writers do confess. For
first contrary to the league made at Cambray, between him and the Emperor,
the French king, the king Spain, and the Duke of Ferara, against the Venetians
who had encroched upon the^ all* he having gotten all that he claimed, ^ee
Iouius ^n vita Al^hons. and ^^uiciardi^^o.
not only made peace with the Venetians, without the consent of his
confederates, but also excommunicated, and with arms enuaded the fast friend
of the French, the Duke of Ferara, because that he not having yet recovered all
his right of them, would not cease to molest the Venetians: And also he left no
stone unturned, to turn the French out of Milan an Genna, the which he at the
length brought to pass. And was not he then the author of all his tragedy?
Moreover this Popes brothers son, Duke of Vrbine cruelly murdered of
emulation Alidosius a Bishop, a Cardinal, See Iouius ^n vit. Alphons and Guic.
Boleslaw.
and Legate of Bologna, almost in the Popes sight, and was put to no penance
therefore. But Boleslaw the hardy king of Poland, was deprived by Pope
Gregory the seventh of his kingdom, and also the country of the honor to
have a king (in the which dishonor it continued 200 years) f^^^^ying with his
own hand in his fury Stanislaw, the Bishop of Craccow for excommunicating
him, yea and interdicting the whole City of Craccow, to make him the more
odious, because he openly kept another man's wife, and for adultery, a thing
which as it should seem by Cromerus, as common in Poland in those days as the
cart way. Yea those noble women that were honest were forced to forsake there
own howses, See Cromerus hist. Pola. lib. 4.
for fear of force and rauishment, yea and it was common in Italy and passed
unpunished in meaner men, then princes. But yet in very truth the kings fact
was very foul, and made worse by the fury of his fellows that chopped in
pieces the slain corpse and cast it to the crows. And yet perhaps David did
almost all ill in defiling of a noble man's bed, while he was in his service in
the field, and afterward commanding him to be murdered for his amends, (but
so dealt not Bolislawe with Stanislaw; and if the qualities of the persons be
not equal, then the manner of the doing does ouermatch, the one being done
without any provocation, and of advised malice, the other upon a great
ignominy and unwonted with kings, offered him and upon a sudden, while his
blood was hot. which seven years continual absence from his country in
foreign wars a little before had ouerheated. And yet David lost not his
Kingdom therefore: Neither do we read of any realm interdicted for
murdering of their Kings, whereof we have almost infinite examples; or any man
deposed for intruding into them by such wickedness, unless perhaps the
murdered Prince were the Popes vassal. So that this zeal in severe punishing
of princes for misusing them of the clergy, I fear me may be imputed rather to
a partial favor toward them of their own coat, and done for their own
security, then for zeal of Justice. Like as our Sargeants at London are an
hunded times more hot to have one hanged that has slain the basest Yeoman
of theires, then another that has murdered his master, or the best noble man
within the land. James the fourth the Scottish King flew his father in the
feilde, and had noething said unto him therefore; but was excommunicated for
aiding of his ancient Alie the french King; whom the Pope loved not, neither
could his lamentable loss of life in that quarrel quench the Popes Choler, but
that he persecuted him when he was dead long time, denyning his dead body
burial; but yet that is noe sin against the holy ghost, for to aid on
denounced a scismatike by the Pope, nor to bear arms against the captain of
a croysy it does appear by that we do read in Mariners his history of
Spain; when Peter the king of Aragon coming to aid the Earl of Tolouse, and
the Albigenses against whom the Pope had sent a croysy was slain in battle by
the Earl of Monsfort general of the Croysy, and that he would not deliver
James the son of Peter, who was brought up with him and should have married
his daughter, but for this mischance unless he would swear that he would not
revenge his fathers, death, the Pope upon complaint forced Monsfort by sharp
censures of excommunication, to set him at liberty without any such promise,
that the Pope (it was Juno Centius the third) might show that he was annother
God that would have mercy where he would, and be merciful to whom it
pleased him, and that he does nothing of desert but all motu proprio, as they
use to say; but yet perhaps he showed grace unto James for his fathers,
Peter's sake, who had purchased before hand his pardon for dying in the feilde,
in the succor of a scismaticke and heretic by being crowned at Rome by the
Pope with a crown made of singing bread or wafers, and by granting unto the
Pope the right to present unto all ecclesiastical lyuings. But to return
again to the deposing of Princes. John King John
the king of this land, bereft both of kingdom, and life, Arthur his elder
brothers son, who had been ordained and proclaimed here apparent by common
consent, and kept his Sister with duble injury in perpetual prison, and
escaped scotfree at the Popes hands: but when he would not accept for
Archbishop Simon Langton a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, advanced to that
office through the Popes extraordinary dealing, he had his whole realm
interdicted (which sustained no harm for accepting him for King against right)
and also himself was deposed therefore. And what reason was there but that the
King might as well maintain for Archbyshoppe the Bishop of Norwich the
faithful president of his counsel, and a man whom the Pope could not justly
mislike being first chosen at Ganterburye by the Prior, and almost the whole
covent as the Pope Simon Langton his Cardinal chosen after the other, and at
Rome by a few of the covent that I may omit that noe Bishop could ever be
chosen in this realm, without the Kings license, nor being chosen counted
Bishop before the King had confirmed him. And if the Pope said that the
covent chose Norwitch at Canterbury for fear of the King, because they had
first elected their superior: might not the King as truly say that they chose
Langton at Rome for fear of the Pope, for did he not force them to a new
election, yea and threatened them who were afraid of the kings displeasure if
they chose not Langton if Langton was an ill man, why was the Pope so
importunate to have him Archbishop; and if he were a good man, why did that
Pope shortly after himself excommunicate him? what bare rule here but flesh
and blood? Did Langton so far pass Norwich that he would do more good to
the Church of England, then Norwich could do if he were placed Archbishop;
then the ceasing of all public service of God, and administration of the
sacred Sacraments, for the space of six years; (for so long the interdict
lasts) thoughout the whole land could do harm? how many souls may a man
probably think were lost through this long irreligiousnes which otherwise might
have been saved* I omit the great murdering of priests, the banishing of
Bishops, the rasing of Abbes, Churches and Chapels, the manifould miseries
massacres and wastes, that I know not whether this more wilful or woeful
interdict brought unto this whole land* But ye will say that before the land was
interdicted the king had driven out of the land the monks of Canterbury, and
seized on al their land, and goods. And afterward did the like to the Bishops
that published the interdict. And also turned out of al* such of the religious
and spiritual persons, as did favor the Popes procedings; and all this before
he was deposed by the Pope. But yet all these mischieues proceeded of the Popes
indirect dealing, to make his Cardinal Archbishop, and if the Pope would have
relinquished that action, the king had soon been appeased. And can any
indifferent man thing that the king had not just cause, to be displeased with
the Covent of Canterbury who first chose scecretly in the night, without his
congedelier) there Superior Archbishop and also priuilye sent him to Rome
without the kings notice, to be confirmed of the Pope; and then misliking of
their own doings elected with the Kings license his favorite Norwich, whom
they afterward rejected, and without the kings license chose at Rome Langton,
one whom the King knew not; And did not the Pope offer the King such a wrong,
as has been done never before, nor since that time to cause the covent to
choose a Bishop without the Kings congedelier, and that to at Rome by a few
of the covent sent thither in messages without their Pryor. And if ye do
think the king dealt rigourously in banishing the Bishops that interdicted
the land, and in ceasing on their goods that favored the Popes actions. How
can you excuse the Popes cruelty in interdicting the whole land, whereof one
half did take his part. And feign would I know of you whether it proceeded of
charity that the Pope would not release his interdict and censures when the
King offered to receive Langton, See Matthew of Paris.
restore the banished men, and fully to satisfy all men for their losses,
unless he would also become his vassal, and make his realms of England and
Ireland tributarie for ever unto the sea of Rome; was this charity, or
covetousness and ambition. And again came this of Charity that the Pope, who
stood so stiff for the restitution of the losses of the clergy, before the
king had subjected himself and his Realms unto him, did after that his own
turn was served, force the Bishops to take half their due, and the rest of
the clergy to bear their own damages without one penny of recompense; And
yet see more partiality in this Pope. First he excommunicated and deposed the
king, because he would not accept at his commandment Langton, for
Archbishop; and anon after excommunicated Langton and the Bishops, and the
Barrons his confederates; because they would force the King to perform the
oath which his own legate had commanded the King to swear, at the atonement
making for the restoring of the ancient laws of the land* if the laws were
unjust and it was a wrong to constraiee the King to restore them; why did he
force the King to swear the restitution of them. But if they wear just, good,
and godly, and for the public profitte why did he not rather assist then
excommunicate them that sought to force the king to keep his bodily oath, made
unto him and them, the which he had also done at his coronation, yea, and had
made (at the time of the peace with the Pope) a Charter of them which also this
Pope himself confirmed. Now the case was altered (Although indeed this case
was of greater moment) and the Pope must still pleasure his friends. First his
cardinal was to be advanced to an Archbyshoppricke, and then the king his new
vassal was to be enfranchised of all oaths and honesty, and vpholden and
maintained with both sworde^ in all tyranny and villainy. If any credit is to
be given to all the Catholic Cronicles of that age, And this I speak not
for that I do like or allow the rebellion of the Barons, Lib. 9.
but to show the irreligious pertiality of the unjust, perverse passionate
Pope. I do also find in Cromerus that the Archbyshoppe of Gnesne did
excommunicate Boleslaw the balde one of the Polonian Princes Duke of Legnitz
for taking prisoner the bishop of Preslen and certain other of that Church
and detaining them in prison: And when that for all this he would not release
them without ransom, Pope Alexander the fourth willed the Archbyshoppe to
proclaim a Croly against him in Polen, and the Archbyshoppe of Magdenburge
annother in Germany. But these excommunications for imprisoning of Prelates to
proceed of partiality is manifestly discovered by the same Cromerus who
writes, that not far from the same time another Archbyshoppe of Gnesne, did
excommunicate Boleslawe the chaste duke of the lesser Polen, and interdicted the
whole province because certain young Gentlemen had either by the commission or
permission of Boleslaw the chaste, taken and kept one month in honorable
custody Paul the Bishop of Craccow, because that contrary to his calling,
he was wholly given to pleasures hunting and letchery, was grievous to his
subjects, stubburne toward his Prince, neither would mende his manners for
the entreatie and admonishme^t of his Chapter and Prince; but also took a
Nun out of a Nunery and kept her for his Concubine, Yet was the Godly Prince
forced to let loose this ungodly prelate and to give him two hundred pound of
silver for a mendes; whereas if he had given him his desert, a halter, he had
prevented a dangerous and bloody Rebellion afterward in revenge hereof
procured by the Bishop, also a pitiful wasting of the country done by the
Lythuanians at his traitorous instigation. Hitherto ye have heard not of one
Prince deposed for Christ's and the common causes, but all for private quarrels,
(here I willingly and wittingly omit the deprivations of Sicilian and
Neapolitaine Princes, and all other over whom the Sea of Rome clameth to have
Soueraignetie secular) And I can find only four Princes deposed for
Religion. The first Raimond Earl of Tolowsen, Since the writing of this book
Henry king of Navarre has been ^^priued of his dominions* by the P ^^
whether because he did embrace the Religion of the Albigenses, or because he
did not expel them out of his dominions of certainety I know not. The second
George Pogrebrot the King of Boemia, for maintaining the doctrine revived by
John Hus: And the third and fourth Henry the eight and his daughter Queen
Elizabeth, our renowned Princes and dread Sovereigns. And although some hott
headed Catholics Roman will perhaps praise the Popes* zeal in deposing
of our Princes, yet must they needs all confess, that it was done smally for
the weal of him, and his friends here, and therefore done without judgment
and discretion. And that these ma^do bulls have killed many, and hurt more of
the Popes friends and favorers, but not done one half penny worth of harm
unto them against whom they were sent. And how smally they have been regarded
of the Popes most deuoutest children, it may apparently appear by the leagues
made by Charles the Emperor, and Charles the french King, with King Henry and
her majesty after they were excommunicated and deprived by the Popes; and the
one an everlasting league both offensive and defensive to the everlasting shame
of such subjects as have sought to revolt, or shall wickedly bear arms
against the sovereign in that unjust quarrel. But to conclude, if we do
wisely weigh the matter and carefully call to mind all the woeful wars and
wastes, massacres, miseries and calamities that this practice of deposing of
Princes has wrought, we shall find that the West Church has been more
wasted and weaken^^ thereby, and that it has caused the murder of more men then
all the cruel persecutions of the heathen and heretics, and all the bloody
swords of the Turks and Saracens. Thus having showed that this deposing of
Princes, is neither authorized by the word of God, nor warranted by the
practice of the Jewish nor Christian Church, within one thousand years after
Christ, nor then devised or since practiced, The Pope cannot release subjects
of their aleagiance.
for the profitte and benefitte of the Christian common weal: Let us go unto
our third proposition that the Pope cannot loose subjects of their natural and
duetifull faith and obedience unto their Princes. It is the common opinion of
all divines Catholic Roman, that the Pope can not dispense in those things
which are ordained by God. But this obedience to princes to be comanded by the
law of god, it is most manifest by the places which we have before alleged out
of the sacred Scriptures, in the first proposition. Wherefore as Christ said
of Marriage those whom God has joined together let noe man separate, and does
pronounce him to be an adulterer that does put away his wife, and marries
annother, unless it be for fornication, notwithstanding that Moses had for the
hardness of the Jews hearts, permitted them many other causes. So likewise may
not the Pope separate the subjects married to their prince (for so they are
solemnly by a ring in our land) from the Prince for any other causes then
such as God has ordained, and what subject soever shall for any causes put
away his Prince and take annother commits rebellion and treason. And as
Christ did abrogate that permission of Moses; so likewise must that of the
Popes be repealed, and so much the rather because the Popes constitutions are
not so well warranted, as were Moses ordinances, who received them of the very
mouth of God himself. And if Christ said he came into the world not to
d^stroy the law but to fulfill it, by what right can the Pope who deriueth his
authority from Christ as his substitute and deputy in the earth, claim the
authority to make that void which God has ordained. And feign would I know
of you, what faults you find in the word of GOD that subjects may revolt
from their Prince, and take them to another, And I am sure you cannot name me
one, for doubtless there can be noe greater faults in a Prince then Idolatry
and tyranny, and yet we have express commandments of GOD from his own
mouth unto the people of Israel, for to be obedient unto two notorious
Idolaters and triumphs, An objection of controversy with the wicked a^swered.
the one by the Prophet Jeremy. Chap. 27. that they should serve
Nabuchadonisor; the other by Christ himself, that they should pay tribute unto
Caesar. But ye will say that Christ said if thy brother will not hear the
Church let him be unto thee as an Ethnicke and Publicane or customer, and that
we are commanded by Paul not to keep company with the wicken, and by Saint
John not to say good morrow to an heretic. And now I would feign know of you
how the Jews did shun an Ethnike and a publicane, did they not pay tributes
and customs unto ethnike Emperors, did they they not serve them in war?
finally did they not do all duties of loyal subjects? did they not also
come unto the publicans to pay their customs, and towlles although they were
nor familiar with them, and did usually keep them company? Again when Sant
Paul did charge the Corinthians, not to keep company with a brother that was
a whoorhunter or covetous, or an idolatour or evil tongued or a dunkard, or a
violent taker away of other men's goods, and not to eat meat with any such.
Do you think the wife that had an husband, the child a father, the bondmand
a Lord or master, infected with any of these faults, were thereby
incontinently discharged of all duty toward them? yea and bound in
conscience speedily to run away from them, and never to do them more
service, nor come at them. I am sure ye will say no, for by the canon law they
are bound to abide with them being excommunicated, for any other fault then
for heresy; And that is a latter edition of the Popes, for there is no such
distinction to be found, in the commandment of God, nor his Apostles. But all
excommunicated and wicked persons, are alike commanded to be shunned, and no
difference to be put between the Idolater, and the whooremonger, So then if
Christ and his Apostles did not discharge the wife, the child, or bondsman of
their duties toward the excommunicated, neither did they also the subjects
of their allegiance to their prince: for they be as fast tied to their prince
by a bond and law, which only death can undo, as the wife is to her husband,
and therefore included in this word (Lex) of the canonical verse that shows
who may communicate with excommunicated persons; Vtile lex humile res ignorata
necesse.
and also as well under and subjected to their sovereign, as the child unto
his father, and the bondsman unto his Lord and master; and so are comprised also
in the word (humile) of the same verse. But let us return where we left. The
Pope deposed Boleslaw the king of Polen for slaying in his rage Stanislaw the
Bishop of Craccow; yet when Saul had without cause unjustly and tyrannically
slain Achimelech the high priest, and all his whole house save one, that
fortunately escaped, yea priests, in number fourscore and seven, all the men,
women, little children, sucking babes, oxen, asses, and sheep that were in the
City of the priests, called Nob: Yet David whom God had anointed king, and
Saul did causeless cruelly persecute from place to place, and sought by all
means to bereave of life, yet thought not himself discharged of his
allegiance by this detestable murder of the sacred priests of God; but when
he had him twice at advantage, saved his life, and told Abisri who desired
him to dispatch the tyrante with one blow, slew him not, for who shall
stretch forth his hand against the anointed of the Lord, and shall be
innocent. As sure as the Lord lives, unless the Lord shall strike him, or
his day shall come, that he die or perish in sight, God never be merciful unto
me, if I do stretch forth mine hand against the anointed of the Lord. Ye
see here a plain assertion of David, that subjects are not released of their
allegiance if that their princes fall to ungodliness and tyranny, much less
does he allow that every private man murder him shamefullie, yea when a
young man brought David news of Saules death, and presented him with Saules
diadem and bracelette, David put him to death because he had told him, that
at the Kings great instance, and entreatie that he might not fall into the
hands of his enemies, who environed him round about, he being no Israelite
but an Amalachite, had killed him, saying, why did thou not fear to send
thy hand, that thou might kill the anointed of the Lord. And again the
blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has spoken against thee, saying, I
have slain the anointed of the Lord. Wherefore seeing David does allow no
cause of reuoulte, and does think that the subjects are loosed of their
allegiance by no fault and wickedness of their prince; by what warrant of the
word can the Pope at his pleasure release subjects of their allegiance? And
whereas we read in the 34 of Job, that GOD does make the hypocrite man to
reign for the sins of the people, or as other translate it, to afflict and
plauge the people, what a malapart part is it of the Pope, to pull the rod
out of Gods hand by violence, and to chase him away, whom God has specially
sent to chastise his people. Neither have I sucked this sentence out of mine
own fingers ends, but learned it of a learned great Pope, Gregory the
great, who interpreting in his moralles the late rehearsed place of Job, and
alleging unto it the thirteenth of Osee, I will give Kings in my fury, has
these words. Quid ergo illos nobis praesse despicimus, quorum super nos
regimina ex Domini furore suscepimus? Why then do we despise them to be our
princes, whose reigns, and gouermentes over us we have received from the
wrath of GOD? So that the Pope may not displace the good princes, because they
are good princes, nor the evil, because they are placed by GOD to punish his
people. And if the Canonistes hold, that no man can judge the Pope, because he
sits in the chiefest chair. Who then shall judge the king who is said in
2. Paralip. 9. to be ordained of God to set upon his own throne, and shall any
mortal man be so audacious to pull him out of it? And if that no man can
excommunicate the Pope because no man is his superior, neither can any man
depose a king because no man is his superior. But the objection out of
Ruffinus his contimation of Eusebius, that Constantine the great said unto the
Bishops assembled in the counsel of Nice. A Place of Ruffinus answered.
God has constituted you priests, and has given you power to judge also of
us, and therefore justly are we judged by you. But what is the uttermost that
can be inferred of these words then a spiritual judgment, for seeing he
makes them judges because they are priests, and not princes, how can it
import any secular power? for the name of priest signifies a man seperat from
secular matters, and wholly dedicated to heavenly and divine. So that to say
that Bishops in that they are priests are judges over Kings and Emperors,
in matters touching their crown and dignity; is or absurd as if a man should
say, the Apostles had power to remitte and retain sins because they were
fishermen. But as the Bishops showed themselves far from claiming any such
authority, by exhibiting up unto him as their sovereign and chief judge
bills of complaint one against another. So also did Constantine continually
practice among them, and upon them his Empire and sovereignty. So at the
counsel at Nice, when the definition of faith was presented unto him by the
counsel, not the counsel, but he did set down the te^porall punishment, to
the infringers thereof, he protesting that he would banish all men that would
not obey and embrace it; And so immediately after he banished Arrius, and
certain Bishops that refused to subscribe. And afterward as we read in
Socrates he made an edict that all books of Arrius his doctrine should be
burned, and who soever did conceal any, and not bring them forth to the fire,
should die therefore, we also find in Theodoretus, that he banished Eusebius
the Bishop of Nicomedia, and Th^^gonus the Bishop of Nice, because they sought
to pervert to the Arianisme certain Alexandrines, and that he wrote thus to
the Citizens of Nicomedia: If there shall be found any among you, that shall
audaciously praise and commend these pestilent Bishops their combs shall be
soon cut, by the execution of the minister of God, that is by me. So that the
office of being Gods minister he kept still after he became a Chrstian;
neither was it fallen unto the Church by his embracing of the faith (as Pighius
says.) And although he refused at the beginning of the counsel, to hear and
determine the accusations, that the Bishops did put up unto him one against
another, of humility and policy, because he would not have that time
unprofitably spent about private quarrels which had been appointed for the
common cause of Christ and his Church; and therefore burnt all their bills of
complaint, yet that he dealt with the correction and punishment of Bishops,
it is apparent, by that which I have already alleged, and is made much more
manifest by that Theodoretus writes, how the Arrians of Egypt suborned by
money certain fellows (because if they had done it themselves, it would have
smelt) to accuse Athanasius unto Constantine, that he had set certain
impositions in Egypt, and given the money thereof to one, for* to raise a
commotion in the country, whereupon the Emperor sent for him to appear before
him at Constantinople (a long journey for the chief patriarch of the East,)
whither he came and cleared himself so substantially, that says Tbeodoretus
he recovered again his Church allotted unto him by God, which is as much to
say, if he could not have satisfied the Emperor he had lost his Bishoppricke.
After this his enemies accused him again unto Emperor of many great crimes*
who thereupon following the honorable custom of this land that all men are
tried by their peers, commanded the Bishops of those countries to assemble
together in counsel at Cesaria in Syria, to hear the matter of Athanasius,
whither, when Athanasius came not, because he thought, that seeing most that
were assembled were his enemies he should find no justice there: then they
having gotten more pretenses of slander accused him unto the Emperor of
audaciousnesse and tyranny. See how it was accounted for an audacious part and
rebellious, for a patriarch not to appear where the Emperor had commanded
him. Neither did there hope deceive them, for then the Emperor being
exasperated did in letters unto Athanasius, both declare his displeasure and
also commanded him to appear at Tyrus for there should be held a counsel of
Bishops. Socrates reports that he threatened Athanasius that if he would not go
of himself, he should be fet by force. He also wrote unto the counsel at
Tiru^; in which letters Theodoretus has these words. I have sent unto you
Dionysius, one that has been consul, for to be president of the assembly,
that if any man (which I think will not happen) now all little regarding you
commandment shall not be there, that there may be one hence from us, that by
imperial commandment may banish him, and teach him (mark well these words)
that he must not disobey the order that the king has appointed for the trying
of a truth; But when Athanasius who singularly well acquitted himself could
yet obtain no justice there, secretly fled unto the Emperor to Constantinople
and put up an appeal unto him, Constantine thereupon commanded all the
Bishops of the counsel to appear before him at Constantinople, with all
speed; the tenor of the mandate Socrotes sets down thus. That all ye that
held the counsel at Tyrus to immediately hasten to appear before us, for to
show by deed the sincerity and uprightness of your judgment before me, that
is to wit him whom not ye your selves shall deny to be the propper minister of
God. From what power came this commandment to a counsel to appare before the
Emperor, and to render a reason unto him of their judgment, as unto the
chief minister and officer of God. But to proceed with our history: when the
Bishops were come to Constantinople, they for fear of assured conviction
gave over their old slanders, and charged Athanasius with a new lie, that he
should say unto four Bishops, that he would let the coming of corn from
Alexandria unto Constantinople, the which the Emperor over lightly believing,
banished Athanasius into Trier in Germany* where was now the Pope to depose the
Emperor for banishing wrongfully the greatest Patriarch of the East; this was
worse then the emprisoning of the Bishop of Apamea by the french king for
giving him ill languages. But to return to our matter: Socrates does write
that Athanasius his first troubles began, because he would not receive into
the Church Arrius whom the Emperor did now take for a penitent and honest
man, whereupon he thus wrote unto Athanasius. Seeing that you do now
understand the tenor of the counsel and of my will, see that you do give all
men entrance into the Church that are desirous to come in, for if I shall
understand, that any man that desires to be made partaker of the Church,
shall either be let by you or forbidden to enter in, I will immediately send
one of mine, that by my commandment shall remove you, from your Sea, and
give your place unto another. Note that he says I will send, not the
Bishop of Rome his officer; but one of mine own men who shall displace you*
and place another therein, not by commandment of the counsel or Bishop of
Rome, but by my commandment. The like also, writes Socrates, he threatened
unto Alexander the Bishop of Constantinople if he would not receive Arrius
into the Church. But you will say that the Emperor iniuried both Athanasius
and Alexander, I deny not that, but although Theodoretus does blame his
overmuch light credulity, and does excuse it by the like in David against
Miphiboseth, yet does neither he nor any other ancient author accuse him of
tyranny, for meddling with matters that he had nothing to do withal, or
punishing of them over whom he had no lawful jurisdiction, and also does
refute that you affirm, that Constantine refused to judge Bishops. Now to
return again to the history, the same Socrates does say that when the Arrians
had accused Athanasius, Macarius, and other of their accomplices unto the
Emperor of foul factes. Constantine wrote unto his sisters son D^linatius
who was then abiding at Antioch 500 miles from Alexandria, to call the parties
before him, and to punish them that he should find faulty. But afterward
because the Bishops were assembled at Tyrus about the dedication of his new
Church at Jerusalem, he referred over the hearing of those matters unto them.
So that at the first he had committed both the trial, and the punishment of
the greatest Bishop of all the East Church unto a temporal officer of his;
the which fact and the other which I have before rehearsed, do plainly prove
that Constantine did not account, nor acknowledge his Empire, or him self
empaired, or of less command by accepting of the Christian religion, but that
he still executed his princely prerogative, on all persons both spiritual and
temporal, and still clamed to be the minister immediate of God, and not any
under officer of the Bishops of Rome Gods vicar on earth, and rightly to, for
as Paul says, 1. Tim. 6. Let all bondmen whatsoever they be that be under
yoke, repute their lords worthy of al honor, lest the name of the lord and his
doctrine be blasphemed, but they which have believing Lords, let them not
contemn them, because they be their brethren, but rather serve them because
they be believers, and belooued who are pertakers of the benefit Teach these
things and exhort them: If any man teach otherwise and does not yield unto the
^ound speeches of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that doctrine which is agreeable
to godliness, is proud knows nothing, is mindesicke of questions and
quarrelles, about words. So also might it have been said: Ye Popes and
Bishops account your princes worthy of all honor, least the name and
doctrine of Christ be evil spoken of, but ye Bishops that have Christian
Kings contemn them not, because they be Christians, but be the more obedient
and dutiful unto them, because they have embraced Chrst, and are pertakers of
his benefit. This teach and exhort but whosoever teaches otherwise, teaches
contrary doctrine to Christ, is a proud prelate, and quite void of knowledge
And as Peter writes 1 Epistle 3. Ye bondmen be subject in all fear unto your
Lords not only unto them that are good and moderate, but also unto them that
are waywarde and unreasonable, for this is grace or worthy of favor, if a man
do bear sorrows for conscience of GOD, suffering unjustly. So also might it
have been rightly said unto the Popes and Bishops in Constantines time, and
now also: be ye subject in all fear unto your Princes, not only unto such as
are good and gracious, but also unto ungodly and tyrannical, neither release
your selves of your alleagence, for if ye do take and bear wrong quietly for
regard of GOD, God will abundadtly reward your patience; for the consequent
is very strong and good, seeing the things are all together alike and equal;
for if the Christian bondmen were not enfranchised, because they were
spiritual brothers unto their Lords, neither were the Popes and Bishops
discharged of subjection unto their Princes, because they were become their
spiritual brethren, and if you will to, their spiritual fathers. But they
say with Phigl^ius that Christ committed the government of his Church unto
Peter, What prince Peter was*
and his successors, and therefore all Kings that are of the Church are
subject unto the Bishops of Rome. And if we grant, this can there be ought
else inferred then subjection in causes and censures ecclesiastical, and not
in causes and punishments secular and temporal: for what fond Frenchman will
say that because in old time the Kings of England were vassals unto the
French Kings, for the Duchies of Normandy and Guien, that therefore the crown
of England was subject unto the Kings of France, or that they could command
the Kings of England in any matter touching their crown of England: or
because the Bishops Chanceller can excommunicate a man for adultery, that
therefore he can also deprive a man of life and living, Mat. 20*
for a greater fault. Moreover did not Christ plainelye enough declare what
kind of Kingdom he gave to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, and how
vnkingely kings they should be; when they contended among themselves who
should be greatest. The kings of nations (said he) be Lords over those
countries, and their princer have power over them, but so it is not in you:
does he not here in plain words take from them all earthlye and bodily Empire
and power, and that too from the greatest of them; So that the Pope that
claims to be greatest and chiefest, is also hereby excluded: neither will a
shifte of humility serve to escape, seeing that to depose Princes is to reign
over nations, is to be their Lord, is to have power over them, all which
things Christ says the greatest of his Apostles, and his successors should
not have: nor consequently authority to release all subjects of their
allegiance the which is a supreeme point of Earthly Empire, the which never any
mortal man yet had and only belongs unto the great God, the supreeme Lord
and sovereign of the whole world; for never yet was there any so mighty a
monarch, that had all the world under his Empire, neither then could his
authority extend over all nations: but his power determined within the bonds
of his own Empire, and could not stretch beyond his own vassals, among whom
only he might decree in what cases their seignories should be forfeated, and
their bondmen be enfranchised of the service of their Lords and not prescribe
laws therein unto all other not subject unto him, no more then the Queen of
England can enacte, that if the king of Spain shall do this and this, that
then he shall forfeite his Crown, Noe law of the Church touching temporalties
ever allowed in this Realm
or the king of France make an edict that if any Lord in England shall commit
such and such faults, that then he shall forfitte all his property over his
bondmen, and they to be enfranchised. And therefore because the Princes of this
Realm did never acknoledge themselves vassals unto the Pope, nor the Sea of
Rome, nor never agnised him for their Sovereign in temporalities, they did
never hear when the Popes authority was greatest, administer justice and
adiudge secular causes here. according to the Popes decrees, and Canons of the
counsels, but always according to the laws costomes and statutes of the
Realm, and in those causes the Canon law had no authority, and force in this
Land. This is so often affirmed by the author of the learned book called the
Doctor and student, (who as he was a great lawyer, so was he also a good
divine and devout Catholic) that it wear tedious to rehearse them all. In
the xliiii. Chapter of thee second book thus he writes: for the ordinary,
no yet the party himself have any authority to bind any inheritance by the
authority of the spiritual law, how then can they bind the inheritance of
the crown, And again in the same Chapter, and th^^fore it is somewhat to be
meruelled that ordinaries will admit such land for a title etc. without
knowing how the common law will serve therein, for of mere right all
inheritance within this Realm ought to be ordered by the Kings Law. Also in
the xxxvi. Chapter of the second book, the Doctor of divinity says, yet me
thinks always that the title of the lapse, in such case is given by the law
of the Church, and not by the temporal law, and therefore it forces but
little what the temporal law will in it as me seems. Whereunto the author
answers thus under the name of the student of law. In such cuntries where the
Pope has power to determine the right of temporal things I think it is as
thou say, but in this realm it is not so. And the right of presentment is a
temporal thing; and a temporal inheritance, and therefore I do think it
belongs to the Kings law to determine, and also to make laws who shall
present after the six month, as well as before, so that the title of ability,
or none ability, be not therefore taken from the ordinaries. And in like wise
it is of auoidance of benefices, that is to say that it shall be judged by the
Kings laws, when a benefice shall be said uoide and when not, and not by the
law of the Church, and shall the law of the Church determine when the crown is
void? As when a parson is made a Bishop, or accepts another benefice
without license or resigneth, or is deprived, in these causes the common law
says, that the benefices be void, And so they should be though the Church had
made a law to the contrary. And so if the Pope should have any title in this
case to present, it should be by the law of this Realm. And if he should
have title to present unto the Crown should it not be by the law of this
Realm? And I have not seen ne hard that the laws of this Realm have given
any title to the Pope to determine any temporal thing that may be lawfully
determined by the Kings Court, no^ y^^ that he may depose the King, and give
his kingdom unto any forreiner, but because noe man should repute this lawyer
for a Lollard and enemy unto the Pope, see what immediately follows. Doctor.
It seems by the reason that thou have made now, that thou preferrest the
Kings authority in presentiments, before the Popes, and that me thinks should
not stand with the Law of God, sith the Pope is the vicar general under GOD.
Student, That I have said proves nor, for the highest preferment in
presentmentes, is to have authority to examine the ability of the person that
is presented, for if the presented be able, it suffices to the discharge of
the ordinary by whomesoeuer he be presented; and that authority is not
denied by the law of the Realm to belong always to the spiritual
jurisdiction. Thus seeing the author, of the Doctor and the student (whom some
suppose to be Saint Germany) is proved to be noe partial man against the
Pope, but only a learned Lawyer that sets down uprightly, to the
satisfaction of men's consciences, what right every man has, and declares the
common opinion of his time when the Popes power was in the Prime: we will
rehearse yet more out of him to the confirmation of you, our Catholic
countrymen who do openly profess, that ye will grant her majesty as much,
and as great authority, as any of her ancestors before her father had, since
the conquest yea or since they embraced the faith of Christ. In the xlvii
Chapter of the second book, he says that although by the Canon Law the Pope
ought to present to all benefice^ or dignities, the incumbents whereof dye at
Rome or within two days ^ourney thereof, yet he says that it holds not
(...) this Realm* because by the laws of this realm the King ought according
to the ancient right of his crown, to present of all his aduowsons that be of
his patronage. And in likewise other patrons of benefices of their presentment,
and the plea of the right of presentiments of benefice is within this Realm
belongs to the King and his Crown. And these titles can not be taken from
the king and his subjects but by their assent, and so the law that is made
therein to put away that title binds not in this realm. Then may I reason of
a stronger, that the Kings title to the Crown can not be taken away without
his consent, and so the Law that is made therein by the Church to put away that
title, binds not in this Realm. But to return again unto presentiments of
benefices, who knows not the terrible statute of praemunire, made in the
Reign of Edward the third, against all such as should provide English
benefices or spiritual dignities from Rome, or purchase them from the Pope,
and also against all atturneyes, and agents in that matter, against the which
statute the Pope never spurned but suffered it (says Saint Germany) and it
has always been used in this Realm with-without resistance, yea and in the
statute made against the provisions and translations of Bishops by the Pope
made in the xvi. year of the reign of Richard the second the vi. Chapter, we
find in those words the cause of the making of the statute, least the Crown
of this realm which is immediately subject to God, and to none other in all
things touching the royalty of the same Crown, should be submitted to the
sea of Rome. We do also read there, that all the Barons, and all the
Bishops present, and the deputies of those which were absent, being asked
every man severally said that therein they would to their uttermost stand with
the King against the Pope so zealous were all good Englishmen in those days of
the ancient honor and liberty of their country, and the soueraignetie of
their King. Moreover Saint Germanye in the xxxix. Chapter of the second book,
entreating how ecclesiastical persons may dispose of their goods, he utterly
rejects the Canon law therein, and shows what they may do by the laws of
this Realm, and at the length he says thus, And moreover a parson of a Church
vicar and Chauntery priest, or such other; all such goods as they have by
reason of the parsonage vicarage or Chauntery, as that they have by reason of
their own person, they may lawfully give and bequeth after the common law, And
if they dispose part among their parishoners, and part to the building of
Churches, or give part to the ordinary, or to poor men, or in any such manner
as is appointed by the law of the Church, they offend not therein; unless they
think themselves bound thereunto by duty, and authority of the law of the
Church, not regarding the Kings laws. For if they do so it seems they
resist the ordinance of God, which has given power to princes to make laws.
But whereas* the Pope has soueraignety in temporal things, as he has in
spiritual things* there some say that the goods of priests must in conscience
be disposed, as it is contained in the same sum. But it holds not in this
Realm, for the goods of spiritual men, be temporal in what manner soever
they come to them, and must be ordered by the temporal law as the goods of
temporal men must be. Thus far Saint Germany; then may I infer: if that
the Pope, the counsel, and thee convocation can not make a Law touching the
goods of the spirituallty within this Realm, and that those which do dispose
of their goods according to such a Canon do sin, although it do agree with
the law of this Realm, if they did it as bound by that Canon: shall we
think that the Pope, the council, or the convocation can give away the
goods, and lands of temporal men within this Realm, yea and the Crown and
kingdom, and that they do not sin mortally that do obey any such decrees?
And what account is to be made of the Popes dispensation in temporal causes,
the same learned author plainly declares in the xli. Chapter of the second
book where he says, That although by the Canon law every man may lawfully
kill an Assasin (such a fellow as will at every man's request kill any man for
money) yet he affirms it is altogether unlawful in this land; and that
notwithstanding the Popes dispensation and pardon, he that slays an Assasin
is a fellon, and so ought to be punished as a fellon. Moreover in his xliiii.
Chapter he does conctantly hold, that the Canon sums that do determine all
scruples of conscience according to the Canon law do rather hurt English men's
consciences, then give them light, and that there be many cases in them ruled
according to the Canon law that are not to be observed in this Realm, neither
in law nor conscience. And in xlii. Chapter that although many sayings in the
same sums do agree with the laws of this Realm, yet they are to be
observed by the authority of the Laws of this Realm, and not by the
authority alleged by them. Finally in the xxix. Chapter of the same book he
does flatly ouerrule our present case, whereas by the Canon Law an heretic
has ipso facto lost all his goods, and therefore can make noe execution, he
affirms that it holds and binds not here, for if he do abjure he has
forfeited noe goods, but if he be convicted of heresy and delivered to lay
men's hands he has forfeyted all his goods, that he has at that time, that
he was delivered unto them; but not his lands, before that he be put to death.
To this the Doctor answers: me thinks that as it only belongs unto the
Church to determine heresies that so it belongs unto the Church what
punishment he shall have for his heresy, except, death which they can not be
judges in; but if the Church decree that therefore he shall forfeite his goods,
me thinks that they be forfeyted by that decree; unto this objection he thus
answered under the name of student. Nay verily for they be te^porall things,
and belong to the judgment of the kings court; And I think that the ordinary
might have set no fine upon one impeached of heresy, until it was ordained by
the statute of Henry the fourth, that he may set a fine if he see cause, and
that the king shall have that fine. If this were the universal belief of all
good Englishmen in the time, when the Popes authority most flourished here,
and before this controversy arose; that neither the Pope, nor counsel, nor
Church, has authority to ordain any temporal punishment for heresy, can he
be accounted a true Englishman that does hold that the Pope can deprive her
majesty of her crown and dignity for a pretense of heresy? Of the counsel
of Laterane.
or that the Canon made in the counsel held at Laterane does bind us here in
England? But because we understand that the greatest scruple in conscience of
our Catholics Roman is grounded upon this Canon: we will make a particular
treatise thereof, and to vncomber and discharge their consciences show first
that it is no determination of faith that the Pope may depose princes, and
secondly that it does not bind in this realm, not only because as I have
proved before, the Church can make no decree of temporalities, but also because
by the very Canon Law, it neither is, nor ever was in force within this
realm; and finally neither orderly executed according to the order of the
Canon. And first because I shall have occasion to examine every word of one
member thereof I will set it down verbatim word for word. Ca. 33^ Si ver^
dominus temporalis requisitus and admonitus ab ecclesia, terram suam purgare
neglexerit ab hac haeretica foeditate, per Metropolitanum and comprouinciales
episcapos, excommunicationis vinculo innodetur, etsi satisfacer^ contempserit
intra annum, significetur hoc summo pontifici Romano. vt extunc ipse, vasallos
ab eius fidelitate denuntiet absolutos and terram exponat Catholicis
occupandam, qui came exterminatis haereticis sine contradictone possideant, and
in fidei puritate conseruent: ita quod bona huiusmodi damnatorum, si laici
fuerint, confiscentur, si vero clereci applicentur ecclesijs a quibus stipendia
per ceperint. Which may thus be englished, If the temporal Lord being
requested and admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his land from
this heretical filthiness, let him be inknotted with the band of
excommunication, by the Metropolitan and Bishops of that province: And if he
shall contemn to satisfy within one year, let this be signified unto the
Bishop of Rome, that he may denounce his vassalles acquitted of his fealty,
and expone or set forth, his land unto the Catholics for them to take, who,
the heretics being driven out may possess it without contradiction, and keep
it in the purity of the faith: so that the goods of such condemned men, if
they be lay men, be escheted to the prince, or if they be clerks, be applied
to the Churches of whom they received stipendes; Here ye see is no definitive
sentence of faith set down, but only an order appointed to be used for the
rooting out of heresies, so that no weak Catholic conscience need to make
scruple, that the Pope can depose princes because the counsel does say let it
signified to the Bishop of Rome, that he may denounce his subjects loosed of
their obedience, etc. For the counsel goes no more about to decide whether
Bishops of Rome may depose princes, then whether Bishops may excommunicate
them, whereof no man in those days doubted, but content themselves with the
used and practiced authority of them both, for long before this time had the
Popes used to depose princes, as Pope Gregory the seventh, the Emperor Henry
the fourth, and Boleslaw king of Poland. And Innocentius tertius the present
Pope that then held the counsel, had himself before that time deposed the
Emperors Philip and Otho, John the king of England, and Raymond the Earl of
Tolouse. So that seeing no man did then move any doubt, whether Popes might
lawfully do it or no, neither did the counsel then go about to determine it,
but wholly omitting the matter, does only set down an order to be used for
the destroying of heresies. But otherwise if ye should always infer, that
for decreed for faith and lawful, which general counsels do many times as
it were secretly receive and not reprove; ye will never be able to defend them
from error in faith, and that which is equivalent, from being one,
contradictorie unto another; For at the second counsel of Nice it is not
refuted, Cap. 32.
but rather it seems by the way to be allowed, that Angels have material
bodies. So likewise this counsel may after a sort seem to allow, that
patrons may lawfully in good conscience detayne, a great part of the tithes
and profits of their Churches, so that they do leave the vicar a sufficient
living: because that this counsel finding fault with this misorder, that
patrons and certain other persons do take the profits of the parish Churches,
does charge them with no more: then the which what can be more against good
conscience and equity, then he to live by the altar that serves not at the
altar; and namely among Catholics Roman that do hold, that tithes are by
the law of God due only to priests, and with what conscince then can any lay
man enjoy them. Likewise in the same counsel there is a Canon, that he that
has a parish Church shall not serve the cure by his vicar, but by himself
unless perhaps the Church be annexed to a prebende or dignity, in the which
case we do grant that he which has a prebend or dignity, seeing it must be,
that he do serve in the greater Church, that he do endeavor to have in that
parish Church a meet and perpetual vicar canonically instituted, etc. Here
ye see that this counsel does not think that residence upon benefices with
charge of souls is commanded by God his law; which is contrary to the
counsel at Treent in the 23 Section in the first chapter of reformation. Yea
Dominicus Soto in his book de^ertitudine gratiae against Catherine, does
flatly affirm, that all the Bishops and learned men that were at that counsel
did so wholly agree thar residence was required by the law of God, that there
was not one man that doubted thereof but only Catherine. Moreover this
counsel thinks it meeter that a man be resident in the Cathedral Church,
then in his parish Church, yea it seems to say of duty it must be so, a
thing very absurd in Dominicke Soto his judgment; who sharply reproves the
Cardinals that have Bishopprickes, and be not resident on them, but abide and
continue at Rome; and thinks* it no reason that they allege that they ought
to make their abode at Rome, because they be Cardinals, and as it were
assistants unto the Pope, for says he, residences upon Bishopprickes are
commanded by God, but Cardinals to be attendant on the Pope is but a
constitution of man, the which must needs give place to the ordinances more
ancient and greater. And bitterly does he inuey against the common abuse: that
whereas by the Canons of the Church no Cardinal may be a Bishop, because
both offices require residence, which one man can not perform, the Cardinals
to delude the force of this Canon, are never instituted Bishops but have
Bishopprickes given them in perpetual commenda, whereby it is come to pass
that the ordinance of Commendaes which was first instituted for the benefit of
the Church by suffering one to have the government of it, for a time until a
meet man might be found for it; is now used to the destruction of the
Church, and the unlawful enriching of the covetous and ambitious. Yea the
counsel of Trent in the 25. Section. Chap. 18. does think this Canon of the
counsel of Laterane, so unreasonable and unjust, for to impropriate benefices
with charge of souls; and to ordain in them a perpetual vicar, to serve the
cure; that they do forbid the like to be done ever hereafter notwithstanding
any grace or grant: wisely weying the difference between an institution of
God, and an ordinance of man, the serving of God in a public charge and in
private person, and finally how much greater good or hurt may ensue by the
continual presence, or the absence of the person in, or from his parish, then
by his lying at, or from the Cathedral Church. So that to salve all this gere,
both ye and we are forced to say, that the counsels went not about to determine
what ought to be believed in those points, and so also must ye do in this
controversy of deposing princes, and not to account it for a definition of
faith, but a politic constitution; Of which kind of Canons Saint Augustine
says, De Baptis-Donat: lib. 2. cap 3.
who knows not, that former general counsels are often amended by the
latter* when by some experiment of things, that is opened which had been
shut, and that known that lay hidden, without any type of sacrilegious pride,
without any swollen neck of vain glory, without any contention of spi^^full
envy, with holy humility, Catholic peace, and Christian charity. Moreover
the famous Cardinal Taietan^ that does hold and maintain that the Pope cannot
err in the definition of faith, yet does affirm in his commentaries upon
Matthew that he may err in judgment, whether a thing be lawful or not: And
therefore he does not accept the de^rees of the Pope, in his controversy of
diuotee for definitive of faith, but for judicial: And in judgments the
Popes themselves (says he) do confess that they have erred; and so then may
also a general counsel err in judgments by your own rules, if perhaps any
judgment be to be found of the counsel of the Laterane, against Raimond the
Earl of Tolouse, for not purging his country of the Albigenses.

Canons of counsels bind not but where they are received.
Now this first scruple being taken away, let us descend unto our next
article and conclusion, that the Canon does not bind us in this realm; who is
so ignorant that knows not that all decrees and Canons of general counsels,
are not observed and kept in every country, neither do thy bind the breakers
of them in conscience; As for example, there was a decree made by the counsel
at Nice, that deacons shall not sit above priests: but yet we do see at Rome,
the Deacon Cardinals, do sit above Bishops that be no Cardinals.
Likewise in Sexto Constantinapolitano in Trullo, there is forbidden kneeling in
prayer on the Sundays, and so likewise all the time between Easter and
Whitsontide, And also that no man shall fast the Saturnedaies in Lent: but the
quite contrary of both Canons, was most usual in this land, and thought most
devout when the Pope was in his highest prime here. Moreover it is the common
opinion of all the Canonistes, that the decrees and Canons reformatiue do not
else where bind, but where they have been received, and therefore our
seminary priests do hold, that the Catholics Roman of this Realm, nor
yet those in France, be not bound to observe the Canons of the late counsel
at Trent, because they have been publikly received in neither of the
kingdoms. This then being so, if I can prove that this Canon of deposing of
princes was never received in this Realm, then have I convinced that it does
bind no man of this Realm in conscience. And this will I first prove by
circumstance of the time, and secondly, because diverse other (...) for down in
the same counsel were never observed (...), as for this Canon, The Canon never
received, proved by circumstance of time.
it never came in practice hear ^ntill King Henry the eight. First it is
certain that the counsel at Laterane was held in Anno Domini. 1215. and in
the seventh year of the reign of King Io^n, and in the time of the bloody
broils of the Barons, against the king, it can not be denied but that the
king had three Ambassadors there, and likely enough it is, that they
subscribed and consented as the rest of the Ambassadors did, for their master
sought all the means he could to please the Pope; that he might have his
help against the Barons; and so indeed he stood his fast friend, and at
the counsel, accursed the Barons, suspended the Archbishop of Canterbury
Stephan Lang^^^, for taking part with them, and for the same quarrel would
not allow his brother Simon Elected Archbishop of york, so that there is no
doubt but the greatest part of the realm, were as ready to displease the
Pope, as their prince was to please him, for the chiefest cause that moved the
king to send Ambassadors unto the counsel was, says Mathews of Paris, to
procure the Popes curse against the Barons. These woeful wars continued to
the death of king John, so that no parliament was, or could be held,
whereby this Canon could be received: For if Sir Thomas More in his debellation
does truly say, that king John could not make his kingdom tributarie to the
Pope, without the consent of the parliament, much less could he give the
Pope authority to give the realm away, God knows to whom it should please
him, or that Christian that was able to win it by fine force, for according
to the rule of the Canon Law, Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus debet approbari,
that which touches all men ought to be allowed and approved and confirmed by
all, wherefore the Lord chief Justice in the first year of the reign of
Henry the seventh, as we do read in the reports of the same year Termino
Hillarii. Chap. 10. affirmed, that all the Barrons unto the Pope that after a
sort commanded Edward the first to surcease from warring on the Scotts that
held of him: That although the king would give away the right he had to
Scotlands, yet for all that it should not be so, because that he that is
king of England is always chief Lord of Scotland. And if the king of this
Realm, cannot of himself dispose of a thing annexed and incorporated to the
crown of this kingdom: will any wise man be of opinion that king John could
dispose of the crown of England of himself, without the assent and consent of
the states, and ordain forfeytures thereof to forreyners and strangers. And
although I can easily be persuaded that the subjects for the extreme hatred
that they bare unto their present prince, The iniquity of the Canon
would lightly be won to accept of causes to be discharged of their
alleageanc to their king: yet can I hardly be induced to believe, that they
could suffer themselves, their wives and children, lands and liuinges, goods
and country to be exposed to the sack and spoil of all their neighbors, yea
of all Christendom if they should unhappily hap to have a wicked king. And
also well might they satisfy the will and intent of the counsel, without any
such pernicious peril of there whole state, and also retain still their
ancient honor and liberty, if they themselves did make choice of the Physician
that should purge them, (if that the law of God had not utterly forbidden the^
to rebel from their prince, were he never so wicked) and not foolishly bind
themselves to take a purgation of they know not whom, and perhaps, unhappily of
such a one, (...) ^^te likely to purge them of ill humors so extremely, that
he would destroy the habit of their body, And hereof ^o said an example they
neded not to seek far: For as the very same instant they had a very plain
proof thereof in France, where the earl of Tolowse was deprived of his
earldom, because he would not purge his dominions of the Albigenses; and the
earldom given by the Pope unto Simon the Earl of Monssort; For that I may
omit how bloudily Monssort executed the Popes mandate being general of the
Croysy against the Albigenses in sacking the Cities, murdering the men and
women, how he did also under that pretense assault and sack cities, that were
not one whit infected with that sect, and slew in one battle twenty thousand
of the people, and their Alies; After he was created earl by the Pope and
counsel, and invested therein by the French King, and all the whole country had
embraced him for their prince, he cruelly commanded the citizens of Carcassane
Towlose and Narbon to dismantell their walls and to fill up their ditches.
This to do (says Paulus Aemilius mine author also in the rest of this
history) they thought to be a wretched ^e pitiful thing, yet they executed his
commandment cursing the head of Simon, they begin with their own hands to
make their country naked of her walls, they themselves making themselves subject
unto all injury, Nether did that seem to be the greatest of their evils, for
Simon, both because his purse was well emptied through the charges of the
wars, and also then he might thoroughly ^ame them being afflicted with
miseries, and manyfould mischiefs, sends about collectors and coactors to
levy a mighty mass of money of the country: It is strange that nature has
so ordained that every man's private damages do move him more then the public
sorrow, neither can their be any sharper weapon found then that of money. They
which at his commandment overthrew their country, could not endure the loss
of their purse. So that the war that was said and p^^^^ched to have been
taken in hand, and kept for gods cause; and might have been ended by sparing
of them that had yelde^, and by desse^bling of things past, was made now more
hard to be ended through unmerciful dealing. Doors were broken, open
distresses were taken, sighing, shriking, sorrowing, weping and wailing of men
and women, were hard in every house. At length sorrow being turned into anger,
the old Earl being then in hope of alteration, had returned out of Spain
whither he fled after his discomfiture in battle, was received of the Cyty of
Tolouse and other Cities there aboutes, the bishops whom Simon had restored
were driven out again, because the multitude thought them to favor him. Then
Aemilius seems to exclame against the wickedness of this Canon, in giving
principalities to strangers, and shows how hurtful it is to gods cause, for
the advancement whereof it is supposed to be made thus saying, Nihil in sacris
bellis perinde obfuit, atque mos iam exortus, vt honesta proscriptione suas
quisque respiciat res; in ore omnium sanctu^ piumque versetur, consilio;
conatu, animo secus afficiantur. S^ de religione tantum agaetur, si obliuio
noxae sanciatur, si sanatis mentibus fortunis hominum abstineatur, omnes idem
sentiant, nu^c de mortalium iure, de comitatures est, ea controuersia tollatur,
nulla erit armorum causa etc. Nothing has done so much hurt in the sacred
wars as a custom that is now come up, that every man does by honest
prescription regard and respect his own, that in all their mouths is heard,
holy and godly; but in drift, doings, and in heart, they are otherwise
affected. If the matter be only for religion, if it be decreed that the fault
be forgotten and forgiven, if when men's hearts are healed their goods be
abstained from, let them be all of one mind; Now the matter in hand is about
the right of men, and about an Earldom, let that controversy be taken away,
and there is no cause of wars. Ramond requesteth his ancient patrimony,
Simon holds fast that, which he has gotten by Arms, the gift of the
counsel, the benefit of the king of France. These men are ^^^de^ill only of
there own; But the Pope, because the matter had once before been adjudged,
does think it to stand with his constancy, and with religion, to have, the
ordinances of their fathers to abide stable, and his own decrees inviolable
etc. Thus the wise Barrons saw, and we also may, that the wars in the
Earldom of Towlose had ceased when the cause ceased, that is, when the
Albigenses were expelled, and the Catholics Roman restored, if it had not
been for this decree of the Counsel that had adjudged the Earldom unto
Monssort, which now, seeing they were not contented with the reformation of the
Earldom, and the Earl, continued many years after, almost to the utter
destruction of the Country, and also the death of Simon, who eight years after
was in that quarrel, slain at the seige of Tolowse. But there sons
Almericke and Ramond continued their fathers contention. When Almericke
findeing himself to weak, did three years after make over his right unto
Lewis the eight, the French King; for to be created Constable of France, Jews
wanne Aninion by assault, yet dyed before he could accomplish his conquest:
and his widdowe, and regent of his young son followed the quarrel, and at
length ended it, by composition, that Alphonse her younger son should marry
with the sole daughter and heir of the Earl and enjoy his earldom after his
disease: this happened, Anno 1235, nyneteene years after that all wars for
religion had ended. So great a good had the first execution of this Canon
wrought, I have dwelt the longer in the narration of this history, for to show
the inconvenience of this Canon, and also to set before the eyes of my
Catholic Countrymen, what curtsie they and theirs are like to find at the
hands of a forreyne Catholic. Prince, if any should unhappily (which God of
his unmeasurable mercy forbid, and my hand shakes to write) through their
wicked and pernicious treason obtain the conquest of this kingdom. But the
english nobility that lived at the counsel at Latarane could not forget the
wretched wrack and wast that a conquest brings, and the slavery, misery, and
the extremity and cursed calamities, that the accepting of a foreign prince
infers and enforces, who then kept woeful wars, received from their
auncesters by many discents, for their ancient laws and liberties, of whom
they had been cruelly spoiled by the conqerour and his successors, and also
delivered them unto their posteritys almost to the destruction of the blood
Royal, well near to the utter ruin of their own howses, and the lamentable
shipwreck of their dear country. Yea and what regard the nobility and people
of this Land had then of any decree and Canon made by the Pope touching any
temporal matter, it does planely appear by Matthew of Paris who writes that
when the Pope had sent Bulls of discharge of the Kings oath, and grant of
their ancient laws and liberties, and also excommunication against the
Barrons, and their adherents that did attempt to force King John to the
performance of them, The Barons would not obey them, but all men generally, and
as it were with one mouth said, that the Bulls were of no moment because the
ordering of lay matters did not appertain unto the Pope. For that only the
power to dispose of Church matters was given by our Lord unto Peter and his
successors. What means the insatiable covetousness of the Romans to stretch
out it self unto us? what have Apostolic Bishops to do with wars? See
they will be the successors of Constantine and not of Peter etc. And in this
mind they continued in the reign of king Edward the first, when the
Parliament assembled at Lincoln thus wrote (as we read in Thomas of
Walsingham and flores historiarum) unto Bonifacius the viii. who among other
things in his letters to the king, had requested, that if the King had any
right in the kingdoms of Scotland, or any part thereof, that he would send his
proctors and learned counsel unto him, and there the matter should speedily
with justice be adjudged and decided. Neither that the kings of England had, by
reason of the preeminence of their state regal, dignity and costome at all
times inuiolably observed, ever answered, or ought to answer before any Judge
eccelesiasticall or secular about his rights in the aforesaid kingdom of
Scotland, or other his temporalities: wherefore we having held a diligent
consultation and deliberation upon the contents of your abouesaide letters, it
was the common concordious, and one minded consent of us all, and of eueryone
of us, and shall be for ever hereafter unaltered, that our foresaid Lord the King
do not about the rights of the kingdom of Scotland, or other his
temporalities in any wise, answer iudicially before you, nor come under
judgment in any sort, or bring his rights aforesaid in doubt or question, nor
therefore send proctours or messengers unto your presence, seeing the premises
do tend manifestly to the disinheriting of the right of the Crown of the
kingdom of England, and the kingly dignity, and the notorious subversion of
the state of the same kingdom; and also to the prejudice of our fathers
liberty, costoms, and laws, to the observation and defending of whom, we are
bound by the duty of oath taken, and the which we will maintain in all that we
can, and will with the help of God defend with all our strength: Neither also
do we permit, or in any sort will suffer, as neither we can, nor ought, that
our foresaid Lord and king, (yea if he would) do, or in any cause attempt,
the premises so unwonted, undue, prejudicial, and at other times so unheard of
etc. And now I pray you will any indifferent man believe, that our countrymen
in those days did think, that the Pope had authority to despose their Kings,
or knew or heard, that their fathers and ancestors had given the Pope power
to expose the kingdom of their country, for a common pray for all Christians
and Catholics; But now having proved that this Canon cannot bind us now,
unless our ancestors had received by consent of Parliament, and also have
showed that it neither was, nor could be done; let us fall to our second
proof that the Canons of this Counsel at least in temporal cases, were never
received in this Realm. In this counsel there was a Canon made under pain of
excommunication, that the Clergy should not be forced to pay any contribution
to secular princes, neither should they willingly of their own accord pay
any, without license first obtained of the Pope: Now that this Canon was never
in force here, it does plainly appear by the subsidies paid by the Clergy
unto the son of King John, Chap. 24.
Henry the third, in the ix. the xvi the xxi. the xxix. the xxxvii. the xliiii.
the xlii. years of his reign, never once asked the Popes consent, but
contrariwise in the xxxvi. years of his reign the king having the popes
mandate from the Counsel of Lions, See Holin^hed.
to pay him three tenthes because he was crossed for the holy land, they
utterly refused to pay him penny. The Clergy did also wthout contradiction pay
unto his son and successor Edward the first in the eight year of his reaigne
three tenthes, and in the eleauenth year the twentieth part of all their goods,
but afterward at the Parliament held at Saint Edmondesbury, Robert the
Archbyshoppe of Canterbury and some of the Clergy refused to pay, not claming
to be exempted by this Canon but by another decre made lately that very year
by Pope Bonifacius the eight, but then the King put the Clergy out of his
protection; and thus forced them to yield, and so they have continued payment
quietly ever since that time; An other Canon we have in the same counsel,
Chap. 4^. that no prescription shall be good during the whole time whereof the
possessor did not verelye believe that the thing was his own in truth, But
that the law of this land did never make any distinction of possession bona or
malae fidei, whether the possessor did think it to be his own or not at all,
our Lawyers do know and acknowledge. And also the statutes of limitation made
in the Parliamentes held at Marton and Westminster in the three and twenty
years of the reigns of Henry the third and Edward the first do plainly
prove. Also a third Canon there is, a branch of this of the desposition of
Princes, that the goods of Clerks condemned for heretics shall be forfeited
unto the Churches where they served.

This constitution not to be observed, the author of the book called the
Doctor and the Student does at large prove in the xxix. Chapter of his second
book, And also it does plainly appear by the statute made in the second
year of Henry the first Chapt. 7. where we find that the goods of Heretics
of what estate, condition and degree soever they be, are escheated to the
King* And also all their lands that houlde immediately of him, or of their
ordinaries or their commissaries: but the lands of all other that hold in
chief of other Lords, the king to have them a year and a day with their
wastes, and afterward to return unto the Lord of the sea. And seeing that in
three small matters that touched not the state, the Counsel was not, nor is
received, can any wise man believe that the Counsel was received in a Canon
that touched the ruin of the whole country and kingdom, and namely, seeing it
has been plainly proved, that a part of the very self same Canon was never
allowed.

Now finally to conclude: neither was the sentence of deprivation canonically
pronounced against her Majesty, according to thee decree of the Counsel, The
Canon not orderly executed.
for whereas she should first have been admonished by the Church, and then
excommunicated by the Metropolitan, and his comprouinciall Bishops; and then
if she had contemned to satisfy within one year, to be deprived, etc. It is
manifest that she was not excommunicated by the Metropolitan, and the
Bishops of his province, neither I do think admonished by the Church, but
even at the very first choppe deposed by the Pope. Therefore seeing that
neither Pope, nor general counsel have authority to depose Princes, or
release subjects of their allegiance, neither was the Canon of the Counsel of
Laterane for deposing of Princes ever received in this land, nor any other
Canons of Counsels that touched temporalities, neither yet that Canon orderly
executed ^-against her Majesty. What good Christian English man can think,
that he was by that Bull of Pius Quin^^^ discharged of his obedience, and
allegiance that he owes unto her Majesty: And can absurdly believe, that all
those that shall dye in that quarrel shall undoubtedly be damned in hell
fire, with all miscreants and rebels.

FINIS.

