An exposition touching all the books of holy Scripture, and their excellency.
THE wisdom of God cries in the wiseste of mortalle men Solomon in the
Proverbs unto al men of all degrees, and Ages, saying. Give ear, for I will
speak of principal matiers, Prouer. viii.
and the opening of my lips shall be to show out things that be right.
Depely do I muse upon the truth, and ungodliness to my lips is most
abominable. In Righteousness are all the words of my mouth: cursednesse,
nor frowardness in them is none. Ready, and easy they are to them that list
to learn and to them that will find knowelege, right, and plain. With me is
counsel, and preseruatione: With me is strength, and understanding. Kings
through me do reign, and Counsailours decree that is good, and just.

When these things be so, I meruail what eiuil spirit drives those men,
which disdeine the most sacred Bibles the only founteine, the most plentiful
and richest treasaurie of true wisdom and be mad upon false, and
countrefaict wisdom. For a man may find at this day, among great students
not a few, which wholly given (and al their whole life) to the colors, and
deceiptes of Philosophy both do loathe the name of the Bibles, and when they
hear them spoken of, be ready to fall into an horrible quaking, and shiuering.
I wys (they say) there wants Learning, and eloquence in them, and that they
hate the rude, and foul barbaritie.

The Bibles Eloquence
And yeat forsothe merueil it is, that they should set up Eloquence before
them, as a rule to live by, and a mark whereunto they would direct all their
whole mind, and study. In deed that wise men ought to look for an other
thing in this life, even their very own Philosophiers themselves do testify
Marcus Cicero the prince of Eloquence, of a Philosopher does not require
Eloquence. For in his first book, De finibus bonorum, and malorum. speaking
of Epicure: The talk of this Philosopher, says he, displeases me not, for he
can utter in words whatsoever he will, and speaks plainly to understand:
And yeat a Philosopher, if he bring Eloquence, I will not despise it: If he
bring none, I will not greatly crave it.

Why now be these me^ more hard unto us, then Cicero? Do they not know that
in our Bibles the heavenly philosophy is taught even after the capacity of the
common people? And Cicero proves plainly, that Eloquence without wisdom is
very hurtful. It behooves then to covet wisdom rather then Eloquence, namely
when these If same Cicero in a book called Partitiones oratoriae does define
Eloquence to be nothing else the^ wisedo^ speking ple^tifully wherefore whosoever
is destitute of wisdom though he have a fair, and a ready tou^g to talk
gaily, yeat shall he be called but a talker, and not eloquent. For as to speak,
and speak wisely is not all one, no more is all one, talking, and Eloquence
Men unadvised and not well in their wits pour out many words many times
without reason nothing to the purpose, and clean contrary to al conuenience,
True eloquence
and comeliness. But a wise eloque^t man is no waster of words, but speaks
soche as do profit, and serve to that end whereunto they be appoincted, and
he so speaks them as he ought to do, whether it be with many, or with
few, with learned, or unlearned, with his match, with his worse, or with his
better, the comeliness of time, and place always observed. And within these
limits have the heathen masters of eloquence themselves bou^ded in true
eloquence But since no writers have been less wasters of words, then the
holy aucthours, which minded only things profitable, and to a certain end,
that is, al to obtain blessedness, to live quietly, justly, and honestly,
and have also set forth those things in a plain, and clear fashion of
speaking: I dare say boldly and truly, that only the writers of the Bibles
have used true eloquence, which thing, ye vain lovers of deceiptfull
philosophy shall not be able to prove false, except they ca^ before overthrow
the description of eloquence, which we have brought out eue^ of their own
auctours or else ca^ manifestly show yt our writers be not soche, as we say
for, which as by good arguments they shall never prove, so as soon as they
shall be willing to do it, they shall ru^ne in daungier of blasphemy,
sacrilege, and high treason to God

S. Augustine also in his.iii. book, and vi. Cha. De doctrina Christiana: I
dare say (says he) that al which well understand what the holy writers
theimselues do speak, do therewith understand also, that they ought not any
otherwise to speak. For there is some Eloquence which better becomes young
men, and some that better becomes old, and is not then worthy to be
called Eloquence, if it agree not to the person that speaks: So is there
other that besemeth men of high authority, and that be in deed most divine,
and excellent.

AND with this Eloquence spoke they which wrote the Bible, neither does any
other Eloquence become the^ nor this any other, but it is mete even for them
alone: and the lower it seems to some, somoche the higher it rises, not in
proud, and lofty words, but in soundness of grave and substa^cial matier
But the Hebruish manners of speaking grieve the tender ears of these learned
men, Hebruish phrases in the Bible.
and seem unto the latins, that is, to deintie, and delicate persons very
hard, rude, and in no wise to be abiden: yea I wis because a fine soft style
falling, and sounding swetely, in every poinct, and delighting us with
pleasant Harmony is that highest good thing which all men ought to
desire, and especially regard, without the which, yea the best things must
be counted woorst forworne, and naught. Lo here our parcialitie, and malice
shows it self most of all. For not only the Hebrew tongue has her facions of
speaking, but the Greeks, and Latins have theirs also. which hitherto no man
has discommended, nor disbeautified.

Moreover many have written, and that largely of the constructions, and
propreties of Speech used both in the Greek, and Latin toungue, many have
written of Schemes, and tropes. In the^ to be occupied, the^ to learn, and
conne without book, and with them to enbrowder our oration, is compted a very
goodly thing. In these tongues no man co^plaineth of ye facions of speech yt
they be very rare, and seldomely used. Only the language of god for her own
manners of speaking, for her own figures strange to our hearing, seems foul,
ouglie, and lothesome: and wot you why? Verily even for that unto the old
Adam, al is counted vile, whatsoever is pure, and heavenly, and what is
ferrefet, unclean, and filthy, that pleases rightwel, and is well allowed.
Plato is translated into the latin tou^g, Aristotle is translated, so is
Lucian, Plutarche, Isocrates, and a great many of Greek Epigrammes. In the^,
what was rugged is made smothe, what was hard is made easy, what joined not
well, is well knit together, what was out of course, is set in good order, and
brought to good Latin, that base was before. Now if the Hebruish manners of
speaking, and endicting do so greatly displease you, why do you not prepare
for us Latin Bibles? surely even because the writings of Paganes do please
you better: What a thing is this? To increase our Substance, we send our
children into France, into Italy, and into the farthest parts of Spain to
learn perfectly the languages of those nations that they may the better, and
the more readily traffic with the Fre^chemen, Italians, and spaniardes. Here
we spare for no labor, we spare for no cost, and all is counted sweet and
profitable. Only to learn the holy tongue, to accustom our selves to her
manners of speaking, which be somewhat strange unto us, is thought painful,
and unprofitable, and a thing in no wise mete for gentle wits Lo thus in deed
does our malice show it self. Verily if to learn holy things we did
bestow yea but half the time, and diligence, which it greueth us not to wast
upon matiers nothing worth, holy scripture should of us be less despised, and
more should be liked her facio^s of speaking, though seldom in use, yeat very
cunning, and cleckelie. Now touching the lerning in holy scripture, I se not
what other thing true learning is, then very Wisdom, neither what wisdom is
other then very philosophy. For Cicero himself in his second book De off.
says.

They that desire wisdom are called Philosophers, neither is Philosophy any
thing else by interpretation, the^ the love of wisdom. And wisdom (as it is
defined of the Philosophers) is a science of Gods matiers and of men's, and of
the causes wherein those things be contained.

After which fashion Plato also in the book that he wrote De Philosophia,
shows that the office of a Philosopher is to know heavenly things, and to
govern worldelie matiers, comprehendyng in that one, Philosophy
contemplative, and in the other, Philosophy active. For the Platonistes divide
all Philosophy into Speculatiue, active, and Sermocinal. Division of
Philosophy after the Platonistes.
Unto Speculatiue they have appointed Metaphysike, natural Philosophy, and the
Mathematicalles: unto active Ethical, Political, and Economical: unto
Sermocinal Grammar, Logique, and Rhetorique. And by Sermocinal, they thought an
entrance to be made into Philosophy active and co^templatiue, in which
stands the exercise, and strength of true wisdom. Of these things Cicero
also makes me^cio^ in his first book De Academicis questionibus. Further if
holy writ lack learning, then lacks it wisdom also, that is, science of
godly and worldly matiers. Again, if the holy books teach the knowledge of
things perteinyng to god and man, then teach they wisdom, and so
consequently true Philosophy. But let us se what things be entreated of, and
taught in the Bibles, or this heavenly Philosophy, that therewith also
briefly, and as it were by a show, it may appear unto ye reader what thing
he should look for by knowing the Bibles, and how in the^ the goodness of god
has set out to the world most aboundau^tlie ye great riches of his high
knowledge and wisdom. Biblia in the plural nu^bre only, Biblia.
are called volumes or books. For in Greek Biblos, or Biblio^ is a volume or
book. So this name is borrowed of the Grecians, and given to the holy
scripture, and is as much to say as holy books, or the book of holy
things. This self same holy book is called a testament, and in deed a
testament both old, and new. Sometime in holy writ, Testament.
Testament is taken for the last will, and ordinance of him that is diyng.
And after this speaking, we say, he made his testament, that is, he testified
the meaning of his mind, and showed how he would have all things disposed
and ordered, and by a trope called Metalepsis Testament is taken for the thing
it self that is bequethed, Metalepsis
and so forgeuenes of sins is in holy scripture called a testament. This
word Testament is used also for a league, or covenant For God has bound him
self unto us by a league, showing ye conditions thereof, both what we should
look for of him, and also what we our selves ought to do. The co^dicions be,
God will be a true god, that is, a father in all sufficiency, and ple^tifulnes
to al men. And there be bound to reverence and worship this God for their God in
faith, innocence, and charity. And hitherto do belong all the promises: I am
thy God, and the god of thy seed after the. The sede of the woman shall break
the head of the serpent. In thy sede all the tribes of the earth shall be
blessed. Again hitherto pertein all the precepts of living, inespeciallie
the.x. commandments. Thou shall have no strau^g god before my face Be ye
holy, for I also am holy. Love thy neighbor as thy self. And this
testament, and league, this ordinacion of God is unchangeable, is one, and
everlasting. For there was never at any time any more then one only church,
never but one only true faieth and religion of saints. Question.
How the^ have we the names of old and new testament? Verily of the manner of
showing, Solution.
teaching, and deliueryng it unto us. As touching the very substance, it is
but one only. For whosoever well considers what things were taught our
forefathers, he shall perceive that thapostles of Christ have taught us none
other. Intent of the Bible.
To them it was showed that there was one God, that he only was to be
worshipped, and that in spirit, innocence, and faieth. Also that there is one
only justice, and redemption of the world, only one priest and true sacrifice,
even Jesus Christ the son of God, and man. Immortality also of souls, and
risyng again of the bodies to be hoped for of God. And what other things have
the Apostles of the Lord taught us? So then touching the substance of faieth,
and of the Testament, al one, and the very self same thing is taught to us
both. Now for ye manner how all one, and the self same thing was taught unto
us, and them, Paul writes and says. Unto our forefathers all things did
chance in a figure, and to us be those things come without a figure.

For God has given Christ unto us, which is the perfection of the law, that
now we should worship as present and past, that is, complete, and fulfilled,
that which our forefathers had in a shadow, as yet to be fulfilled, or rather
to be looked for. And thus is seen the diversity in the fashion of teaching.
They had figures, we have the thing it self. They reioised in outward things
and ceremoniales, we without figures enioie spiritual things that were
signified. And hitherto pertains ye priest hode of Aaron, and the diverse
bloody kinds of sacrifices, the figures of the priesthode and sacrifice of
Christ. And by this diversity in teaching, rise these words, old, and new
testament. For that teaching, whereby our religion was taught our forefathers in
types and figures, is called the old testament, but that which without figures
describes and shows unto us Christ the perfection of the law, is called
the new testament, not therefore new, because the old fathers knew not
Christ, but by conferryng and setting it together with the old, and because a
new people, eue^ the congregation of gentiles is received into this league
through Christ, and preaching of the gospel. And hereby now you may the better
perceive how the bible is called the old and new testament. For the self
written books of the bibles are no more the new testament it self, then the
tables and writings testamentarie, or of leagues, are the testament or league
it self: and yet of all men be they called the testament and league. Thus of
the thing that they do describe, they take this name. Because then yt in the
former books of the Bibles be declared precepts, promises, factes, rites,
traditions, and diverse ways, whereby God has instructed and led mankind in
his testament, in his league, and true religion, therefore, Old testament
say I, they called it the old testament. And because the latter books
declare unto us how in Christ al things are fulfilled, made new, and in deed
restored again, how also a new people gathered together of the Jews and
gentiles is ioigned into one body, and in faith and charity worship God in
Christ, New testament
therefore were these books called the new testament. Touching the title and
purpose of our heue^lie philosophy, thus much have we spoken in general.
After will we briefly expoune what matier is contained in each book severally.
But first will I speak somewhat of placyng ye books of the old and new
testament, and how they stand in order.

S. Hierome in the preface to the books of kings, and Daniel, The number and
order of the books of the old Testament.
shows yt the old testament is divided by the Hebrews into the law, the
prophets, and holy books written by holy men, called in greek Hagiographa.
So he nu^breth of the law.v. books: Genesis, Exodus Leuiti. Numeri, The first
order.
Deutero. and this he makes the first order. In the second, which he calls
of prophets, The second order.
he puts.viij. books. Iosue, Judges, whereunto he ioigneth the little book
of Ruth, Samuel, Malachim, Esaie, Jeremy with his lame^tations, Ezechiel, and
the.xij. prophets. He also has noted that these.xii. prophets be not nu^bred
of the Hebrews, and the.lxx. interpretours in all one order, and the
interpretours to reken thus: Oseas, Amos, Micheas, Joel, Abdias, Jonas, Nahu^,
Abacuk, Sophonias, Haggeus, zacharias, Malachias. The Hebrews to follow this
order. Oseas, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas, Nahum, Abacuk, Sophonias,
Haggeus, zacharias, Malachias. The books called Hagiographa he rehearses.ix.
Hagiographa
Job, the Psalms, which is comprehended in.v. particions, and one volume, the
Parables of Solomon, his Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, the book of Daniel, the
Chronicles, Esdras, to which is ioigned Nehemias, and the book of Ester. Al
these put together, he thinks of tholde law to be gathered xxii. books. He
warns us yet that there be some, which count the book of Ruth, and the
Lamentations of Jeremy among Hagiographa, and set them in this order. First
the book of Paralipomenon which with us is divided into two books, then the
Psalms the Proverbs of Solomon next, after them Job. Ruth follows him,
Ecclesiastes has the sixte place, the Lame^tacions of Hieremie the seventh,
the Canticles the eight, Esther the ninthe, Daniel the tenthe. Esdras and his
co^panio^ Nehemias the last. The holy writings which be next in aucthority
to the books of the first, and second order, those by likelihod they called
Hagiographae as first written, and made by holy men, the other ascribe they to
God himself, affirming him, and not man to be the maker of them. Bullingers
mind touching these books.


To speak freely, as I think, I do not see why by as good reason God may
not be accoumpted to be the maker of these books, as well as of the other and why
they of the first, and second order may not in likewise be called
Hagiographa. Saint Peter speaking of all the Prophets, as well of David,
Daniel, and Solomom, as of other: No prophecy in the Scripture (says he)
has any private interpretacion. ii. Peter. i
For the holy Scripture came never by the will of man, but holy men of GOD
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Verily that these be of equal authority with the other, it is proved partly
by many Arguments, and especially by this, that the LORD Jesus, and the
Apostles in teaching, and confirming true, and sound Religione, used as well
the Testymonies of the Psalms, of Daniel, and other books among those called
Hagiographa, As of Moses, Esaie, and other.

There be some, which of the matiers that the books treat of, In other
division.
divide all the Old Testamente into four parts. Into the Law, Histories,
Precepts of Wisdom, and Prophets. Of the Law, they reckon five Books,
which be well known to all men. Thirtene of Histories: Iosue, Iudicum,
Ruth: four of the Kings, two of Paralipomenon, Esdras, Nehemias, Hesther, and
Job. Of wisdom the count those three most excellent of Solomon the wiseste
of all mortal Men: Into the Prophets they put the Psalms, the four
great Prophets, and the twelve lesser.

I will not keep from you the Judgment of Josephus touching the books of the
Old Testamente, The judgment of Josephus touching these books.
disputing against Appion.

There be not with us (says he) innumerable volumes discording one with an
other among theimselues: But there be only two and twentte books which
contain the just order of al times, which also are rightly believed to be
written through the inspiration of GODDE. Of them, five be called the Books
of MOSES, conteinyng Laws of living, the first Creacione of Man, and his
ofspringe until the death of Moses himself. And from that time unto
Artaxerxes, which among the Persians reigned after Xerxes, the Prophets, and
soche as lived at those days have written in thirtene books the acts that
were dooen. The other four teach Hymns, and praises to god wards, precepts
and rules of living. From Artaxerxes until our time all things be written,
which yeat neither are worthy so great credit, nor so to be esteemed as
are the first matiers: Even for this verelie, that the Prophets followed not
still in one course one after other, nor thoroughly be known what they were.

To these words straight ways he adds, which greatly sets forth the
authority of the Scriptures. Hereby therefore it is plain (says he) how
reverently we use our scriptures. For in so many hundred years coming, and
going, never durst any man put to, take away, nor change anything: but into
all men of our nation is this faieth in manner graffed. To believe all these to
be the decrees of GOD, and for ever to abide in them, and for them, (if the
matier so require) gladly to leave their lives

Hitherto be the words of Josephus And I much allow this Judgment of his
touching the books of Divinity: Which Ciprianus, or Ruffinus, (for so
thinks Cassianus in the Seuenthe book of the only begotten) well nighe
following in thexposicion of the Creed, makes soche an order of the holy
books as has seemed always unto me best and plainest. He sets together all the Historical books, then the writings of the prophets, almost in this
wise.

The order of Ciprian, or Ruffinus
First he puts the five books of Moses, next the Prophets called of some
the former Prophets, that is, the book of Iosue, of Judges, of Ruth two of
Samuel, and two of Kings. To these streightwaies he ioigneth the other books
of Histories, two of Paralipomenon, Hester, and two of Esdras. After these he
sets the Prophets, which we call the greater. Esaie, Jeremy, Ezechiel,
and Daniel. To the^ he ioigneth the Books of the twelve lesser, whose names
are rehearsed before Last of al he sets the other excellent Books
replenished with all kind of heavenly doctrine. The book of Job, the
Psalms, and three books of Solomon, and within this nu^bre both certain and
plain he includes all the Canonical Books of the old Testament. Neither
did the Bishop of the most ancient Church of Sardis, nor that excellent
learned man Origenes doctor of the Apostolical Schole at Alexandria, reken up
any more unto Melitus. Of that one Eusebius makes mention in the fowerth book,
and five and twenty chapter Ecclesiasticae Historiae, and of that other in
the sixth book, and eightenth Chapitre. Yet in placing them they use not all
one order, as after the diversity of examplers, and will of the Scriueners you
may find (I doubt not) these holy Books otherwise ordered also: one setting
that before, which an other places behind, moved not somoche by reason as by
will, and pleasure. But a wise reader will not pass greatly hereupon, knowing
that we ought principally to regard not the order, but the matier. Neither
would I my self have stand so long herein, had I not wiste some men so
earnestly to require, and look for soche an exact, and curious handeling of
this matier.

The new Testamente is finished in seven and twenty books. For the
Euangelicalle History is set forth both in four Books, Number, and order
of the books of the new Testament
and by four Writers. The Acts of the Apostles are contained in one Book.
The Epistles of Saint Paul be coumpted fowertene. To the Romans one. To
the Corinthians two. To the Galathianes, Ephesianes, Phillipianes, and
Collossians one a piece. To the Thessalonia^s two: As many to Timothy, one to
Tite, one to Philemon, and one to the Hebrews. After these follow seven
Epistles Canonical. One of James, two of Peter, three of Ihon the Apostle,
and one of Judas. Last is the Apocalypse made, and published by Iho^ the
Apostle. By these books the Canon of the new Testamente to be fully
perfeicte, all the ancient Writers, and the holiest Doctors with one consent
do testify, and agree. Saint Hierome in those his prefaces. Augustine in
his second Book, and eighte Chapitre, De Doctrina christiana. Ciprian also in
thexposicion of the Creed Origene varieth nothing from them, save that he
shows certain Books to be in this Canon, of which some men have
somewhat doubted. As for the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews. I say (says
he) As it has been taught me of mine Elders, that it is Paul's undoubtedly,
and that all our forefathers have so taken it. Thus says Eusebius in the
sixte book the eighteenthe Chapitre De Ecclesiastica Historia: And he also
following Origene writes thus.

To assign, and mark out all the Canon of the new Testamente, first let us
ioigne together the fowersquare heavenly Chariotte of all the Gospelles.
Eusebeus touching the books of the new Testament
Couple to them the Acts of the Apostles, and after, the Epistles of Paul,
which be plainly known to be fowertene had in authority. Yet am I not
ignoraunte the Latins to be in doubt touchi^g the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Then set the first epistle of Iho^, and the first of Peter also. Of these never
was there any doubt at all. There has been of the Apocalypse, of the Epistle
of James, of Jude, of the second of Peter, of the second, and third of Ihon,
whether they were his that was the Euangeliste, or else some others of that
name.

These be the words of Eusebius in his third book, the third, and five,
and twenty Chapiters. But I have proved elsewhere that the authority of holy
scripture is not appaired by the doubting of some, seeing it is not confirmed,
ratified, and established by Depositions, and opiniones of Men, but approved
to be infalliblie true by the most sure Sentence, and approbation of
almighty and everlasting GOD. In the library of the church of Tigurie, there
is in the upper part of the college, a very old and true exampler of the
Bible written by hand, which places first the.vij. Epistles Canonical, even
in the same order that they stand with us. The epistle of James stands
first, Peter next, John after, the^ Jude, and the.xiiij. Epistles of Paul
last, of which, that to the Hebrews stands hindemoste. In that exampler the
Evangelists are set first, the Acts follow next, last after all the Epistles
is set the Apocalypse. And thus much have we spoken, touching the number,
order, and distinction of the books of the most sacred Bible. Now come we to
the arguments and brief expositions of each book severally of either
Testament. Moses.


Moses, as a golden co^duit, and first father, by whom the heavenly doctrine
is translated from Godde to man, comprehending all virtue, and true wisdom in
five books, has taught the same, and whatsoever he has described from the
creacion of the world until his own time, with soche diligence, truth, and
uprightness, that he seems none otherwise to have set it out, then he had
received from above, and by the secret inspiration of the holy ghost. As for
ye law it self, as it was delivered him from god, so did he publishe, and
send it abroad. Whereunto he ioigned the acts of.xl. years, which space
Israel wa^dred in desert, him self being a great part of those things, that
there were dooen, and seen. These books contain the history of two
thousand, five hundred, and seventy years, whereof the Genesis
has.ij.M..iij.c. and.xc. For from Adam to the fludde are M.vi.c.lvi. years
From the fludde unto Abraham's going out of Chaldee. ccc.lxiij. From thence unto
the death of Joseph.cc.xc. In Exodus be the rest of their afflictions, and the
acts of their going out in the first year The other.iii. books make up the
space of xl. years, in which they wandered in desert, and all this put together
makes ij.M.v.c.lxx. years.

Genesis.
The first book declares the beginning and causes of all things, specially
the creation of man, how it was from the beginning, how he fell and was
restored again, how all men came of one, and being dispersed through the world,
by enormeous faults angered God, and caused the fludde to come upon them.
Again, how they that were saved in the same, gave the beginning to all
kingdoms: last, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob holy Prophets, which lived
before the law written in tables, the lives, conditions, manners, religion,
notable deeds and sayings be discribed, and how they descended out of the
land of Chanaan into Egypt, For these and other good men, this first book of
Moses was called of some, The book of just men. Yet with us and our elders
has their naming prevailed, which called it Genesis, doubtless of the
generation and beginning of al things, at which Moses begins his book.

The second book declares how the Israelites oppressed in Egypt by Pharao,
Exodus
and delivered by their capitain Moses, were led into desert through the red sea, how they fought against the Amalechites, and were fed with bread
that rained down from heaven, how at the commandment of God they did create
a Magistrate, and at the last received laws also, describyng, setting out, and
commaundyng true religion, holy manners, rites, ceremonies, and finally al due
and good order in the common wealth. Here also is touched a little their
shameful offense, that they did in worshippyng the golden calfe. And of their
coming out of Egipte, whereof it principally treats, this book is called
Exodus.

Leuiticus.
Unto this ioigneth Leuiticus, so called of the Leuitical ministeries, which it
teaches. It shows sundry kinds of sacrifices, vows, pollucions,
infections, general cle^syng of sins, lawful and unlawful marriages, and like
other. It speaks a little of civil Governance, but specially of holy
rites, or customs, and, as we might say, the bishops or canon laws. Here
may we see how virtuous and learned priests ought to be. All the mysteries of
the gospel, the priesthode and sacrifice of Christ, his virtue and power, yea,
and our whole rede^ptio^ covertly wrapped in figures, is here thoroughly
contained.

The fourth book is called Numeri peradventure of this, Numeri.
that in it the people of Israel are nu^bred. It declares the acts from the
second year of their going out of Egypt, eue^ unto the death of Moses. In it be
many notable examples of sondrie co^mocions, and rufflinges among rebellious
people. There is showed what evil end sedicious persons come unto, and what
marvelous chances happen to the rulers them selves.

Moses of all men most constant and pacient suffered intolerable things
dooen to him, both by his own people, and other foreins to, and yet he him
self is not fautlesse neither. Many things are in this book, which perteine
to religion, and civil governance, specially this: That bishops ought not
to fly from intermedlyng with matiers of the common weal, nor a civil officer
to pass little upon religion. Almost at the end be described great battles,
and certain laws are declared at large in the great plain of Moab.

The fifth and last book is called Deuteronomium, Deuterono.
or second law, and as you would say, The law expouned now the second
time. This is added of Moses unto the other before, as a brief of all heavenly
Philosophy. In it is contained all that ever serves to live well and
virtuously. The briefness thereof is much commended and set by, and is a
plain commentary of the ten commandments. This Book the Lord would have
still in the hands of his people, wherein he has so ordered all matiers, as to
all degrees and ages they may be most mete and convenient. Iosue.


The book of Iosue declares principally the truth of Gods promise: How
after the death of Moses the people of Israel by the leadyng of Iosue (of whom
the book has his name, as of the chief person) were brought into the land
of promise, the princes and people of the Cananites vainquished and destroyed,
in punishment for their great sins. It has a goodly description of the
holy Land, and shows unto us an example of a very good Prince, and
obedient people. It contains ye history of.xxvi. years, or therabout. Judges.


The Book of Judges takes his name of the Judges of Israel, whose acts and
governance it declares. And countyng Iosue him self, there were among the
people thirtene Judges, not as Kings, and Monarchs, but pastors,
presidentes, and consuls of free people. Here is set out a fre state with many
chaunges, victories, slaughters, Oppressions, Deliueries, judgments, and
commocions. Also the mutabilitie of the commons always ready to the worst,
diverse heavy chau^ces, the fight betwixt religion, and supersticion is here
declared. It is a mirror of that weal public where is no head officer, but
every man follows what likes him best, and it shows what evil end that to
much liberty comes unto. The^ ensues civil battle, and destruction within
them selves. The history is of.cccxxxvi. years, accountyng hereunto the time
of Iosue, and.xxiiij. years out of the ministration of Helie.

Ruthe.
The little book of Ruth took the name of the chief person. It treats of no
high matier, but shows how after hard happes, and grievous temptations comes
a merry end: and that virtue is rewarded, if we continue still in goodness,
and refuse not honest labor. It has a rehearsal of David's, or rather of
Messiah kindred very profitable for that that follows, and the understanding of
the promise of God. This history pertains to the times of the Judges.

After this follow.ij. books of Samuel, Samuel and Kings.
and.ii. books of kings, a work of many and sondrie matiers, very
profitable, and full of learning. By most notable examples in them, be
declared and confirmed the laws, and promises of GOD. Out of them also are
made the Psalms, and homelies of the Prophets. To be short, among the best,
goodliest, cunningest, and most necessary books of the Scripture these be
not the last. The book of Judges shows a state of governance, where the
people, or rather the chief among them do bear rule. The History of
Samuel, and of the Kings sets out in his colors a Monarchy, or one high
governor, describing not only what a King is, but the facions also of al his
Court, and Kingdom, be it good, or eiuell. Here may you find how laws be
changed, religion kept, or neglected, notable examples also of Virtue, and
vice, of truth, falshod, prudence, justice of princes, and priests, both
good, and badde. But who is hable in few words to comprehe^de the great
variety, and profit of matiers in these books? The first chiefly describes
the governance of Samuel, and Saul: The second of David: the third painteth
out the glory of Solomon, and how mighty kingdoms decaie except they be
maintained by fervent love of Godliness, religion, virtue, and concord: So in
the latter part is showed how the Kings of the Israelites, and Jews,
wounded, and killed each other, how to their great cost, and charge theie
hiered the Egiptianes, and Assyrians to aid them, and thereby gave occasion
to invade the Kingdom of Israel, as it is declared in the fowerth book: Where
also you may see, a little before their captivity, how great misery they
were in under Ieconias, in the year after the making of the world, three
thousand, four hundred and thirty. For the History of Samuel comprehends
an hundred, even the twenty latter years of Heli. Fowertie of Samuel, and
Saul, as it is in the Acts: and fowertie of David. The two books of the
Kings unto the Captivity have four hundred twenty and six years, and six
Months. To which, if you put the years of the History of Moses, and
Judges, you shall find three thousand four hundred, and thirty years. Add
hereunto the seventy of the Captivity in Babilone, and you shall have from the
twenty of HELI, four hundred ninety, and three years, and six months. But
into the number of seventy years you must put the little book of Hester.

It seems, Hester.
those things written of her to have been dooen under Astiages, unto whom the
myghtie Monarche Euilmerodach, son to the most victorious Nabuchodonozer,
peradue^ter had given rule upon those people, whom the first chap. of Hester
speaks of. The same man (as far as we can guess by the ninthe of Daniel) by
likelihod was called Assuerus, a word of Regal dignity, his proper name
being Astiages, even the very same that by the mothers side was graundfather to
Darius, not Darius the son of Histaspis, but of that ancient Median surnamed
of Zenophon Cyaparis, which carried away Daniel with him into Medea, eue^ the^
also possessing.ii.c.xx. great Lordships. For.vii which his father Assuerus,
(as it is said in the first Chapter of Hester) possessed were come unto the
Persians, unto whom at the last ye remnaunt also, were subject after the death
of Darius the Mede, whose Daughter Cyrus had married, being Victour, Lord,
and King of Babylon, Mede, and Persia. But howsoever it be, in this book is
described the courtly life, foolish, mad, and pernicious. There all things
are gaie, and gallaunt, men live at pleasure, and by riotous excess lose al
they have. Many heavy chances, great pensifenesse, peril, and heinous
treason is there also, The proud, and rebellious queen Vasthi, is compared
with the lowelie, and obedient Hester. Aman is a pattern of an ambicious,
unjust, and cruel tiraunte, from base, and low degree enhaunsed into the top
of high dignity, and forthwith cast down headlong, ending his life on the
gallows, an example to us of unstable fortune, and what they shall come to,
that give cruel counsel. But Mardocheus represents a virtuous lord standing
on a sure ground. through his wisdom saving himself, and his people, and by
his prudente counsel doing much good to other foreine Princes. As the little
Volume of Ruth, so this also takes his name of the chief person.

Now follow the Books, which Esdras
declare what happened to the people of GOD after their deliverance. Esdras even
at the first preaches the truth of Gods promise. In captivity they cry
to the Lord, and be heard. Seventy years expired, by favor of king Cyrus,
they return into Iewrie, with Gold, and rich gifts to be put in the Temple
being made up again. They set up an altar, and have them to building, but the
work was let two and fowertie years. At last under Darius the yo^ger the
Temple was finished. Then came Esdras, renewed the Laws, corrected the faults
of the people, and prelates.

After him came Nehemias, Nehemias
and walled the City, eased the people from hard Exactions, burdennes, and
vsuries, by wit, and Wisdom help the Citizeines, and amended that was
amiss. The Souldioures of Antichriste, and their Crafts, whereby the
buildinge might not go forwards, is here plainly set out, and how ware men
should be to overcome thenemies of the people of GOD. This History contains
three score and ten years. From the first of Cyrus unto the twenty of Darius
are coumpted eight and fifty years. From thence unto the two and thirty
are.xij in which the walls were made up.

There remains the Chronicles, which the Greeks, and Latins divide into two
books called Paralipomenon. Chronicles
For some things passed over in the former History of the Kings be here
rehearsed, and spoken of more largely. Yet sure it is yt these be not the
Chronicles of Judah, and Israel, which many times be mentioned in the Books
of Kings. Doubtless those were most copious commentaries of the acts of the
kings of Judah, and Israel, now being lost through wastful time. Some think
these to be a brief of this excellent history, namely of the Kings of Judah.
They profit most to the exposition of the Prophets. Thus hitherto have we
rehearsed all the books of the divine history, which from the beginning of
the world, unto the building up again of the City of Jerusalem, that is to
the two and thirty year of Darius, is three. M. iiii. C. lxxxviij. years, and
vi. months. So many shall he find, whosoever will diligently read over the
holy History: for we made this accoumpte by the years of the Patriarchs,
judges, Dukes and Kings. Neither makes it any matier that Josephus, Eusebius,
and many other follow an other accoumpt. We have followed the holy writers, yea
and the truth it self. Now to the other books of holy Scripture.

Job teaches to bear patiently the cross of adversity, Job
and that not by triflyng precepts of Philosophy, but by wonderful
consideration of Gods providence. First of al is the history it self: how
there was a certain good, and just man brought to great adversity, and what
should be the merueilous meaning of God in this case. After the matter is
discussed by a great disputation: last of all follows the croune, and triumph
of the victour. And in this book is showed more sincere philosophy, then in all
the books yt ever all the philosophers wrote, of the which none has tought any
thing purely in this matier. The Epicures call us from the cross to
delectacion, and pleasure. The Peripatetiques count sickness, poverty,
reproach, and disworshippe among the greatest eiuilles that can be. Certain
Stoiqnes do counsel men that be in dau^gier either to break their own
necks, either to hang, or kill them selves, or by some other violente death to
shift from their peine And other teach other things more foolish.

The book of Psalms is an heavenly work, Psalms.
treating diverse matiers, and is both profitable, and pleasant. It pleased
God (which touched briefly al Sciences) to speak a little of Music also, and
handle it purely, if perchance thereby men might be driven from unclean, and
wanton songs. So whatsoever cunning, and holy so^ges David and of his nation
other wisemen, Poets, and prestes have written of diverse matiers at diverse
times, all those would the most holy God show to the world at ones, in this
book. The psalms contain the praises of god, and godliness: many exaumples
also of calling upon him, of praiyng, complaining, thanks giving, and earneste
repenting.

Other books there be written of deeds and sayings both good and badde, and
of sundry duties that men should do. But in this you may learn all facions
of all kinds of life, and how the servants of God ought to behave them
selves, whatsoever chau^ceth unto the^. This word Psalm signifies a song,
and this title, The book of Psalms, is to say, The books of songs.

Touching Solomon, Solomon.
thou read in the third book of kings, and fourth chapter. Solomon
spoke.iii.M. Proverbs, and his songs were. M.v. But all those we have not. He
had in his court to his familiars holy and learned men, which through the
providence of God gathered of al things the best, and asmoche as was mete for
us, and have written the same in.iij. books.

The first is called Proverbs, Proverbs.
or se^tences, short in deed, but witty and sweet, seruyng generally to many
things, and many men. In these he shows good and evil, truth, and fashode,
what is to be desired, and what to be eschued, addyng here and there diverse
godly exhortatio^s. Some among the Grecians have defined a Proverb to be a
brief dark saying profitable to man's life: or worthy to be marked for some
propre novelty therein, as says Erasmus.

Ecclesiastes.
The second book is called Ecclesiastes Ecclesia is a Greek word, and
signifies people called out to hear matiers of the common wealth.
Ecclesiastes is he that speaks, or reasons openly before them. So in this
book is imagined a great multitude of people to stand together contendyng
among the^ selves of the Highest good thing, and Solomon the preacher to come
forth, and condemn all their sentences, saying. Vanity of vanities, and all
things vanity. For in the first part of the Book he entreats that famous
question, Summum bonum.
What is that highest good thing, which in deed is, to be ioigned with God,
and to have the fruition of him for ever. Wherefore he replieth against them
which say, it is in knowledge of many things, in pleasure, in glory, in
excellency, or richesse. Where also he shows how these things may be well
used. In the later chapiters he teaches how we may judge of good and evil, of
things to be desired and eschued, and that by soche sentences, as he had
before in the Proverbs.

The third is the book of Canticles, Canticles.
which is altogether allegorical. For in figurative speech it teaches, what,
and how good a thing it is to becoupled with God, the highest good thing. god
is imagined to be the husband, and the faiethfull soulle the spouse. Much
rehearsal is of love, embracing, kissyng well fauorednesse, and beaultie. Whereby
is drawn out the nature, pleasure, and strength of love, and ioignyng together
with God, For it pleased his goodness thus pretely to talk, and attemper him
self to our affection, seeing to man nothing is more sweet, nor of greater
strength then Love. Let no man therefore conceive with him self any foul,
wanton, or filthy thing. All that is here, is holy, chaste, and honest. It is
called The song of songs. and as you would say, the most excellent Song,
for that is the signification and strength of the Hebrews doubling. So they
say. The holy of Holiest, that is, the holiest of all.

Prophets.
Now follow the books, oracions, sermons, Homelies, or declarations of the
Prophets. These were divine Poets and orators, holy preachers, priests,
chosen men, masters of living, and virtuous manners, eue^ soche as in holiness
of life, in feruentnesse of spirit, in constaunce of mind, finally in most
Godly and effectuous eloquence, were above all other most excellent and
marvelous. And in that time or middle age, many to have flourished, it is
plain, among whom were Samuel, Helias, Nathan, Heliseus, Micheas the son of
Iemla, whose sermons we have not wholly, but so far forth as their sayings
and doings are described in the holy history: yet as much as is necessary,
and enoughe for us, we have received, as it were by hand from one to another:
that is.xvi. orations, of those that were most excellent. All they direct all
their sayings, and doings to the common mark of the Bible. Partly they
write histories, partly oratio^s. Ente^te of the Prophets
In histories they show examples of living, faith, and virtue, of the might of
God, his truth and goodness. In their orations they teach what is the
nature, and disposition of God, what his will is, what things he is pleased
withal, how we should serve him in faieth, verity, justice, holiness, and
charity. They exhort, dehorte, and coumfort. They grievously rebuke sin,
especially breaking of leagues, idolatry, falshode, murder, perjury, guile,
deceit, usury, oppression, injury, fornication, riot, adultery, and soche
other enormities. They call us by all means to repentance. They set before us
the promises, and benefits of God, they threaten his anger, and grievous
punishment: Again of Christ the sede of Abraham, very God, and man, of his
blessings, redemption, justification, kingdom, and all the mystery thereof,
of the calling also of the Gentiles, puttyng away of the Jews, holiness and
glory of the Church, they talk and commune so plainly, that a man would
think they wrote an Euangelical history of things that were past, and not of
things to come. And this is the common intent of all these holy prophets, of
whose books severally I will now speak a little.

Esaie.
Esaie, one brought up in the liberal sciences did prophecy at the least.lxx.
years. For he flourished under Osea, Iothan, Achas, Ezechia, and Manasses.
Howbeit though we take nothing of the kingdom of Osea, and Manasses, the
Empire of the other kings lasted lxi. years. In the.v. first chapters, he
blames the corrupt state of his time, calling them to repentance. Then
tells he a Vision that was showed unto him in the time of Iotha^: After that
he sets the Orations, which he made in the time of Achas. He shows also
to other foreign nations, what should happen to them. Moreover he diligently
describes the notable battle of the Assyrians, a very great battle, and
wonderful in deed: and what sermons he made before the king, and the people,
or ever this battle began. And from the.xl. Chapter, he prophecieth
deliverance by king Cyrus, from the captivity of Babylon, comfortyng the
people of God in their affliction, defending always true religion, and
improuyng false. At the last from the.xlix. chapter unto the end of the book,
he prophecieth of Christ and the church so plainly, yt Hierome thought him
rather to be called an Evangelist then a Prophet.

For (says he) so evidently does he set out all the mysteries of Christ
and the church, that a man would think him to prophecy not of things to
come, but to write an history of things paste. The same Hierome in ye preface
of his first book upon the commentaries of Esai says thus: Let no man think
that I can briefly prehende the argument of this volume, touching all the
holy mysteries of the Lord, as well how Emanuel borne of a Virgin did noble
works and miracles, as that being dead and buried, he rose again to save all
nations of the world. What should I speak of his Logike, or of his
Philosophy natural, and moral. What soever is of holy Scripture, what soever
the tongue of man is hable to utter, and wit to comprehend, in this book it
is included. These be the words of. S. Hierome.

Jeremy.
The Prophet Jeremy in his writing is not so fair and pleasant, as Esaie,
but more homely, and nere the capacity of the common people, yet in sentence
as good. He was borne in a little street called Anathoi.iii. miles from the
City, him self a Priest, and of the kindred of priests, and sanctified in his
mothers womb. He prophecieth being yet a very young man, and as he says him
self, he began in the.xiii. year of Josias, and ceased not by the space of.xl.
years, after the city was destroyed. Yea, for his plain preaching, and free
mouth, he was stoned to death, and so gave up his spirit to the Lord. He
rebuked the sins used in his time, idolatry, falsehode, covetousness,
fraud, cruelty, and riote. He moved them to repentance, and amendment. He
taught diligently faieth in God, and showed them how to live. He spoke also
of their captivity, and comforted the sorry, showing aforehande the
destruction that should come to the nations borderers. He wrote also a
lamentation, wherein he bewaileth the overthrow of that noble city, and royal
kingdom. Yeat in that kind of writing appear merueilous tokens of the
justice, and goodness of God. Ezechiel


Ezechiel, he also coming of Priests was taken prisoner with Ieconias, and
carried into Babylon: Where he taught the same things that holy Jeremy did in
Judea. Every where, after the office of a prophet, he puts in his writings
common places of Christ. He also prophecieth against Tire, and other nations,
threatening unto them the judgment, and just punishment of God. He stands
much in declaring the building up again of the temple, and new city:
Doubtless propouning unto us the Mysteries of ye church wrapped up in
couerture.

Daniel being yeat but a very young man was led away into Babylon with
Ieconias. Daniel
This man described unto us very elega^tly certain profitable, and goodly
histories of his time, the fight of true and false wisdom, of religion also,
and supersticio^. He lived until the time of Cyrus King of Persia, being
then.lxxx. years old. He was a man of so great wisdom, that of him rose this
Proverb, Wiser then Daniel. which Ezechiel used in his.xxviij. Chapter. Of
al wisemen he was called Polyhistor, that is, one that knew many things. For
like as he rehearses up the fatal chances of all kingdoms, so in a brief
history or prophecy rather in few words he comprehends, and finisheth
that, which the co^ning, and curious writers of the Gentiles could not tell
in many books how to begin. Only he opens unto us truly the matiers of
the Babylonians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romans, and declares of Christ
the everlasting kingdom. How Antichriste also shall rise up, what mischief he
shall work before at last he be destroyed. He shows the destruction both of
the City, and of the whole world, the day of judgment, the rising again of
the bodies, and life everlasting.

The lesser prophets
After follow the.xij. prophets, whom we call the lesser, not for the smalnesse
of the matier, work, or learning, but for their brevity, and because in
gretnesse, length, and copy they be unlike to the other.iiii. whom they call
the greater.

Oseas stands first, sine of wit, Oseas.
and utterance, but somewhat brief, and therefore obscure. He prophecieth most
against the ten Tribes, or Kingdom of Israel. Sometime he touches a little
the Tribe of Judah. He rebukes the faults of the priests, princes, and people
sin, and Idolatry, upholding religion and goodness. He warns them to
repent, least they all perish, and shows that all nations shall be called.

Joel seems to have prophesied in the time of Ezechias, he, and Esaie
together, Joel
after the destruction of the ten tribes He moves the kingdom of Judah to
repentance. He sets out the horrible day of the Lord, and their misery
to come, which yeat might be avoided by amending their lives. Yeat after he
says it shall be better with them, and shows the signs of love in ye
church, of which Peter is an interpreter in chactes

Amos neither a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, not brought up in any
the liberal sciences, Amos
was but a rude homely unlearned man: yet in few, and sharp words, he preached
to the ten tribes still calling upon repentance, as the other Prophets did.
And against the nations that were borderers, he spoke very gravely touching
their sins, and the just punishment of GOD. He was sore grieved against the
religious of the Ieroboams, and the wanton living of the priests. He
prophesied also of the calling of the Gentiles. He lived, and taught, when the
younger Jeroboam reigned in Israel, and King Osias in Judah, or Jerusalem.

Abdias reasons against Idumea in the time of Achas King of Israel: Abdias.
and though he be the shortest of all the prophets, yeat does he
comprehend in a sum all the chief points of true religion: namely, that god
is to be worshipped, and that in love, and charity, dooyng to our brother no
wrong at all. For the lord will revenge it. He declares salvation to be in
Sion, even in Christ and his faithful church. He tells the Idumeans
aforehande that they should be destroyed, with the causes why: and that
nothing may deliver them from the harms hanging over their heddes.

Jonas bears the figure of Christ diyng, and rising again. Jonas
Whereof the lord himself makes mencio^ in Math. He has set out in a pure, and
fine History the propretie, nature, and disposicion of god, how mighty, how
good, and just he is being god of the gentiles also, how vain the counsels of
men be, which are taken against the lord, what true repentance is, how weak
man is, and that the proud flesh, reasone, and devise of man would keep her
estimation and be highly set by, yea, though it were to the great hurt of other.
He lived under Jeroboam king of Israel, being both a prophet, and an Apostle
of the Gentiles. Yet prophesied he to his own nation also, as it is written in
the fowerth book of Kings

Micheas seems to have been the follower of Esaie: Micheas.
verily they lived both at one time, and had both al one supporter even
Ezechias a right verteous king. He cried out principally against the.ij.
tribes, and then against the.x. He thretneth unto them utter destruction for
their sins, and calls them to repentance. He inueieth against false
prophets. He prophecieth of redemption by Christ, of his kingdom, and of the
calling of the Gentiles. He teaches evidently that Salvation comes through
Christ to them that believe. and that the right worshipping of God is true
virtue

Nahum
Nahum also flourished under Ezechias, and taught after Jonas. He preached
against the Kingdom of the Assirians, and against Niniue their chief City.
He makes as though letters of defiance had been written by God, and sent unto
the Assirians, wherein War is proclaimed, and that it is showed, who, and how
mighty a God thenemy of the Ninevites is, and for what causes he purposed to
destroy that great city, and most ancient kingdom, and he sets out the
manner and facion how he would destroy it. By which things he shows a
merueilous but a fearful example, unto al ancient, mighty, bloody kingdoms,
and again a great coumfort unto those which are oppressed by tyranny.

It is likely that Abacuk was in the time of Manasses, Abacuck
after Niniue was taken, and about the beginning of the monarchy of Babylon.
But under this civil and ungracious King all true religion was quite gone,
mischief, and supersticion bare the brag. Many were slain: innocent blood was
shead, all goodness was banished. Some thought that god was fast in sleep,
wherefore good men were not pleased, but spoke somewhat sharply. The^ came
forth this prophet to comfort the sorry, discourage the tyrant, and lift up
the weak: declaring that God would come shortly to revenge good men's
quereles by power of the Chaldees, which waxing proud beyond measure should
be also destroyed, and the Jews sent home again: And that then in deed
should be performed which was spoken, touching the coming of Messiah, under
whom should be the golden world.

Sophonias prophesied under Josias, Sophonias
he, and Jeremy together. After the king by due reformation had set up true
religion again, there were not a few among the heddes, and the people which
deliting rather in supersticion, looked and longed for a new day, and to se
religion overthrown, and clean put away. Wherefore he blames their
wickedness, and moves them to repentance, showing aforehande that they should
be punished by the Babilonia^s, and that yet he neither had so great cause to
be proud, seeing at length there should come much sorrow, and mischief to him
also. In the end he says that Sion should be made up again, and prophecieth
the coming of Christ.

Hagge
Haggeus under Darius Histaspis, blames the unthankfulness of the people
sent home again, and their sluggishnes in building up the temple. He bids
the^ have forwards the work, and not to leave of, for fear of any enemies.
In the^de he prophecieth plainly of Christ, and the Church

Zachary flourished with Hagge, and entreated of all one matier, Zachary.
exhorting the people, and specially the rulers to build up the temple. This
man saw the peculiar destenies of the people of Israel, and writes many
things, as Daniel does. He bids them live verteouslie, writing many
plain Prophecies of Christ, and his Church, wherein he is marvelous
gospellike. He speaks also of the times which followed after Christ's
ascension.

Malachie last of all, Malachie.
whether he be the same zacharias, or Esdras (as Hierome thinks) or any other
excellent writer, chideth the priests bitterly, rebukyng their insatiable
covetousness, slougthfull lechery, and filthiness. He blames also the
people, and certain light persons, which murmured against God. Last of all, he
speaks somewhat of Christ's time, and the day of judgment, in which every
man shall be rewarded after his studies and works. This Prophet also seems
to have taught under Darius.

Howbeit from the.xxxii. A supputatio^ of times until the coming of Christ.
year of Darius, which fill in the third year of the lxxii. Olympiade, we have
nothing of ancient, and Canonical Scripture, until Christ's time: save those
things which the Prophet Daniel with zachary have darkly spoken of: how
the Empire should be translated from the Persia^s unto the Macedons: and again
from them unto that foul beast Rome, Rome.
the destroier of many kingdoms, and to the Princes of the same, under who^
should be borne the Lord Christ, to make satisfaction for the sins of the
world, to bring everlasting righteousness, and ioignyng the Gentiles unto
him, would forsake the Nation of the Jews, their temple and city utterly
destroyed by the Romans. And the Prophet making an account of these
wonderful things to come, Daniel.ix.
says: Number from after the buildyng up again of the city, or the.xxxii.
year of Darius.lxix. seuens, which make.cccc.lxxxiii. years. For.lxix.
multiplied by the number of seven, amounts to so many, and thou shall have
the time of Christ's incarnacion. With this account agree also the Olympiades
of the Gentiles. One Olympias makes.iiij. years. So the xxxij. year of
Darius fell in the third year of the.lxxij. Olympias. And the xlij. year of
Octauius Augustus, in the which Christ was borne, was in the third year of
the.cxciiii. Olympias. Now if ye take away from.cxciiij the other.lxxij. years,
there shall remain rxxij. Olympiades, which if you will multiply by the
nu^bre of.iiij. you shall have.cccclxxxviij. years, which is ye time of.lxix.
seue^s, only.v. years over. For I said.lxix. seuens did make.cccc.lxxxiij.
years. But this little nu^bre of.v. does not darke^ so great light. Thus we
have in our Bibles a sure and continual history from the beginning of the
world unto Christ. Nota.
And doubtless the wisdom of God would have given unto his church more
writers, had not these few notes of Daniel been thought sufficient. And what
auayled to rehearse the Acts of those times, being in deed both troublous and
naught. Those things which Josephus in his books De Antiquitatibus, has
added to the Bible, do profit the readers nothing at al. For ye most part be
of ye deceites, lies, falshode, murders, shameful deeds and sayings of the
Iewyshe bishops, and of Herod which in all kind of mischief bare the bell.
Wherefore by the very provision of god, thactes of yt most corrupt and
abominable time, seem not to have been thoroughly written, but only touched
briefly of Daniel, and zachary. For so was it necessary and profitable to us
Thus much have we spoken touching the Canonical Books of the old testament,
peradventure somewhat largely, but not without profit. We will to these
ioigne the matiers of the books of the new testament.

Euangel.
Among the writers thereof, the Evangelists be first: those be that write the
history of the Gospel. Euangel is a new word of this signification given to
a new thing. For the old writers called Euangelies rewards that were given to
men that brought good tidings. Cicero writing to his friend Atticus, says:
O sweet letters, for the which I confess my self bound to give an Euangel.
But we use it not for the reward, but for the glad tidings it self: even
that from the father of heaven is given unto us a soonne, and with him all joy
and gladness. For the Angel of the lord in Luke cries out unto the
shepeherdes. Fear not, for lo, I show unto you great joy, which shall come
unto all the people, because now is borne unto you a Savior, which is Christ
Jesus. Thus the Euangel shows unto us joy and quietness of mind, which
comes by this, that God has sent his Soonne a redemption of the world.
Wherefore Paul defined the Gospel: The power of God, Romans i.
for salvation to all beleuers, through his son Jesus Christ our Lord. So
they that set out this matier of justification, that Christ has taught
faieth, repentance, and redeemed the world from the devil, and al iniquity,
be called Evangelists, Evangelists
of which we have but four, yet the name it self may be extended to many.

Of them the two first, Matthew.
Matthew and John, be witnesses of that which they saw and heard. For those
things that they saw, they show, and were a great part of the matier them
selves, chosen of the Lord Jesus into the college of the Apostles. Mathewe
wrote first (as some think) in the ninth year after the Lords ascension. He
shows in goodly order the stock and birthe of our savior Christ, and what
was dooen before he showed out him self, and took upon him his office of
preaching openly, and then what Disciples he chose, what kind of teaching he
used, how great miracles he wrote, what benefits he did to the people openly
and privately, how he used his adversaries how his friends, how he handled
the weak, and how the obstinate sinners. He shows his excellent virtues, his
example of good living, and high authority. Last of all, how by his disciple
he was betrayed to the Jews, delivered to the Gentiles, most cruelly
handled, and at length also nailed upon the cross, was dead and buried, rose
again the third day, showed him self alive to his friends, and after
ascended into heaven, sendyng his Apostles abroad into the whole world, to
preach salvation throughthe death of Christ, to all that would believe, and
give them selves wholly to God.

John.
John is thought late at the last to have written, and put forth his history
of the word incarnate. Doubtless he had seen those things yt Matthew had
written, wherefore he thought as it were to make up the matier, specially in the
doctine of Christ, for soche things as Matthew seemed either to have passed
over, or lightly touched. Therefore these two histories ioigned together, we
have a very full and perfect declaration of all the deeds and sayings of
Christ.

They say that Mark was the disciple of.s. Peter the Apostle. Mark.
But whatsoever he was, in deed he showed him self very well learned, trusty,
and dilligent. For he knitteth the gospel together very briefly, and
clarkelie, showing unto us, as it were an abridgeme^t, of the Euangelical
history. Some say he wrote the gospel, as he had received it of Peter. But it
is uncertain what time he put it forth abroad.

Luke was not an Apostle, Luke.
but a disciple of ye Apostles, and one always in their company, specially
in Paul's. This man wrote.ij. books of the euangelical history. In the first
he co^prehendeth the sayings and doings of Christ, as did also Matthew and
Mark.

In the latter he shows how and in what place Christ went out of the world
and in what wise the holy spirit promised did come from heaven: Acts of the
Apostica
how ye church first began increased, and grew to the best: what was ye
doctrine of thapostles rites, or holy customs, religion and faith: who were
false Prophets, who true, what were the natures, devises, and conditions of
them both: What was the study of the world, and minds of persecutours, what
c^au^ces did follow them, and how the Gospel was received. Many things be
written of the Sermons and deeds of Peter, and other Apostles, of the preaching
of Paul also, and his iourneies. Therefore this Book is called the Acts of
the Apostles. And all this History of them and the Gospel contains about lx.
A suppucatio^ of the times of the new Testament
years. For Christ seemed to be about xxxiij. year old, when Tiberius had
reigned.xviij. year. Paul in the.ij. year of Nero came to Rome bound, and was
two year prisoner at large. Until this time did Lucas write his history, and
living lxxxiiij years, died in the peace of God buried at Bithynia.

The history of the Gospels, and Apostles perfect.
Now where some have made mention of the Gospel of Nicodemus, Thomas,
Bartolomew, and certain others, I wot not who, surely it nothing pertains
to the perfection of the Canonical books. For John him self testifies: Those
things which he has written to suffice for the faith that may sane us.
whereof speaks also the holy father Ciril. Not althinges (says he) be written
that the Lord has done: but that which the writers thought to be sufficient,
as well for opinions, as for manner of living, that we shinyng in true faith,
works, and virtue, may come to the Kingdom of heaven, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

So when it was perceived that al was written which perteined to godliness, it
was thought neither necessary, nor worthy the labor, either to put to any
more, or to make any thing of new. And if they had, they could not have done
any other the^ was set out alredie. This is evident in this that we have. How
little difference (I prai you) is in the three first? perchance the old Fathers
willed of one matier four writers to remain.ij. apostles, and.ij. their
disciples, that when al was dooen, it might be seen any larger instruction
herein, or contrary to this, nothing to avail, no not if there should rise up
an hundred Writers, sens these that we have agree, al in one, and those that
should follow could write but the same. And to what purpose were it, in
infinite volumes to entreat all one thing declared by four witnesses
sufficient before? For the same entente also it seems that Luke wrote not all the Acts of all the apostles, sins the rest followed none other ways, neither
in doctrine, nor in living: And that by thactes of one, or two, the residue
may be judged. Be it therefore ascribed to prudence, and not counted lack,
or imperfeictnesse, that the History of the Gospel, and Apostles goes
hitherto, and no farther.

Now follow the Epistles written unto diverse Congregations touching faith in
Christ, Thentent of the Epistles
true repentance, and innocence of life, which in deed is the commune
mark, and intent of them all. The occasions of them be diverse, and so is
the Argument, or matier. The first in order, and most excellent of all, is
the Epistle written to the Romans, To the Romans.
in which he so describes, and sets out the Gospelle, as he preached it to
the Jews, and Gentiles. He disputes of Sin, and proves al men to be
sinners. Sin.
After he reasons of Justice or goodness, Justice, or goodness
and shows that only through the grace of Christ by faith, and not by any
works, or merits, the beleuers to be justified. Grace, and faith.
Then he declares the effect of Grace, and faith, teaching the justified to
lead a penitente life, to keep theimselues from sin, to live holilie, Good
living
and sobrelie. He disputes of the law, and strength thereof, of the Nature,
Law, and strength thereof.
and fight of man new borne again, of the calling of the Gentiles, the
refusing, and restoring the Jews, at last he enfourmeth, and facioneth our
manners with many good, and wholesome precepts.

In the first to the Corinthians he entreats of diverse matiers principally
correcting the faults of that Congregation. The first to the Corinthians
He reasons against secular Philosophy, for the simplicity of the Gospelle.
He disputes of the ministry of the word, and of the fruicte, and glory
thereof, which ought to be referred to God alone. He rebukes the shameful
riotte, and lechery of the Corinthianes, speaks also of Marriage, Bigamie,
and virginity, willing them to avoid their strange facions in holy rites,
and service of God, the true christian use thereof to be kept, and restored
again, he speaks of diverse gifts of grace in the church, of concord,
charity, toungues, use of prophecy, resurrection of the deadde, and many
other profitable things.

The second to the Corinthians
The second Epistle is in manner of a defense, or answer to certain rebukes. In
this he lays the law, and the Gospel together. He shows with what pureness,
and great peril he preached the Gospel, and how well things came to pass He
speaks also of the almose to the poor. Last, he lays many matiers of his
own, to defend his authority against false Prophets.

To the Galathians
The Epistle to the Galathians, is in manner a Breuiarie of that to the Romans.
He disputes of Iustificatione by faith in Christ, against the Justification
by the law, and works. He facioneth also the life of them that be justified
by faith. In the beginning he speaks much of his vocation, and authority of
his apostleship, which the enemies of grace would have had utterly to be
disanulled.

Thepistle to the Ephesians is a brief but a notable exampler, To the Ephesians
how he preached the Gospel to the Gentiles. He teaches the beleuers to be
justified by grace only through faith, al full perfectness to be in Christ,
and through him the gentiles also to be brought into the favor of God. After
be diverse exhortacions to good living.

He warns the Philippianes by a short Epistle sent from the city, To the
Phillippiens
not to be offended with his imprisonment, but to go forwards in the truth,
that they had received, He desires the^ to be al of one mind, and to beware
of false Apostles: chopping merits, and the law together with the Gospelle. In
the end he gives Lessons of virtue, an he does many times before.

The Epistle to the Collossians is a breuiate of that to the Ephesians. To the
Colossians
It treats of all one matier more briefly In this he rebukes sharply the
false Apostles mingling Iewishnesse with the Gospel.

The first to the Thessaloniens
In the first to the Thessalonianes he praises their faith and constance,
encouraging the^ to continue in the same, to live a pure, and a Christian life,
and not bewail the deadde with soche out cries, and howling, as the Gentiles
do where also he reasons of the Resurrectione, and day of Judgment, of
watching, and holiness of the christians.

The second to the Thessalonians.
In the latter he paincteth out Antichriste, and his Kingdom, and wills that
the dranes those idle beasts should eat no honey.

The first to Timothy
In the first Epistle to Timothy, he sets before us a very perfeicte
exampler of an Euangelical Bishop. He disputes of true, and false Doctrine: of
the living, manners, and household of a Bishop, of his study, and care for
Ecclesiastical matiers, of avoiding unprofitable questions, of wrangling, and
intricate bonds of covetousness.

The second to Timothy
In the second he commits to his charge the defense of sound Doctrine, he
remembers him of his duty, and not to be discouraged for any adversity: he
prophecieth of the departing away from the faieth in the latter days.

In the Epistle to Tite he repeateth in manner the self same things more
briefly. To Tite.
He shows what men should be made bishops, teaching both young and old
their duties. He speaks much of the mystery of Iustificacion by faith and
commands to fly Sophisticalle questions, and incurable Heretics.

In a brief Epistle, but very plain, To Philemon
cunning, and full of Christian charity, he desires Philemon to be good to
his Servant Onesimus, which had run from him: And this he wrote at Rome
being in prisone.

The Epistle unto the Hebrews is a goodly, and cunning example, To the Hebrews.
in what wise he preached Christ unto the Iuishe nation. Strait in the
beginning he proves by plain testimonies of scripture that Jesus Christ is
very god, and man, and therefore that his doctrine should not be set light by.
Also that he is the only and true Priest, and everlasting sacrifice, so that
to pourge, and put away sins, there needs neither any of Aaro^s priests,
nor oblations. For he has perfeict justification, that possesses Christ by
faith. He shows that by faith all the saints of the old Testament pleased
God, and served him in Patience, charity, and innocence of life, unto which
virtues, he exhorts them. In the end he puts certain rules of good
living. The Philosophy that paul learned in the third heaven.
And lo, this is the abridgement, and su^me of that excellent Philosophy
which the Apostle Paul learned in the third Heaven, and left unto us in
fowertene Epistles.

Seven Epistles Canonical
The other.vij. both holy, and brief, be called of our eldres Canonical, and
Catholic. Canonical, because they pertein to ye Cano^ of the scripture.
Catholic, for that they were written not unto certain churches, but
universally to al Peter the Apostle wrote.ij. The first of Peter
In the first he exhorts to patience, and stedfastnes in faith. He teaches
married folks, masters, servants, priests, and soche as be in adversity to
lead an holy life. In the latter he prophecieth of these last unhappy times
of Antichriste, The second of Peter:
warning us to embrace the pure Evangelical Doctrine, and to keep it fast.
Of like argument or matier is the epistle of Jude. Jude.


James rebukes the faults of his time, James.
teaching true religion not to be in vain bablyng, and boasting of faith, but
in Godliness that brings forth good works plentifully. He gives also
many wholesome, and necessary precepts of living.

John Euangeliste the well-beloved disciple of the Lord wrote.iij. Epistles. Three
Epistles of John
In the first he speaks much of charity, and pureness of living, the
fruits of true faieth. In the second and the third he sets out the same
charity, and truth, biddyng us to beware of Heretics.

The last book written of the same Apostle has a Greek name. Apocalypse
It is called Apocalypse, or Revelation. In this book he prophecieth and sets
out, as the Lord had opened unto him, what things should happen to the
church of GOD, even to the worlds end. Thou shall find in it many things
borrowed of Ezechiel, Daniel, zachary, and other prophets. And thus it has
pleased the goodness of God to warn his people in good season of the
mischiefs that were to come, yt they may the more wisely provide for the^
selves, and pray to God the more hartelie.

Canonical books.
More books are not in the Canon of the new testament. Neither is it great lie
to be cared for, that some have doubted of the Epistle to the Hebrews, of the
former Epistle of Peter, Jude, James, and the Apocalypse. For what is it to us,
that a few corrupted with their own affections have doubted of things
certain. Nota.
It is to be believed, these books of both the Testamentes, which we have
reconed up, to come of the spirit of God, to be written and left to the
church by the prophets and Apostles of the Lord: and in them to be taught all
truth, with the^ to be mingled none error nor lie. Of the old fathers this
was called Canonical Scripture, because it was given to us of God for a rule of
living, and a truth, by which we ought to try all things, and thereafter to
live. The Hebrews call their law, Thora, which name they give generally to
the word of God, and in deed to all the whole Scripture. Thora, signifies a
directorie to lead us forth, of the which the Grecians also do seem to
have borrowed that word of theirs, Canon, which you may call, a law, or
rule.

There remains to speak somewhat of the Ecclesiastical Books,
Ecclesiastical books
of some called Apocrypha, the word peradventure not al agreyng to the thing.
Saint Hierome in Prologo Galeato after he had reconed up.xxij. Canonical
books, says thus:

Whatsoever is besides these, must be put among Apocrypha. Therefore the book
of wisdom, which commonly is entitled to Solomon, the book of Jesus the
Soonne of Sirach, Judith, and Tobie, are not in the Canon. I have found the
first of the Machabees in Hebrew, The second is in Greek, and that may be
proved even by the very phrase. etc. Furthermore Saint Augustine in the,
xviij. book, De ciuitate dei, the.xxxvj. chapter, says: that the books of
the Machabees, be taken of the church for Canonical. And yet he him self
estemeth the^ not so much, as he does the^, which doubtless be canonical As you
may see in the second Book xxxij. Chapter Contra Epistolas Gaudentii, and
again in his second book xviij. Chapter, De doctrina christiana Howbeit
saint Hierome in the Prologue, Super Prouerbia Solomonis. The church in deed,
says he, reads the books of the Machabees, but yet does not receive them
among the canonical Scriptures. And speaking of Baruch the Prophet, and the
Epistle of Hieremie that is ioigned unto it, he shows that they are not
contained in the Hebrew Canon, but only in the common edition, and in the
Prologue that is before Daniel, he says: yt neither the history of Susa^na,
ye himne of the.iij. children, nor the tales of Bell, and the Dragon, be found
among the Hebrews. But of the history of Susanna Origene demed far
otherwise, and gave great credit unto it, albeit he denies not, that in the
Hebrew it is not found. Hitherto have I rehearsed what other men have
thought of the Ecclesiastical books. Verily I suppose (saving yet all other
men's judgments) yt they may right well be called Hagiographa, and that yet
they ought not to be taken as good as the canonical books, nor to be of equal
authority. Difference betwixt Apocrypha, and Ecclesiastical books
And I think plainly that there ought a diversity to be made betwixt the
books Apocrypha, and Ecclesiastical. This Greek word Apocrypto signifies to
hide. So then Apocrypha, Apocrypto. Books Apocrypha.
be hidden or privy books, which at home in deed or privately to read, it
may be lawful for every man at his pleasure, but in common assembles, and
specially in the holy temples, they ought not to be read openly, nor any man
to be charged by authority of them. Of this sort is the Gospel of Nichodemus,
Thomas, and Bartholomew, and many other more of this mark: and of them is made
rehearsal in the Canonical decrees, the fiftenth distinction. Ecclesiastical
books seem to be called those, Books Ecclesiastical.
which although they be not in the Hebrew Canon, yet because they teach good
things, and are not contrary to the books Canonical, the church does
receive, and read in the congregation of saints. And I am not the first that
so thinks. The Same before me taught Ciprian or Rufine in the Exposition of
the Creed, whose words if any man will have, be these:

We must know that there be other books after the Canonical, which be
called of our elders not Canonical, but Ecclesiastical, as is Sapientia
Solomonis, and an other Sapientia which is counted to be of Jesus the soonne of
Sirach, and is called among the Latins by this general name, Ecclesiasticus,
whereby not the aucthoure of the book is signified, but the quality of the
writing. Of the same suit is the book of Tobie, and Judith, and the books of
the Machabees, al which they would in deed have to be readde in the churches,
but the authority of our faieth not by them to be confirmed. Other Scriptures
they called Apocrypha, and would not have them read in the churches. Thus
much says Ciprian.

Furthermore of the Ecclesiastical books, some teach histories, and some
prophecies, we will now as we go, touch briefly the matiers that they
treat of.

Tobie.
Among the histories in a great sort of exa^plers, the book of Tobie stands
first, which in my mind teaches to order an household much better then
zenopho^, and Aristotle to. For he shows all things, both by good
precepts, and lively examples. The elder Tobie master of the household has
experience both of good fortune and badde, as well in his body, as in his
goods, and yet in that change of the world does nothing unmeet for a good
housekeper to do. In his greatest poverty and trouble he keeps still the
true worshippyng of God, his innocent life and goodness he chau^geth not, in
no point sekyng help by fraud and craft to releue his poverty, yea him
self being in very great need yet does good to other, doing his duty all that
he can, and helpyng to bury the dead, and by most holy example occupies
him self in his house, rulyng equally his wife, his son, and his family.
Besides this he makes his testament, he instructs his soonne most
perfectly, he provides for his posterity, he shows him self tha^keful
both to God and manne, and in every point does the office of a good
householder.

But TOBIE the younger his Soonne, showing how children should love their
parents, first loves and fears God, obeieth reverently his fathers
commandments, being paineful, dilligent, courteous, sobre, chaste, and fearyng
God in all things. In this book is the honesty of marriage solemnly set
out, how virtuously it should be made and kept, how evil it frames, if we
come not to it with the fear of God. It shows that the readiest way to put
all evil out of an household, is to study to be virtuous, and that the
troubles of good me^ shall have a good end, the wicked to perish for ever,
with many other good things like to these.

Judith.
The history of Judith, as of Tobie, having the name of the chief person,
sets out the cruel tyra^nie of the wicked, their pride, disdeigne, and most
unthrifty riot, presumyng yet nevertheless very great things of their own
strength. So the majesty, the power, the valeantnesse, the gorgeous pomp
passing the pride of the Persians, which was in Holofernes lieutenant of the
kings army, is here lively painted Contrary to him is set a lowly Widow,
weak, and frail, but verteous, and chaste, fighting against that his
invincible power with Faieth, Prayer, lowelinesse, and Wisdom. And being
armed with these, warely taking vauntage of the Capiteines surfite, lust,, and
pride, she takes this wicked man in his own snare, and kills him with his
own swearde. By this appears the merueilous will of God, exercising his
servants with the Cross, and not delivering them by and by, but at last
easelie destroiyng all the strength of the wicked, and laughing them to
scorn. Thus he always shows his might, delivering all them that trust in
him. Judith praising the benefit of God techeth us to be thankeful, and that
God only is to be called upon, and worshipped, which in battle gives
victory, in peace joy and felicity.

Susanna is a very good exemplar of trust, and virtue in married women: Susanna.
the same teaches that GOD keeps the just, and defends their innocence,
punishes, and shameth the wicked fornicatours, and adulterers, specially
naughty judges.

Bell, and the Dragon.
The contention between Daniel, and the priests of Bell, for thoutward worshipp
g of gods, and idols, sets out the nature of true, and false religion: of
that one, the shameful craft and confusion, of that other the good simplicity,
and victory. But such as take this for a fable, let them beware whereupon they
take their ground. The history is full of learning and profit. The song of
three children.
They also which say, that the children in the furnace had scant so much
leisure as to play, and make verses, seem craftily to condemn the matier By a
like reason many things may be set light by in the canonical books. We read
that Jonas prayed unto the Lord out of the bowelles of the fish. This seems
not incredible, the lord being his comfort. Yet idle fellows will dispute what
leisure the children had in ye furnace. The himne it self is a goodly praise of
God, and his works, and a moving thereunto.

the third of Esdras.
The third of Esra. reherseth certain things out of the.iiii. book of kings,
and many matiers which are declared in Esdras, and Nehemias, but more at
large, with many goodly examples of virtue.

The fowerth of Esra. tells visions or reuelatio^s co^teining diverse chau^ces
of the people of god. Fowerth of Esdras
And although our forfathers have set lest by this book, yet have they not
utterly condemned it, for it serves to a purpose and is also profitable

The fragmentes, Fragmentes of Hester
and residue of Hesther gives many propre examples of prayer, and certain
other profitable things.

The first book of the Machabees for the finenesse of style, First of
Machabees
sauoureth somewhat of the old Phrase, that is of the Canonical scripture, and
shows unto us goodly examples of faith. For of faith manliness, noble
courage, temperance, co^staunce, love to god, and their country the noble
children, with that right excellent lord Mattathias their father, are most lively
presidentes. They fight for their cou^treie, and holy laws against the
ungodly, with great success? Yeat abuse they not their victory. First they
set up again the right woorshipping of God, and redress the common wealth
which was far out of order. Hereby we may learn to fear God, and fight
against infidels, all soche as by lawefull vocatione have that Office committed
unto them. Diverse, and merueilous chances be in this book, wherein
evidently appears the goodness of God, his truth, Justice, equity, Mercy,
and many other things that the Scripture speaks of in him, how he defends
his servants and punishes his enemies. This book is of soche price, that
great loss it were for good men to lack it.

The second of Machabees
The second book in style is unlike the other. It is full of Grekishe
Eloquence: neither have the old fathers so greatly esteemed it as the first.
It repeateth many things declared in the first, but more plainly. It
contains the famous Martyrdom of the seven brethren, and the steadfast
belief of the old father Eleazer, mete to be followed of all good men, which
things Cecilius Ciprianus in the exhortacione to martyrdom speaks of
largely.

The confession of Manasses
The confession of Manasses shows unto us the manner of true repentance, and
just confessione of our sins to be made before God. Sapientia.


Among other books which contein precepts of living, Sapie^tia is set first
being in deed, as it is called, the wisdom of Solomon, not that he was the
maker thereof, but the wisdom soche, as might beseme Solomon. The Style is
pure, and fine: It teaches, and praises wisdom, and tells of what effect
and strength it is, and how much to be labored for. Herein he laudeth Godde
highly, whom to know is very wisdom. It rebukes false wisdom, and that
deadly poisone Idolatry, of which Lactantius speaks and says. There can
be no woorshipping of God where Idolatry is. It shows many things that
belong to true wisdom, which here they may see that list to learn.

Ecclesiasticus of Jesus the son of Sirach, Ecclesiasticus.
has much that is before in the proverbs. He writes more largely, and is
not so hard. Here may be learned moral philosophy much better, and with less
ieopardie then out of any Plato, or Aristotle. Almost at the end is a goodly
praise of holy fathers, and their faith, whereunto peradventure thapostle Paul
had an yie, when he wrote the leuenth chapter of thepistle to the hebrews, in
which also he commends the faieth of our elders, not somoche yt we should
know it, as endeavor to follow it. He concludes his work with prayers to God.

Baruch.
The prophet Baruch is much alleged of the doctoures. He wrote a little book
being in captivity at Babylon. He confesses God to be just, and worthily to
have punished the Iues, he knowlegeth their faults, and blames ye stubburne
inobedie^ce of his nacio^. He desires perdo^ for their offenses, and that God
having pity upon his people, at ye last would bring the^ again into their
countreie. Further to stir up faith in their hearts, he tells that Israel
shall be sent home again

The Epistle of Jeremy
Thepistle of Jeremy put unto Baruch warns the captives that they turn not
from the true god, and reverence ye gods of Babylon. And therefore he grievously
rebukes idolatry, cou^sailing the^ to worship the very God, and serve him
only.

I thought good to add hereunto that which Theodorus Bibliander has written
to our greatte profit of the books Ecclesiastical in his work De optimo
genere interpreta^di hebraica in which he briefly touches both the effect
of the books, The times of the books Ecclesiastical
and the times when they were written, which we have not set out: his words
be these. The Ecclesiastical books also they call Hagiographa: And although
they have no fit authority to strengthen, and confirm things that come
into contencion, as have the Canonical writings, ye at are they not rejected
as APOCRYPHA soche as is the Prophecy of ELDAD, and MED AD. Apocrypha
Thasscention of Moses, the Apocalypse of Helyas, and many other like devises of
the Deuilles Spirit. But the Ecclesiastical books be admitted both to be
taught, and learned of faithful people, and of many so reverenced, that some
men put Judith in the order of Canonical Scripture. The times of
thecclesiastical Books.
We will rehearse them keeping the due order of times when they were written.
Part of them contain Histories from the time of Ezechias unto the birthe of
Pompeie, which first took from the Jews their kingdom. Tobias translated
hy Saint Hierome out of the Chaldee into Latin, as was Judith also
mencioneth those things that were done among the Assirians after the ten
Tribes were led into captivity, teaching by notable example, what love ought
to be in parents, children, and married folks. Judith showing the nature of
faithfulness and constaunce, declares that Bethulia was besieged of
Nabuchodonozors Lieutenaunte, Judith
father to the great Nabuchodonozor, which took prisoners Ioachim, Ieconiam,
and Zedechiam, and how it was delivered by the means of the right holy
woman Judith. And I am in doubt whether it was in that battle in which
Manasses also king of Judah was carried away into Assiria, and shortly after
sent home again. For while he ruled among the Medes, Dioces called also
Arphaxat, builded the City Echatana in the Country of Medea. But I know that
Josephus refers these things to the time of Cambyses. Damel has the
remenaunt of Susanna, and the Dragon of Bell. In Hester be certain things
added unto it. Susanna Bell. Hester The third of Esdras.
The third of Esdras repeateth somewhat of the passover of Josias written in
the books of Kings, and of those things which be in Esra. and Nehemias
after their return out of Babylon, minglyng there with a goodly contentione of
wit, and wisdom, in which zorobabel had the victory. The books of the
Machabees declare the affliction of Israel, by Antiochus Epiphanes, and the
Macedones, in whom is the evident figure of Antichriste. Part of the
Ecclesiastical books treat of virtue and good living. Baruch.
Baruch gatheryng together the sentences of Esaie, and Jeremy, which make to
the reprofe of Idols, rebukes Idolatry very sore. Fourth of Esra.
The fourth book of Esra has diverse prophecies, and is very much in
visions, as is also Ezechiel, zacharias, and Daniel. Jesus the soonne of Sirach
about the.cxxxviii. Olympiade put forth his book Ecclesiasticus, which is
called also Sapientia, and Hierome found it in Hebrew entitled by the name of
Parables. Ecclesiasticus.
It teaches Philosophy in sentences, which is a very old usage, and in it
be many things spoken of before in the Preacher, and in the Proverbs of
Solomon. Sapientia
The book of wisdom, which is ascribed to Philo the most eloquent of all
the Jews, and as cunnyng men do say, in manner an other Plato, does more
largely, and in Grekishe eloquence declare soche things, as in the beginning
of the Proverbs do perteine to the praise of true wisdom. The prayer of
Manasses which is not in the Greek examplers sauoureth plainly of the Hebrew
phrase. Manasses Prayer
Thus much says our Theodorus. Now will I return to my purpose.

Thou have (O reader) as far forth as we can show and comprehend in brief
expositions, The darkness and errors of the Philosophers.
the riches, and ample learning of our heavenly Philosophy. Say on now you
our adversaries what may be thought that we lack, or what you think we ought
to beg of that your Philosophy? Verily if you will confess the truth, you
must say, that we be destitute in no part of true learning and wisdom. I
grant in deed yt in the bible nothing is taught of that part of Philosophy,
which is called Sermocinal, neither of things natural, or arts Mathematical.
For these be as it were handmaides to lead us to the queen of all sciences,
and teach us that we may be able to speak with her, and learn true
knowledge of things perteinyng to God and man, specially the acts
sermonicall. Moderate study of the sciences does help to wisdom.
We do not condemn the sobre and moderate studies herein, but confess them
necessary, and much helping to atteine wisdom. Philosophy learned in
measure profits much. Yet this we say, that to know God, and lead our
lives virtuously, not only is taught in our Bibles, but also more plainly
and perfectlye, then in all your writings. For your Philosophers have written
hereof darkly, yea, and falselie to in many poinctes. Aristotle which in
this part is with you a King, Aristotle.
and in manner worshipped for a GOD, has for the nones darkened those things
which he wrote of Moral Philosophy, yea, of natural to. He used also
doubtful sentences, that might be bowed to which side you list, and as he
checked all writers before him, so fearyng to be taunted again, and his
sayings corrected of the^ that came after, he made sure provision in case he
were caught, by one shifte or other to wind him self out. He wrote also unto
king Alexander, that none should understand his commentaries, except he had
heard them read of his own mouth at home in his house. He studied for a
kind of enditynge more brief and cutted then ever was any, that sometime he
seemed rather to point to the matier, then speak it out plainly, which
thing Lodouicus viues, a man of a sharp wit and judgment, right well
perceived. In his moralles, he teaches much naughtiness, contrary to right,
reason, Plato.
and our religion. But Plato, one less corrupt then Aristotle, has dooen so
evil about the majesty of the eternal GOD, that he makes all his Philosophy
worthelie suspected. The truth which he knew of the true god for fear he
durst not declare. I have witness hereof Iustine the Philosopher and martire,
in a warning that he gives to the Gentiles, saying thus:

Plato when he should have showed the doctrine of Moses, and other Prophets
touching one God, which he had learned in Egipte, fearyng that happened to
Socrates, and to stir up against him some Anytus and Melissus to accuse him
of heresy before the men of Athens, and so to be poisoned went about a
variable and crafty conveyed sermon touching the Gods, whereby their opinion
might stand which thought there were many, and theirs also which thought the
contrary, as by his writings may easelie be seen.

Lo the goodly acts of these two Princes of the Philosophers, and in manner
their Gods. What should we look for of the commune sort, seeing in these
their chief lights so great darkness is found. I trow no man is ignorant
what these blind guides have judged touching the soul, what trouble they have
made, and how folishelie babled thereof. Of the highest good thing, as many be
their opinions, as days in the year. Finally, they have scarce judged
rightly of any thing that pertains to blessedness, and virtue: and yet
follow we these bussardes wholly given to worship and maruail at them, more
the^ at all the Bible: yea, we think no man learned in deed, except he be well
sowsed in the sinkes of their filthy errors. How much better and more
wisely did they which sometime being noble men in Christ's church, forsakyng
the study of Philosophy (wherein yet to this day by all consent, they were
most excellent) gave them selves wholly to study the Bible our heavenly
Philosophy, and hasting away from enormious lies, deceiptes, and blindness,
ioiefullie came to the bright shinyng sun of truth. I mean Origin, Iustine,
Panteum, Ciprian and innumerable other excellent Philosophers and Orators,
whose soulles now rest and live with the Lord God eternal. I will not
counsel any man therefore to follow those blind teachers, or their erroneous
doctrine, wherein no pure nor certain thing may be found. I call and exhort all
me^ as loud and as hartelie as I can, to the most holy, and sacred Bible. For
man's hope and salvation only stands in that learning which the Bible
teaches unto us. All the right wisdom that man has, Wherein all wisdom
rests.
rests in this one poinct, to knowledge God for his own God, and that
through Christ, of who^ all the books of all the Philosophers have not showed
so much as one word, neither how by true faieth and sure hope we should
cleue unto him when he is known, and honor this most mighty Lord and
bou^tifull father, in charity and innocence of life. This is our
determinacion and doctrine, this is our full mind and sentence I testify it
therefore with as loud a voice as I can, I proclaim and warn you to keep it.
This is that, which all the Philosophers have sought for all the days of their
life, and yet could never fasten upon it, nor hold it: eue^ for because sekyng
it a wrong way, either they held a naughty religion, or else made no
religion at all. Wherefore away with all soche, which set not man's life in
order, but distrouble it. For what teach they, or whom do they instruct
which can not teach them selves? Whom can sieke men heal, whom can blind
men guide? Shall we tarry till Socrates know somewhat, or Anaxagoras find
light in darkness, or Democritus draw truth out of the well, or Empedocles
dilate the paths of his mind, or Arcesilas and Carneades can see, feel, and
perceive? Behold a voice from heaven teaching the truth, and showing a light
brighter then the shinyng Sun speaks in the Bible openly, plainly, and
certainly. Let all therefore that care for very wisdom come hither. Will
we hurt our selves, and linger to take it? You that will be wise and happy
harken to the heaue^lie voice, learn Jesus Christ to be your justice, and in
him to be laid up all the treasure of Gods high wisdom and science, learn
the mystery of your faieth, and nativity, despise worldly things, love
heavenly, that after this miserable and wretched life you may come to the
joy that is prepared for you.

A co^ferring of the holy books with the prophan
But the pleasant variety of the profane writers, and their propre cast of
teaching does much delight them. Well go to. Declare I pray you some of
your gaie and goodly colors. They teach wisdom (say they) in pleasant and
fine disputatio^s, in sweet dialoges and elegant epistles, as does Plato,
Aristotle, and Seneca: In eloquent orations, as Isocrates, Cicero, and
Demosthenes, in dilectable fables and allegories: as Homere, and Virgil: in
sentences and Proverbs both short and sweet, as the seven sages of Greece,
Chrisippus also, and Diogenianus: in notable histories, as Herodotus,
Halicarnasseus, Diodorus Siculus, and Liuius Patauinus. But if these great
boasters of Gentile Aucthours were as well accustomed to holy writings as they
are to profane, they had found long ere this in the Bible also those facions
in teching of pleasant variety, which they so merueile at in these deceiptful
naughty masters of error. They praise the fine disputacio^s of philosophers
touching Wisdom. But Cicero in his first book De oratore. Though al me^ rage
there at, yet will I (says he) speak as I think: By Hercules that one little
book of the twelve tables, if a man will see the grou^des and chief points of
the law, seems to me both for their authority, and profit, far to pass
all that ever the Philosophers wrote. And who knows not the ten precepts of
gods law to excede the.xij. tables a M. fold? So then, be these bosters of
vain philosophy never so angry, yeat will I also say that I think, and
believe to be true: that one brief treatise of the ten Commandments, or book
of Deuteronomie, touching the foundation, principal parts, and effect of the
laws, far to surmounte in gravity, and profit at the writings of all the
Phisosophers. In the book of Job, wise, and Godly men dispute very finely,
to whom if you compare the persons in Plato, or Cicero, you shall see in
respect they be right naught: which Hierome also confessing says. The
book of JOB determines all matiers with Logiqual proposicion, assumption
confirmation, and conclusion. One Epistle of the most eloquent Paul, Peter,
and Ihon, has in it more true holiness, and learning, then all the Epistles
of all the Philosophers. Neither do we lack right excellent Orators, as
Esaie Micheas, Joel, Oseas, with many other mo, which have left unto us most
profitable, cunning, and elegant oracions. You merueile at the thundering
words of Pericles, the Eloquence of Demosthenes, and Cicero. They be reported
to have moved the minds of the hearers, and enforced them to what they
would. If this be so praise worthy, what say you to our Paul, which with
bold, and chereful countenance, though he stood in irons before the mighty,
and learned King Agrippa, before the Princes of Syria, and before Festus
himself presidente of Jury, so learnedlie, and plainly pleaded his own
cause, and that in a matier of death and for a religion hated of all men, that
King Agrippa himself ravished in his wits cried out saying. Thou have
almost made me a Christian man. Acts. xxvi.
And Festus himself overcome with his most pure, and clear oration, said with
a loud voice, Paul, thou art besides thy self, much Learning has made the
mad. Yeat was this Festus neither vneloquent, nor yet unlearned, nor one that
hated the study of philosophy I pray you in soche an audience, in such hate
of al me^, and so heinous complaints of false accusers, besides this in a
matier of death also, yea, and in irons to, what would Cicero your prince of
Eloquence have done? Cicero
Without doubt his spirit stopped up for fear, scarce sobbingly could he have
brought forth one word. For upon a time, as Plutarche reherseth, neither
bound, nor led in chains but borne into the court hall in a soft chariot, to
plead not his own matier, nor a matier of death, but for Milo, when he saw
Pompeies armed men standing round about in bright harness, he was amassed,
and confounded, and at last trembling, and scarce bringing out one word he
began fearfully not to speak, but to sobbe. Besides this we have wisdom
covered also in goodly Allegories, as figurative ceremonies, parables, and
canticles: where you shall find more mysteries both honest, and profitable, than
in all the ungodly verses, which all the minstrelles, and Harpers have song in
the praise, and honor of their wine God Bacchus. In deed they trim up their
fables with alluring words, and yeat give you a swearde laid over with
honey. Most part of their writings be of deflouring virgins, adultery,
lechery, deceipte, cruelty, murder, vainglorie, and things not to be spoken
of. But our Poem is pure, clean, and honest with out all ieopardie. Who ever
spoke or wrote more finely, and wisely, then our Solomon? Of whom we read in
the third book of Kings, the fowerth chapter. And GOD gave Sapience, and
understanding to SOLOMON above measure, and a breadth of heart as the sand of
the Sea. And his wisdom excelled all the wisdom of the children of the East,
and of Egypt. For of all mortalle men he was the wisest. And there came of
all Nations, and Regions of the World to hear his wisdom that was so much
spoken of. Yea, the Queen of SABA in Rich apparaile, and of wonderful wisdom
came also and when she had communed with him of al matiers, and perceived how
he governed his City, and Household, she said.

The fame that I heard in my land of thine Eloquence, and Wisdom, is true,
but I would not believe it, till I came my self, and see with mine yies. And
yet lo, no not the one haulfe of thy matiers is told me, thou so excelleste in
Wisdom, and passest all that is spoken of the. These most surest praises of
our wisdom no man merueileth at, and yeat we wonder at certain fables, and
vain things, which very vain liers have written of vain Philosophers: Namely
of Appolonius, how he went into Persia, and so over the Mounteine Caucasus,
through the Albanes, Scythians, Massagetes, those rich Kingdoms of Jude, and
passing over the great River PHYSON, at last came to the Brachmans, and all
to hear Iarchas sittyng in his golden throne, and drinkyng of the fountain
Tantalus, and disputyng among a few persons of the nature and properties of
natural things. We rather wonder at the great desires of Pythagoras and Plato,
of which that one is reported to have gone to Egypt, that other to the
Prophets of Me^phis, by a painful way, and ieopardeous journey. Stand still
here a little I pray you, and learn to be mad and wise together. You think
them praise worthy, and much to be made of, which took a far journey to
certain wise men I wotte not who, to learn of them I wot not what but these
our men you neglect and despise, and yet of them to be taught all the whole
world made haste to come, because they knew that the high God had there set up
his throne and chair of most excellent and perfect wisdom. And why follow
not you their examples, who^ you so greatly praise, and much marvel at? Now
as touching an history, is there any like ours, so ancient, so sure, so
grave, so profitable? Cicero in his book, De oratore, says: An history is
the witness of time, the light of truth, History.
the life of remembrance, the maistresse of living, the messenger of
Antiquity. And if this be so, I may say truly that none have an history
but christien men. As touching certainty of time, you have nothing before the
Olympiades were found, and they began but in the time of Esaie under king
Iothan. Olympiades when they first began.
So these your writers confound many things together, and lay them in heaps
all out of order, breaking of their matier with vain folishe fables, the
Grecians especially, which studied not truth, but rather to lie, and therefore
are condemned of Cicero, Quintilian, and Iuuenal. Lodouicus viues speaking
plainly, says: some for fear of reproach, and to lie the more safely,
leauyng the Grecians matiers, fette their compass a far of, from the
Persians, Egiptians, and Chaldees, as did Herodotus the father of lies, and
Diodorus Siculus a triflyng Grecian. Your aucthours also write of light matiers
neither pleasant nor profitable, and set out their bablyng with vain
descriptions, and no goodness at all. But our most profitable history
truly declares the order of times, seuering the kingdoms one from another,
and speaks of nothing without a good reason. It may best also be called the
messenger of antiquity. For beginning at the creation of the world, it
holds on to the Monarchy of the Persians, even unto Xerxes. Josephus writing
against Appion of Alexandria, says thus: The Greek historiens, as Acusilaus,
and those that followed him about the time of Cadmus Milesius, were but a
little before the wars of the Persians, as witnesses Hellanicus. So the
Greek historians there began where ours left of. The Latins be much later.
Now then it is plain whether our history or theirs may rather be called the
messenger of Antiquity. Finally, as the holy writers in learning and
variety far pass the profane, so in glory and renoume through al
kingdoms from the beginning of the world, they excel all other: so that to
say that Philosophy is therefore most commendable, because it has always
been had in most price, is a thing to no purpose. The kingdoms of Egypt and
Assyria were of all the world most ancient. In how great estimation Joseph and
Moses were in that one, it is well known. In the other how shone our
Philosophy, Esai. xxxviii.
when as Esaie Prophesied in one night about the walls of Jerusalem, were
slain an hundred four score, and v. M. men. To speak nothing of the high
authority of Samuel, Iosue, and David: Do we not read of king Solomon, how
he was magnified above all the kings of thearth, as well in riches as
wisdom? And as in the monarchy of Babilo^ dominion was given to our Daniel,
so did Mardocheus rule the whole kingdom of the Medes By the mightiest kings
of Persia Cyrus and Darius great Priuilegies were granted to our Philosophers.
This is evident in Joshua, Esdras, and Nehemias, which by favor of the
princes of Persia built up again both temple and city. In thempire of the
Macedoniens at the request of Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of Egypt, which sent
also gifts of incomperable value to the temple of Jerusalem, our law was
translated into the Greek tongue. But in the monarchy of the Romans the Bible
now dispersed through the whole world so willingly was received of all men,
that al which had wit and knowledge most gladly badde your deceiptful
Philosophy farewell. Why then go you now about to call it up again being ones
dead and buried? Or what remains else, then all lies quite forsaken, to give
our selves wholly to be instructed in the most ancient, certain, and most
wholesome Philosophy of the Bible?

FINIS.
Londini in aedibus Richardi Graftoni Reginae a typographia excusum. Anno
Domini. M.D.LIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

printer's device of Richard Grafton, featuring the classical seven sciences or
seven libreral arts (McKerrow 122) VERSVTVS CELAT SCIENTIAM PRO. 12. GRAM

MVSIC

ASTRO

LOG

GEoMET

RETHOR

ARITHM




