The Moral Philosophy of Doni: drawneout of the ancient writers. A work
first compiled in the Indian tongue, and afterward reduced into diverse other
languages: and now lastly englished out of Italian by Thomas North, Brother to
the right Honorable Sir Roger North Knight, Lord North of Kyrtheling.

*THE WISDOM OF THIS WORLD IS FOLLY BEFORE GOD


IMPRINTE^ ^T LONDON by H^^^^ Denham.

To the Right Honorable and my singular good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley,
Earl of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, Master of the Horse, and one of the Queens Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable: Diogenes being demanded what thing of all other waxed old
soonest, and lived also longest: answered: Benifite. The which (said he)
bestowed upon an unworthy person, and of unthankful mind, dies straight
without further fruit: but done to a worthy man and of courteous nature, it
is never forgotten, but augmenteth bond during life. So, my Lord, confessing
my self not only bound to your Lordship in mine own respect, having
heretofore tasted of your Honor, but dulye remembered by my late Lord and
Fathers testament of his great bond unto you (who living loved and honored
your Lordship, and dying was desirous to show to the world that he was not
forgetful of your Honorable favor and courtesy showed him) and now also of
my Lord my Brothers, succeeding him, whose bond your Lordship still increases
to you with your large and friendlye love to him, which does no more bind him,
than he is now and ever will be thankful to your Lordship in acknowledging
the same: I have presumed under your favor to offer to your Lordship this
mean Present as a witness of my duty and love, and of your Lordships honor
and goodness, meaning for life to retain with me a grateful mind to your
Lordshippe. Howbeit, when I consider the learned writers of our English
Nation, and pervse their grave and wise inventions and discourses of their own
doings, excellently written in our own tongue, without interpretation of
others works, knowing that to translate only is a far less reputation,
than to be an Author of any good work, and to be tied to others words and
constructions brings ofttimes in an other language obscure and darcke
phrases: as I do rejoice in them, so am I ashamed of my self, that this small
gift of mine to your Lordship neither answers my good will unto you, nor is
worthy (as I wish it) of your Honor. Yet my good L. let me humbly entreat
you to esteem (as Darius said) not the value of the gift, but the occasion of
the thing given. And how much the gift of it self is but simple and without
curiosity, so much the rather the same well considered, is to be lykened to
virtue it self, which needs no glorious show or ostentation to the
judgment of the wise. By means whereof, I am imboldened in this rude and
homely style to prease to offer to your Honor the fruits of my simple
traueyle, and to dedicate this noble and pleasant Treatise, which at the first
sight will seem to many a vain thing, treating only of Beasts: but better
advised, they shall find it within full of Morality, examples, and
government.

Some perhaps will think my labor bestowed in the translation hereof, and
offered to your Lordshippe, superfluous, for that your Lordship understands
the Italian tongue very well, and can perfitely speak it. For such as
understand any tongue, in which any good Author has written, do rather
desire to read it in the same tongue, wherein it is originally written, than
in any other translated. Wherefore Plato the great and learned Philosopher
willed such as talked with him of Geometry, to repair to Euclydes, or else to
read it in his own tongue. To those I answer. That I have committed no
error to dedicate it to your L. (unless peradventure in presumption) to thend
that such as understand not, may be pertakers of your gifts: and your L. that
understands, may at your pleasure and leisure, conferring the one with the
other, be judge of the matter, as I have made your Lordship patron and my only
Mecenas. As concerning the morality and sense of this Philosophy, it is
shadowed by the manner and speech of brute and dumb beasts, and by the
examples and gestes of their lives, which carries such a vein of delight with
it, as amongst a number of Italian Authors, which I have read, I could find
none better in my poor opinion for me to deal in, and pleasanter for your
Lordshippe at void times to read than this. Wherein you may my Lord, see into
the Court, look into the common wealth, behold the more part of all estates
and degrees: and the inferior and common sort also may learn, discern, and
judge what way is to be taken in the trade of their life: but Courtyers above
all others attending on the Princes presence. A Glass it is for them to look
into, and also a meet school to reform such scholars as by any manner of
devise, practice, or subtlety, unjustly seek to aspire, or otherwise to
abuse the Prince.

Thus my Lord, leaving further to enlarge me, and to trouble your Lordship,
humbly beseechinge you to take my rude pains and bold offer hereof unto your
Lordship in such good part as I have meant it (delivering it to your honorable
protection, knowing my little labor herein to be subject to the censures and
reproof of many, that are ready to carpe at every little fault, or finding
themselves touched any way, will mislike a troth) with offer also of my
humble duty to your Lordshippe, I humblye take my leave, wishing your
Lordshippe and your noble house long life and happy success in all your
affairs.

Your Lordships humbly to command, Thomas North.

To the Reader.
HE THAT BEGINS not to read this Book from the beginning to the end, and
that advisedly follows not the order he finds written, shall never profit
any thing thereby. But reading it through, and often, aduising that he reads,
he shall find a marvelous benifite thereof. The stories, fables, and tales,
are very pleasant and compendious. Moreover, the similitudes and comparisons
do (as they say) hold hands one with the other, they are so linked
togithers, one still depending of another: which if you sever, desirous to
read any tale or story by it self, not comparing the Antecedent with the
Sequel: besides that, you shall be far from the understanding of the matter,
you shall think them ryding tales, spoken to no purpose, but to occupy your
ears, and consume time. Therefore follow I say this order given you, and
receive to you the fruits of my poor traueyle, and of your painful reading.
Farewell.

Al lettore. G. B.
Il DONI, che col suo leggiadro style.
Augelli, e mutipesci. Armenti, e fiere.
Fa ragionar d'Impresa alta, and humile.
E sotto il falso asconde cose vere.
Non penso may, che la ricca ANGLIA, e THYLE
Sapessero di luj, ne che in talschiere
Venissero le Nimfe a mezzo Aprile
In freddo Clima a fiori, e frutti hauere.
Il NORTHO e, che col suo sublime Ingegno
Fa questo, et alla bella ITALIA dona
Nel suo paese, con sua lingua, stanza.
E Percio, il DONI. Dona a luj per pegno
Se istesso, et dice. Se gia may persona
M'Interpreto. NORTHO e quelche hor m'auanza.
T. N. To the Reader.
OF words and of examples is a sundry sort of speech,
One self same thing to minds of men in sundry wise they teach.
Words teach but those that understand the language that they hear:
But things, to men of sundry speech, examples make appear.
So larger is the speech of beasts, though men's more certain be:
But yet so larger as conceyte is able them to see.
Such largeness yet at length to bring to certain use and plain,
God gave such grace to beasts, that they should Indian speech attain.
And then they learnde Italian tongue, and now at length they can,
By help of NORTH, speak English well to every English man.
In English now they teach us wit. In English now they say,
Ye men, come learn of beasts to live, to rule and to obaye,
To guide you wisely in the world, to know to shun deceit,
To fly the crooked paths of guile, to keep your doings straight.
As ^arst therefore you used beasts, but for your bodies need,
Sometime to clothe, sometime to bear, sometime your selves to feed.
Now use them for behoof of mind, and for your souls delight,
And wish him well that taught them so to speak and so to write.
E. C. To the Reader.
IF care to show, good will to native soil,
In setting forth, a work of great avail:
If how to shun, the vain and restless toil,
Wherein we wade, for things that soon do fail.
If grave advice, bewrayde in simple show,
Forewarning still, the train of guilefull way:
If Wisdoms lore, the good from ill to know,
And by the same, our brittle lives to stay.
If this and more, yea more an hundred fold,
Lies open now, unto thy happy gain:
If these I say, more worth than mass of Gold
Do well deserve, by him that took this pain.
Good Reader than, grant this my just desire,
In thankful sort, receive this learned Book:
For his reward, he seeks no further hire,
But good report, when thou herein shall look.
His pains were great, thy gift thus way but small,
Yet he content, and thinks he reapeth all.
The Philosophy of the wise ancient Fathers. A work first compiled in the
Indian tongue, and afterward transferred into diverse and sundry other
languages: as the Persian, Arabian, Hebrew, Latin, Spanishe, and Italian: and
now reduced into our vulgar speech.
The Prologue
THis precious Jewel (beloved Reader) was first found written in the Indian
tongue, entitled Moral wisdom: and thence conveyed into Persia, and was
coated with their language, naming it with them The example of good life: and
from the Persian speech a long time after by the ancient Fathers (they knowing
the wonderful doctrine thereof) brought into the natyue Arabian: and from that
translated into Hebrew by Joel gran Rabi a Jew: at length reduced into Latin:
and passing through many languages became a Spaniarde, with the title of
Exemplario: and so in time brought to Venice, and there put into Italian by a
company of Gentlemen associated togithers, entituling their Fellowship Academia
Peregrina: and now lastly out of Italian made vulgar to us. What high doctrine
is contained in this Book, the diligent and curious search for the same of so
many wise and famous men and of so sundry nations does witness. If therefore
you desire the understanding of Moral wisdom, spiritual doctrine, and
infinite instructions and examples for man to live well: read I say this
golden Volume. Surely reader, this book shall be a looking glass for thee,
wherein thou shall most lively behold the daily and present dangers and
deceytes of man's most miserable life, and the eyes of thy understanding shall
be made open to discern the flatteries of disceytfull men, and the wisdom of
this most guilefull world: by means whereof ye may easilye blotte out many
malignant effects of this (alas) our crooked age. The style is familier and
pleasant, and will much delight thee. For the first and old Authors hereof
wrote it doubtless with great judgment, trained thereto with a fervent desire
that their doctrine should not only remain in perpetuity for ever, but that
it should also be imprinted in the Readers mind, assuring them selves it
should profit all, and dislyke none. For it may in manner be called an
artificial memory, to benifite themselves at all times and seasons, and in
all arguments, with every particular thing that these wise and grave men have
invented, shadowed with tales and parables, and with the examples of brute and
dumme beasts.

THE Sages of ancient nations, (expert in all the Sciences) desirous to
publishe to those that came after them, their great knowledge and wisdom,
even with a determinate mind and counsel premeditate, decreed to set forth a
piece of work, adapted with diverse similitudes and sundry comparisons of
unreasonable beasts and birds, by which they might greatly beautify their
doctrine, and this they did for diverse respects. First, to give occasion that
their wisdom and learning should be known to the world. Secondly, that men
of judgment and discretion reading the same might reap the benifite of their
rules to direct this frail life. Thirdlye, that he that understands these
examples, knowing little, should by them know much. And fourthly, and last of
all, if he were young, and had small delight to read much: yet he may with a
short and pleasant way be instructed with these delighting fayninges, and with
those similitudes and examples taste the sweetness of the words, the
pleasure of the sentences, accompanied with proper tales: and so (Gentle
Reader) profit himself, and teach others. In this their treatise such wise
Fathers have hidden from us wonderful significations. For a treasure
undoubtedly of so high a misterye and doctrine as this is to be more esteemed,
than all the Iewelles of the world. This precious Iemme of knowledge, who so
shall lodge it in the secrecy of his memory, shall never lose it, but shall
rather augment and increase it with age in such sort, that he shall win a
marvelous commodity to him: and of that plant shall taste the sauorie,
pleasant, and profitable fruits, no less wonderful then delectable. To read
such a Book (worthy Reader) thou must call thy wits together, uniting them
and thy understanding with the due order of the work, to know why, and to
what purpose the old prudent Fathers framed it: least thou be like to the
blind man, that wanting his sight, takes upon him to go over Mountains,
Hills, and Dales, through most dangerous and perilous ways. He therefore
that does read, must understand what he reads, and why he reads it: and
not to be so desirous to come to the end, that he mark not the beginning, and
forget the sense (full of knowledge) lincked with the midst and end. For he
that reads so, reads without fruit, and rather troubles the mind, and
wearieth his body than otherwise, not forcing the benifite and knowledge of the
truth. Follow therefore these grave preceps and ruled order, and let no vain
thoughts possess your minds to withdraw you from reading it. For to find so
rich a treasure, and not to know how to take and lay it up: is rightly to
follow him, that finding a Mass of Gold and Silver, had not the wit to take
it, and carry it away.

Of a Husband man, and of the treasure he found.
A Husbandman of Persia going one day to plough his land, by chance stumbled
of a marvelous treasure, fyndinge store of pottes of coin, of Gold, and
Silver: and woondring at his great fortune, began to think to lode him self,
and to bear it home. But seeing the sums so great that scant twenty men
could carry it away, it grieved him much that he alone could not convey it,
and thus he said to himself. If I leave it here, it is in danger to be
taken from me, and to watch it daily, it would to much trouble me: besides,
that that I could take with me, would do me but small pleasure. Well, hap
what hap will, I will go fetch company to help me home withal, and they shall
bear the burden, I will only pay them, and take mine ease, tush I have at
will to content them: and thus in one day I shall come home and find my Cofers
filled. With this mind resolved forth he goes, and calls men togithers,
bringing them with him to this Golden mass of coin, where he gives each man
his burden, and byddeth them hye them to his house. These bearers now departing
with their burdens, overcome with desire of the money, and greedy of this
pray, in stead of going to the house of this foolish and unlucky man, they
went every one to his own house. The husbandman after their departure comes
leysurely home without any burden, like a man of wealth, as one that thought
himself a Lord at home, weening to have found his richesse there. But when
he was entered his house, and heard nothing of the goods nor bearers: then
all to late he knew his lack and folly, commending their judgments that with
the burden of their shoulders had made themselves rich. So that for treasure
he enjoyed sorrow. For he that might have been Lord of all, discreetely
governing that which good hap had laid on him, deservedly bought the price of
his folly, abiding the bitter smart of poverty and myserie.

THE discreet Reader that shall look in this Book must give attentive ear,
and note each thing perticulerly he reads, diligently marking the secret
lessons. For always the work of these sage Fathers carries two senses
withal. The first, known and manifest. The second, hidden and secret. Of the
first we sweetly enjoy the taste: but of the second we receive small
knowledge, if we deeply ponder not the words. And hereof we may take ensample
of the Nut, which gives no manner of taste to man if he do not first break
and open the shell, and then comen to the wyshed kernel, he begins to taste
the savor thereof, and to reap the fruit of so excellent a doctrine. Let us
not do therefore as the indiscreet and simple man that had a desire to seem
learned, and to be counted eloquent in speech, as you shall hear.

Of the simple ignorant man, desirous to seem learned.
ON a time one earnestly besought a Poet and an excellent Rhetorician (his very
friend) to give him some thing written that might be learned and eloquent,
which konning without book he might recite at pleasure in the company of wise
men, that he might at least seem no less learned than they. His friend
consented, and performed his desire, and gave him in a written book (fair
bound and lymned with golden letters) many goodly sentences, so that he began
to learn by rote his written authorities, and laboring night and day to commit
them to memory, he determined to show that he was also learned. And being one
day in argument, not understanding the signification of the words he had
learned, for that they were not in his own tongue, he began to allege them
quite from the purpose: and being taken with the manner they lawghed him to
scorn. He being angrye at the matter, like an obstinate and ignorant fool,
answered. What? think you I am deceived, that have learned that I allege out
of the book of a worthy learned man, yea, and the letters lymned with gold
to? at which words they laughed him more to scorn then before to see his
ignorance.

EVery man therefore must endeavor himself to understand that he reads, and
understanding it well, he must diligently observe that doctrine, marking to
what end and purpose that was written that he has red, to profit thereby at any
time. I know there will be wise men that will believe they can say and do
more wonders than this comes to: yet for all that, the more we read, the
more we know, and the quicker is our understanding, besides, there is obtained
even profounde knowledge. Learning brings with it a great privilege: for by
that men are exalted, and to a man of knowledge and understanding it gives
life. But to him that has judgment and understanding, and that governs not
himself and his actions according to the prescribed rule of reason: His
knowledge I say dies in him without fruit. As by reading this example following
you may easilye perceive.

A comparison of the slothful man for the Reader.
AN honest man lying in his bed heard a Thief going up and down in his
house: and thinking to pay him home (to take the more advantage of him)
suffered him to take his pleasure and loding, that having in deed his pack at
his back, he might even then as he thought take him with the manner, and justly
reward him with the swords point as he listed. Thus debating with him self,
imagining to execute his purpose, (the Thief occupying all this while himself
taking what he would) this stelye good man fell a sleep again, and the
Thief with his fardell of the best things without any let at all quietly
departs his way. This man when he awaked and saw his house naked, his
chestes emptye and broken open, bitterly sighed and lamented, cursing himself,
and blaming his folly: considering he might easily have saved all that he was
robbed of (since he knew it and heard the noise) and for very sloth would not
once rise and defend it, having as it were the thief in his hands. Knowledge
therefore is aptly compared to a tree, whose fruit are the works: and this
knowledge is that we al ought to desire, and to exercise our selves in. Were it
not a mad part to leave the broad beaten hie way, and to take the unknown and
dangerous pathe? Even so it may be said of him which follows his own
appetite and lyking, governing himself thereby, (and not as he ought with
reason and good order,) leaning to these worldly experiences, which ever
desires that that is profitable, but follow always in deed things that are
hurtful. A man of such life and government we may compare to him that knows
good meats light of digestion, and the gross ill and heavy: yet overcome
with desire takes that that is most hurtful, and so being hurt, himself
alone is the cause of all his ill.

EVen such a man is he whom affection subdueth. He understands and is
learned, and able to decerne troth from falshoode, and yet will not put in
proof the true profit, nor once follow and desire knowledge and wisdom. We
might bring this man in thexample of him that having his sight good and
perfect, shutting his eyes would needs be led by a blind man, so that both
they falling into a diche were drowned, and miserably died. Every man will
condemn him for a fool, and worse than mad, that having his sight good and
without blemishe, that might have seen the danger and escaped it, and of mere
foolishness would not. Therefore every wise and discrete person must
continually labor to read, and to understand that he reads, and must then
teach it to as many as desire to know it, and to do the good works of the
knowledge he teaches, that every way he may show the wonderful profit of his
doctrine: for in this case he may not be like unto a Well or Spring, which
without any profit to it self quenches the thirst of all beasts. The wise
man is afterward bound (when he is grown to the perfection of learning) to
teach and instruct those that know not. Provided ever that he can master
himself, and subdue his affections. For to a wise man three things are
pertinent: to wit, Knowledge, Richesse, and Mercy. And of all things a man
must chiefly beware of reproving his neighbor of that fault he himself is
guilty off. That he be not likened to him, which having a Perle in his eye,
found fault with the element that it was always clowdie, not considering the
blemish of his eye. Yet greater doubtless is our offense when with our
neighbors hurt or detriment we win commodity to our selves. As falls out
many times, which this example following shows us.

The deceyt lights on the deceyuers neck.
Two friends having a great mount of corn in a Garner undivided, they fell to
parting it, leaving to each his portion a part (howbeit both in one Garner
still) so that they could not err to choose either heap. But because in deed
the one heap was greater than the other, he which had the lesser thought to
steal the bigger, and so by deceit to be revenged of Fortune that had allotted
him the least part. Upon this he went to the Garner determining to steal it
that night, and because he would not miss of his purpose in taking the one for
the other, he cast his cloak over his fellows heap being the greater, that he
might the easilier know his own in the dark being uncovered. Not long after
came to the Garner also the other honest partener to look to his heap, and to
see his divided part: and when he saw the love of his partener to him
(supposing simply he had covered his heap of corn for good will he bare him,
that it should receive no dust) as one that would not be thought unthankful,
nor come behind his fellow in courtesy, thus he said to himself. Oh this man
is to kind to me, that to cover mine leaves his own heap bare. And so
taking the Cloak off his heap cast it on the others, and covered it as his
was, requiting his courtesy with like good will, little suspecting the intended
deceyte, but rather reputed his friend civil and full of humanity. At night
his false friend counseled with a thief and told him his intent, saying: if
thou will go with me this night I will bring thee to a place where we shall
have a good booty of Corn as much as we can both carry away with us. And thus
agreed togithers thereupon, they went both to the Garner where these two heaps
of Corn lay, and this partener the thief groping in the dark to find the
heap his Cloak lay on, laying hands on his Cloak (supposing he had met with
his fellows heap) he gave it in pray to the thief he had brought with
him, labouringe both to load themselves, and so between them they conveyed
the whole heap: and weening they had stolen from the other honest man, found
at length he was thief to himself. The next morning very early the two
companions (according to appointment) went togithers to the Garner to carry
away each other his portion as it was divided between them. And he that had
done this feate, seeing his parteners part whole and untouched, and his own
gone: like a man half dead for sorrow he heavily departed thence to his
house, and not a word he spoke, bewayling and lamenting his wretched pretenced
craft, not daring once to open the theft to his friend, who so much did trust
him.

NO man therefore should deal so foolishly in things that have no certain
end, and that are hard to bring to pass: least that wearied with superfluous
labor, he cannot afterward exercise himself in things certain and
needful. All our works and deeds ought rather to tend to profit us in time
to come, then to serve the time present. For if we abandon and forsake the
insatiable and infinite desire we have of this wretched world, doubtless in
the other world to come we shall feel no pain. For who that serves God
devoutly, and with pure conscience, and that desires riches only to supply
necessity, and to do good works: him God does prosper and guide in all his
ways. And let no man despair though he be visited with ill hap sometime,
doing well notwithstanding. For God many times sends his blessing and
increase unawares to man, and in an hour unlooked for, which he never thought
would happen. And hear in what manner.

The good and virtuous should never despair in adversity.
THere dwelled in a certain City a man of a godly life and disposition, who
fallen into extreme poverty, being ashamed to ask for Gods sake, determined
to prove his friends, and so he did. And bewraying his misery, looking for
relief and pity, found nothing but hardness, neither was there any that
once would look upon the necessity of that honest conditioned man. And thus
repleate with grief, vexed in his mind, he sorrowfullye repaireth to his
poor mansion. And being laid at night in his bed to take his rest, the
anguishe of his mind, together with famine, would not suffer him to rest but
kept him waking. And bychaunce hearing a noise about the house, lystening
diligently what it should be: he knew straight it was some Thief (hoping of
a great booty) that went thus ransacking up and down. So this poor man said
unto himself. Thou had need look narrowlye, if thou ween to have that
thou seek for: Surely I will see yet what feats these thieves do work
when they come into such places where they find naught. The Thief roming here
and there, busily searching and groping in every corner, found nothing but a
little pot with Meal: and because he would not lose his labor, he determined
to draw his string to ketch that little morsel, and began to pour it out
into the lap of his cloak, having in the cape thereof great store of Iewelles
and ready money which he had stolen in an other house where he had been. The
good poor man which till now was whisht and quiet to see the end of the
Thief, perceiving his little discretion, his heart rose against him,
considering the villanye of this wretch that would not leave him that sielye
quantity of Meal to sustain him alive withal: and thought with himself it
were better defend it in time to keep him from famine, than to tarry looking
for the late relief of his hard friends. So in a great fury he leapt out of
his bed and took him to his sword, and having the same drawn in his hand
with a terrible noise he runs to the Thief. Which because he would not
both lose his honesty and life together at one instant, leaving (for have to
save himself) his cloak in pawn with the Meal, having no leisure to cast it
on his back, he was forced to fly for life and let all alone. This honest
poor man then at his pleasure poured out the Meal out of his cloak, and put
it again into his earthen pot where it was before: and thus said to
himself, a ha, by Saint Marie this gear goes well, I have gotten a cloak to
boot by the means, to defend me from the cold at least, and putting his
hand into the cape, he met with great riches and Jewels, and happily lighted
on those goods which he never hoped of: winning that from his enemy by force,
which his friends would never have given him for love.

I Do not like in such a case to say as the common people do, that God
provides living for every body, and that he will not see me lack that that
shall be necessary for me, so as I need not to labor for my living: for sure
it is but a foolish phrase and vain speech. But rather I will conclude, that
every man is bound to labor to procure his living, and he may not make any such
cases presidents, in which it pleased GOD to send great riches without labor,
as in this. For these are only the secrets of God, and we ought not to ask the
cause of his divine goodness. The wise man therefore must endeavor himself to
gain that he may, honestly and uprightly, trusting always in almighty God
that he will prosper his doings and give him increase, seeking ever to keep
him self out of trouble and sorrow: and not to do as the Dove, which breeding
her Pigions about the house (making them familiar with the same) albeit they
are monthly taken from her and killed, yet she leaves not for that to return
to her old nest and breed young again, though she know they shall be taken from
her. We find it written, that God has ordained the end and term of all
things, and that they can not pass. Therefore say these wise men, that he that
works respecting the world to come, lightneth the burdens and troubles of
this frail life: But he that reposeth his trust in these worldly things and
is wrapped in the same, does waste and consume his years. A man ought to
labor in these three things, because he has need of them, to wit. To know
to keep the law, and the good statutes thereof. The second, to procure
things necessary for man's life. And the third, that his works be pure and
clean with himself and among others. Then he must beware and withdraw
himself from four other mortal and damnable. The first, is to be negligent
in his art or science. The second, to contemn that the law commands. The
third, to credit all things lightly. The fourth, to deny knowledge. For he
that will be reputed wise in his doings, must first consider well what he
takes upon him: and if he need counsel, let him ask it of a faithful
friend. When he happens to have great matters in hand, let him not go
about them rashly, but first way the importance thereof. That he be not likened
to one which being out of his way, and going on still, is the farther of the
place he would go to. And also compared to another, which has but a little
hurt in his eye, and by continual rubbing of it he makes it incurable. A man
must fear the divine justice, inclining him self to that that is good, and
doing that to his neighbor he would have done to himself, helping him in all
dangers as he would be helped him self. And to conclude this our work, he
that means to understand it, must order his life according to the laws and
institutions of virtue: as shows these wonderful and learned examples, and
sententious authorities.

The Argument of the Book
WHat time there reigned in Edon so many Royal crowned kings, amongst the
rest there was a King called Anastres Castri: who chose for chief of all his
Court one Berozias, whom he made high treasorer of all his Realm, a man
right noble in his deeds, and rich of possessions: and him he loved and
trusted so much, that he put his princelye person and whole affairs of his
Realm into his hands. It happened one day there was presented to the king a
Book, in which was written many goodly deeds and secrets, and amongst the
heap this was one. How that in India were marvelous hie mountains, in which
there grew certain sorts of herhes and trees, which if they were known and
confected afterward in a certain kind: they should draw out of that
precious composition such a remedy, as therewith they might raise to life
again the dead. The king no sooner read this wonder, but he burned straight to
know the troth thereof: wherefore in haste (as soon as might be) he
dispatched Berozias, and bade him hie him thither, commanding him to see if he
could find it true. And because it was a hard and painful enterprise, he
furnished him with gold and silver, not only sufficient, but more than
needed, that he should not lack. Then he delivered him his letters of
recommendation to all those kings of India, praying them to further this
worthy man in his noble attempt, purposed to good end. Berozias licensed now
of the King to depart (furnished with money and letters) went into that
country, and arrived in India presented straight the king his masters
letters: by means whereof he was received of the Magistrates as was pertinent
to the Imbasie of so high a Prince. And his message delivered, they
understanding the cause of his coming, offered themselves with all the wise
men they had to favor his enterprise, and to further it all they could. And
thus honorably accompanied of all the sage and wise men, conducting him through
all the Mountains and Countries there abouts, they had and gathered all they
found written for the conditing of so precious an electuarie. And all they
joining togithers to make this confection, proouing it a great while, could
never find it work such effect as to raise any one from death to life again.
So that they saw by proof that all that was written in the book concerning
the electuarie was mere false and untrue. This thing grieved much Berozias,
that he should return to the king Anastres his master and bring no better
news with him: howbeit consulting with these grave and wise men before his
departure, how he might do, not to return home in vain, there was given him
by a famous Philosopher of that Region, a goodly treatise, who serched himself
also to find that secret, and in the end he understood that it was the
Book which was so called. And so, O grave Berozias, thou shall say unto the
king, and return to him with joy.

The hills which we ought to seek, are the wise and learned men. The trees
and herbs growing upon those hills, do betoken wisdom and learning: which
springs of the understanding and judgments of the learned. The medicine or
electuarie condited of those herbs, are the books full of most learned
writings, composed by the high and deep wits, and with this oil or Baulme
they revive the dead. For with such knowledge the ignorant and unlearned are
instructed: whom we may justly reckon dead and buried.

Therefore tasting the sweetness (continually reading) of the doctrine of the
sages, they receive health and resurrection. This interpretation greatly
rejoiced Berozias, in so much as he besought the Princes and sage men that
they would give him but the copy of that book to carry to the King his
Master, which (although the book were always in the hands of those Kings,
for that it was full of Moral Philosophy) was granted him, licensing him to
translate it out of the Indian into the Persian tongue, with the help and
knowledge of all those learned Philosophers, which was so singularlye done that
it bare the vaunt of all Moral Philosophy. The Book received with due and
infinite thanks rendered to those noble Kings and Sages, for the great honor
and courtesy they had done him: Berozias departs home, and being come to his
Master, presented him the book with relation of his whole entertainment.

The King hearing so noble an exposition, so wise and discreet an
interpretation, thankefully received the Book, esteming it above any other
present. And thencefoorth he procured with great diligence to have always
books, and those he studied, desirous of knowledge, seeking to entertain in
his Court wise and learned men: judging (as is true) that books and wisdom
are the greatest treasure and delight to man. Appointing in his Palaice a great
library, wherein above the rest he placed this book for chief, being full of
examples and instructions for man's life, and also of Justice and the fear of
God: in praise and honor of whom we begin this work, showing therein the
continual dangers and deceits of this miserable world

The first part of the Moral Philosophy of the ancient Sages, compiled by
the great and learned Philosopher Sendebar, In the Indian tongue, who by
sundry and wonderful examples bewrays the deceyts and dangers of this
present world.
WHen I was come to years of discretion, borne of a noble house, and of my
Genitours put to the study of Philosophye, to learn Phisycke, whereof I
proceeded Doctor: I knew that this world was a course of a most vehement
running stream, but yet appearing no peril of drowning to him that passed it,
because that hard by the banckes sides it was very shalow, and above it ran
quietly, carrying above water riches and wares of great value, to the judgment
of those that beheld them, by means whereof men drawn with great
covetousness to have abundance, they ran toward them, and entered into the
river, partly wetting themselves, but only their foot, they took a few of
them. And he that would have mo, going further in, must of necessity wet his
leg and knee, because it increased. And he that with fury (passing the rest)
with an insatiable desire would needs go further, plunged his whole body in
the water. And the others trusting in their force of swimming stuck in the
midst, and found the stream exceeding big: for in the bottom it was most
swift and raging, and they could not get out of the midst, but even as much
as they could do in swimming to keep them selves above water. And brought to
this pass, not finding any way to get out, they cast of these rich
merchandises to this man and to that man, which having no skill to swim
followed them alongest the banckes sides of the river. In the end weried with
swimming, not able to labor any more for life, forsaking this merchandise
floting above the water, down they sink, and carrying nothing with them,
remain drowned.

WHo could in better manner describe our worldly labor? truly our insatiable
desire is so greedy to have that it likes and sees, that to be owner of that
we would, we put our selves to all manner of dangers, and intolerable pains
of this world. To be brief: Every man (little or much) wetteth himself in
this raging river of man's life. He that wetting his foot runs alongest the
hancks side of this terrible Brook, is a man that is oppressed with bondage,
that enjoys naught else in this world but miserable life. The other that
washes his leg, lives by his labor, and comes to take more of the world,
and to taste the delights thereof bearing many afflictions. He that thrustes in
his whole body in this water, has possessed the seignorie and government of
the most wicked and hapless state of this world. O unspeakable cruelty, that
once passed forwards he enters perforce into the midst, and reaches to this
man and to that man that he has, keeping himself always in this dangerous
state. But in the end overtaken by some accident, as war, treason, poison,
or man's force, he falls into deaths lap: and he that has followed his
troublesome life remains deprived of all his goods, because wanting the
head, the rest of the members remain vile, filthy, and stinking. Sure this
worldly life represents no more but the little world of our body, which
carries a wonderful presence: and that little breath of ours once spent, it is
then but a shadow, dust, and smoke. These worldly favors and temporal goods
in the judgment of the wise seem but as snow, which with the first beams of
the Sun dissolueth and comes to nothing. Lord, what cost do we bestow upon
our hears and face, which when the Barber clippeth of, are despised and
thrown away? A man should never trust this foolish life. It is but a fire
kindled on the coals, which consuming it self gives heat to others. The
Physician truly that cures the disease of the body is a worthy spirit of
man: but he that heals us of our sins is a celestial God. He that can
shun the water of this river, which carries in his course, Pride, vain
glory, lasciviousness, covetousness, presumption, infirmity, and loss: may
be called divine and not human. Let no man put his foot into the water of
carnal love, neither his leg into the false waves of these goods, nor wash
his body in the glory of this malignant time, neither seek continually to
swim in the midst of these felicities: for all passes away to our loss
and undoing. The rich Indian merchaunt Sostrates, richly furnished his house
with sundry sorts of merchaundise with his great travel, expense of time, and
money: and having his house full stored even to the top, he could find none
that had so much ready money as to pay him for it all at one time and to
carry it away. Then he said to him self. If by little and little I should
spend it, when shall I ever make an end? Life will not always last, neither
can I live so long as I would: I know there can be no end of our miseries:
and thus despising all pomp and riches he forsook the deceytfull life with
trouble, and withdrewe him to a better, taking upon him another course. A man
ought to believe the true and divine car^^, and not man's writing: not to trust
the false sayings of wicked men, (which continuallye live of the spoil of
their neighbor beguiling them) but to his own experience. For who so easily
believes the words of light persons, falls into a grievous error, to his
own loss and hurt, as ye shall hear reading that that follows.

Here may you see how light belief brings damage.
TWo thieves very skillful in picking and opening of locks with ginnes (but
nothing advised nor foreseeing the danger) entered one night into a knights
house, no less wise than worshipful, and very rich: where these thieves
thought to have sped themselves for ever, that they should never more have
needed to have exercised that art. This valiant knight awaketh, and hearing
the noise of their feet in the house, imagined (as it was) that there were
thieves: and they were even upon the point of opening his chamber door where
he lay, when he togging his wife awaked her, and softly said to her. Have ye
not heard the noise of the thieves in the house that are come to rob us? I
would have ye therefore ask me straight with great instance, after what
sort, whence and how I came by all that we have together in the house. And ye
shall ask me so loud that if there were any at the chamber door he might
easily hear you: and I will seem to be very scrupulous to tell you, then
shall you be more earnest with me than before to understand it: at length
you shall press me so with importunacie that I will tell it you. The Lady
his wife being very wise and subtle, began in this manner to ask her
husband, and thus she said unto him. O dear sir, grant me I beseech you one
thing this night that I so long have desired to know: to tell me how you have
done to come by all these goods you have gotten together. So he gave her an
answer at randon, nothing aunswering her desire. She contending with him, and
he aunswering, in the end as he had been angry, he said to her. I can but
muse what reason mooues you (in Gods name) to desire to know my secrets,
being a thing that little profits you to know them, or not to know them. Be ye
contented Madame, and set your heart at rest: let it suffice you to fare well,
to be richly apparelled, and to be worshipfully waited upon and served,
although ye do not importune me to tell you such a secret. These are not
things to be told, for I have heard it spoken many a time and often, that
every thing has ears: therefore many times things are spoken which are
repented of the party afterward. Wherefore hold your peace, for I cannot
tell you. To this answer his Lady replied, and lovingly besought him to tell
her, sweetly entising him with wifely traynes in such sort, that the knight
wearied with her importunate speech yielded, and said to her. All that we have,
and as much as is in the house (but sweet heart I charge you let it never come
from you) is stolen, and in deed to be plain with you, in the nights season
I stole it from this and that man's house, so that I never gate any thing
truly. His Lady amazed to hear that answer, would not yet believe it at
the first, but said. What for shame how can you ever speak this with truth?
being reputed here the best Gentleman in this City: and there is none in all
this realm I dare well say that would once dare to suspect you for a thief.
Out a thief, one of your worship and credit? nay nay, I will never believe it.
Therefore I pray you without ceremony tell me truly that I have asked you, or
else I cannot be in quiet. The knight answered her and said. You think it
peradventure a wonder that I have told you: but listen yet and you shall hear
more. Even from my cradell in manner I always had delight to steal and filch,
and it liked me a life to be amongst thieves that my fingers might ever be
walking, so sweet was the craft unto me. And a Mate amongst them there was
that loved me so well, that he taught me only a singular trick, and so rare a
secret as never yet was heard. And wot ye what it was? a few words and
coniurations which I made to the Beams of the Moon, and I ran suddenly to
embrace them, going upon them quicklye into every part where they shone.
Sometime I came down upon them from a high window, another time I served my
self with the^ to get up again to the top of the house: so I staid and went
on them as I list, and did what I would. The Moon hearing my coniuration
seven times showed me all the money and treasure that was hidden in that
house, where I flew thus up and down upon her beams, by means whereof I
took my choice, and had what I would, carrying it quite away with me. And thus
good wife (as I have told thee) I made me rich, and now I care for no more.
One of the two thieves (who gave a listening ear, standing at the knights
chamber door) heard all that he said, and bare it away with him in memory,
believing it was true that he spoke, knowing this rich knight to be a man of
credit and to be believed, since he was reputed of all men to be a worthy and
courteous knight: so that they thought themselves happy to have learned such a
wonderful secret in manner (upon his words) assuring themselves in short time
to be made very rich. The chief thief apparelled like a woman got up to the
top of the house, desirous to prove that in deeds which he had heard in
words: So he made his exorcisme and enchauntment repeting it seven times, and
then embracing the beams of the Moon, his arms thrown abroad, he cast
himself on them, thinking to have gone from window to window, and so hedlong
he fell to the ground in ieoperdie to break his neck. But the Moon for the
first time favored him so that he killed not himself, but brake his legs and
one of his arms as God would have it: so that oppressed with pain he cried
out alowde, lamenting his missehap chanced to him, giving to much credit to an
others words. And thus not able to creep nor go, he pitifully lies
expecting death. The knight leaping out of his bed ran to the cry, and come to
the place, he found this unfortunate and wretched thief lying on the ground
in woman's apparel, and he gave him many a fair wound to lighten the pain
of his broken legs and arm, and forced him to tell what cause moved him to
come to rob his house. This miserable thief answered him (fearing least he
would kill him) and told him the whole cause of his coming. But yet that that
grieved him worst of all was said he, that he was such a fool and beast to
believe his words: and besought him though he had at least hurt him to much
with his words, (which he had dearly bought and repented both) yet that he
would vouchsafe not to hurt him in his deeds also.

IT is most true that lightly believing these worldly things, has made many a
man fall into sundry dangers, and hedlong to plunge himself into the deep
miseries of this world. Sometimes men determine to obey the law. At another
time they contemn it and set it at naught, following sensual appetite. Often
times they believe the counsel of their good friend, but very often they
follow the counsel of the flatterer. To day we are pleased with true doctrine:
to morrow we follow the false. In every wit and art there is abuse: and who
runs not to this river? and the more they ween to gain, the more they
run in danger and loss of life and soul. Behold, here is one man pricked
in his conscience, there is another oppressed with passion and sorrow, and there
never wants some that follow the continual servitude of this deceitful
life, either for goods, favor, and estimation, or else of their own free
wills: and there is never none (or few at the least) that in so short time of
life can forget this known and manifest danger. For death assaulting us, we
know not whither to retire, and then with all our might we fly the force of
his most piercing dart: and thus weening to hide our selves in sure place, we
hedlong run to our shame and undoing. As is manifestly seen by sundry
examples happened like to this following.

A tale of a Lover and a Gentilwoman.
THere was in the City where I dwelled, hard by my house, a fair young
Gentilwoman nobly borne, the which was but even in manner newly married (at least
not long before) when this chance happened. This young spouse fell in love
with a proper Gentleman fair condicioned, well spoken, and of good
entertainment: and fortune so favored her, that she sweetly reaped the
fruits of her desire at all times when she liked to enjoy it without let or
annoy at all. But to prevent her husbands sodein coming home at times
unlooked for, this lively young wife devised to work a way for her lovers
safety, and the continuance of this second (yea most blessed) joy. She caused
to be conveyed in a Well she had a proper vawte, which should safely receive
her young lover leaping into the same, if he were by mishap at any time distressed
with her husbands soden coming upon them. The husband also much about that
time called workmen to him, and in a corner of the house made a great dark
hole and vent (very deep) for the sincke of the house. It happened so by
chance one day that her young Lover was no sooner entered into the house, and
the gate but newly put too, but straight the husband of this wanton wife
knocked also at the door. She knowing his knock, with heavy heart beckened to
him to hide himself in the vawte that she had made in the Well, and this while
she stood still, poynting him the place and would not open to her husband.
This young man flight with fear (which is ever at hand to amaze the offender)
ran round about like a headless fly, and missing the Well (as one stricken
blind for sodeine fear) leapt into the deep dark vawte serving the sincke
of the house. At which instant she had opened the door to her husband, so as he
saw the young man when he went into it: and then he knew his wife had born a man
more than she should, and that she had beguiled him, understanding the late
opening of the door. And overcome with rage and her fault, he fierslye laid
hands on her, and cruellye slew both her and her Lover.

TO be unadvised, and to do things rashly which we ought not, brings many
times death, hurt, and shame. For no man should so entangle himself in these
worldly toils, as he might not ever leave them at his will. For so strange
and sodein chances fall upon him, as a man would never have imagined, and
therefore he cannot upon such a sodeine withstand it, but is forced to yield.
Wherefore I would wish no man to be so carried away with these short pleasures
and sweet sound of man's life, that they should cast behind them the
remembrance of the right way to do well: as happened unto him that would
mende and set his Iewelles.

Of a Ieweller that forgot his profit, and gave himself to pleasure.
THere was a rich Merchant of Surria, that brought from the Cair a great sum
of precious stones, and because they wanted setting in Gold with curious work
to pullish them, he agreed with an excellent artificer, (most skillful in such
works) to give him daily a certain sum of money, because that during the
time he wrought in his Iewelles he should work with no other but only
attend his business. This cunning workman went every morning to this
merchants house to work, carrying his tools with him: and working all the day
at his desire, at night he received his days wages agreed upon. It happened
there was brought to this merchant a goodly instrument, and excellent to play
upon (much like to a Harp) to see if he would buy it. The next morning
betimes came this workemaister to follow his work, and the first thing that
the merchant did was to show him the Harp. The workman taking it in his
hand (being an excellent Musition, and playing well of this instrument) he
said. Sir is it your pleasure I shall play? yea, said the merchaunt. This
cunning man passingly handling this instrument playde so sweetly, and showed
such music in such strange and rare stoppes, with such voluntarye wythall,
that the merchaunt delighted with his heavenly harmony made him play all day
long. At night this cunning workman demanded his days hyre, as if he had
wrought the whole day in his Jewels. The merchaunt denied it, and would not
pay him. The other alleged that he had been in his house all that day (at his
request) as he was the other days before. This matter called before the Judges
and brought in trial, the Judge gave sentence against the merchaunt, and
forced him to pay the workemaister for the day (such sum of money as they
were agreed upon) as if he had wrought all day. The merchaunt ill digested
the Judges sentence, but much worse the payment, greuing him to the heart to
pay so dear for so short a pleasure, where he might have gotten much by the
others work, if like a fool he had not let him.

LEt men that give themselves to the pleasures of this unhappy life be warned
by the example of this merchaunt, to leave aside the sweet deceits of the
body, and to attend only to the precious stone of our soul, pullishing and
keeping that clean. Lord how many are there, that leaving profit follow
loss, and all for a feigned show, or worldly shadow. The Greyhounde that
has pinched the Hare and taken her in his mouth, cannot run after another he
sees go before him and take her also: for so the one may escape from him quite,
and the other easily vanish out of his sight. O miserable world, nay rather
most miserable and wretched our minds and wills: that plainly seeing our hurt
and misery, we still hedlong pursue and follow the same. What is he living so
ignorant, that knows not our life passes quicklyer away than the
lightening that comes before the thunder clap, and in the dark clouds
gives most short light: and that our sight (the lightening past) coming into
the dark is blinded more? the man truly that is tossed in this worldly broyle,
and entered into the sea of miseries: that that sensual appetite and short
desire shows him, seems light unto him, but in a moment (wretched creature
he) he finds himself in darkness. What part have we of any good thing in
this short course of life? where is our good beginning? where the excellent
midst? or where the perfect end? in that day (O miserable man) that thou art
begotten in thy wothers womb, in the self same day death imbraceth thee to
overthrow thee at his will. Our first original is begun in darkness and
corruption, the first passage that puts us forth to the light of this world,
brings us sorrow and lamentation. We are borne naked, subject to diseases,
unclean, and have need of all things, and of every bodies help. Afterward
unless we would seem Images of stone or timber without understanding, we
must be taught, ruled, and instructed: which brings us diseases, troubles,
pains, sorrows, and griefs. And in this while how many necessities do
assault us? how many businesses do oppress us? the elements offend us with
heat, cold, and barrenness. Diseases never forsake our bodies, and the
troubles of this world never lets us rest an hour. To be alone it grieueth
us: to be accompanied it troubles us: to live long it werieth us: to have
little misliketh us: and sufficient contenteth us not. The thought of death on
the one side assaulteth our life: and on the other, the passions of the mind
to forsake our goods, friends, wife, children, and the world, do still
prick us. O what troubles and afflictions, what terrors and passions abides
this our confused body: which the most part of our time is replete with anger,
rancor, and malice, but often void (rather ever) of justice, mercy, and
pity. And lastly, what does one man for another? He causes that by force the
good is trodden down with the evil. The fool takes away the reputation of
the wise: the liar plucketh out of his seat him that always tells troth:
the noble Gentleman well brought up, is ruled by the indiscreet and rude
Cloyne. What more? virtue alack dies, but ignorance lives. Wherefore our
state is in more dangers and troubles than his, that flying the fierceness of
four Lions to save him self, leapt into a Well with greater danger. As
writes the great Philosopher Tiabonus.

A Parable of the World.
A Certain lusty young man traveling through a desert country, wandering to
and fro amongst the thick and huge woods, happened one day to come into a
great large plain, where not far from him he saw traversing in the way
four great and terrible Lions: whereof he being marueilously afraid (to behold
so horrible a sight) took him to his legs and ran for life: and because he
was not able to run so far right out, as the Lions had force to follow
him, by good hap in running he was ware of a Well in the midst of the field,
about which grew certain wild roots of little trees, and being come to the
Well he caught hold with his hands of the twigges of the same, and so cast
himself into it, hanging by force of his arms upon the twigges, not falling
down at all: and throwing his legs a cross to the sides, he stayde himself
with them and the strength of his hands to keep him from falling down. While
he stood thus upon his feet and force of hands, looking down into the
Well, he saw a terrible Dragon that with open mouth gaped for his fall. This
youth brought now to such a present mischief, raised up himself perforce
sometimes, and looked out of the Well to see if these devouring beasts were
gone their way: and seeing them standing hard by him, with great sorrow and
pain he hunge still on force of his arms scant able to continue. A new
mishappe (and worse than all the rest) assaulted this iolye youth. Two beasts
of color white and black came to gnaw the roots of these twigges, the tops
whereof he gladlye held fast in his hands to sustain himself alive withal:
so that now he saw present death on every side presented. Remaining thus in
this danger (brought to sorrow and despair) casting back his eye, he saw a
little hole behind him wherein there was a pot full of honey, laid there by
chance by some shepehearde passing by that way. And forgetting quite in what
terms of life he stood, he began with one hand to taste of it holding him
self by the other, and so long he attended to this little taste, that sorrow
stroke him on the neck. For the two beasts had now gnawen a sunder the roots
when he hedlong fell into the Well and died.

WHat is signified hereby, or who can otherwise interpret it but thus. The
Well represents the world. The four Lions the four elements, which seek
still to devour man. The Dragon with gaping mouth, what was it else but the
grave? The two twigges or boughs, temporal goods and love to which we are
wholly inclined: both which by the two beasts are gnawen a sunder, the one
white, and the other black, which are understood for the day and night. But
the pot with that little sweet honey, to which we are given, not regarding our
danger, betokens no other but the short pleasure of this world, which
retayneth us, and suffers us not to know the dangers and troubles of this
most miserable world, and of our thrall and troubled life.

The second part of Moral Philosophy, showing the wonderful abuses of this
wretched World.
Many and diverse are the sayings of our wise and ancient Fathers spoken to
exhort man to quietness, and to make him self wonderful in behavior, wise
and ware in these worldly things, and pacient of life. That noble Roman that
sought and labored to bring the people and Communaltie to love their
Magistrates and superiors, told them a pretty tale (to write it happilye in
this Book for him that knows it not) how the hands were angry with the
body, and thus at variaunce would not for malice give meat to the mouth: as
those that thought themselves inferior to no other member, and thought scorn
to take such pains, and the other members not. By reason whereof using this
abstinence of self will a while, refrayning to do their office in giving
meat to the belly: the belly suffering lacked his sustinance, the hands
also began to leave the skirmishe, and knowing then their lack and hurt (for
preservation of both) repenting themselves, they returned to their office, and
began again to feed the mouth. And thus united both in one, they preserved
each other. With this pretty tale he made the people sensibly to understand
what became them, and how they should behave themselves to their superiors, for
there must needs be Magistrates and inferiors, Masters and servant. An
other likewise told a tale, that many years past there was a Horse used to
feed in a goodly pasture, where he alone was Lord and Master within
himself. At length by chance there came within his diocese a mighty grown
Heart, who took his herbage there as his right also, and did eat and feed
beyond all reason or measure. Insomuch that this horse disdaining his beastly
attempt, chased this Heart from of the ground full many a time and often. And
perceiving he could not for all that overcome him, because his horns were of
as much force as his feet, he was mad for anger. It happened so one day that
a man came through this pasture, and passing by, the horse came near him, and
told him his whole mishap, praying him to help him. This man that was more
wise and subtle than a beast, told the horse that he alone could not do
this feate, and showed him plainly that he must needs have saddle, bridle, and
rod: to speak of stirrops, stirrup leathers, and spurs, me think it no
words of Grammar. For when the Latin tongue was only used, they had no such
terms, because they had no such toys. The beast to be revenged of the other
beast, did beastly let himself be ridden, and like a beast became prisoner to
the man. Aesope recyteth also many of these pretty fables, being very
pleasant, learned, sharp, profitable, and full of Morality, as you shall hear
in this deceytfull framed practice devised by a Moyle, between the Lion king of
all beasts and the Bull. Which was never made and invented by the wise Fathers
to other end, but to shadow and cover the life of man from the foul spots
of vice: as shows you this present history following.

IN India, in those worthy and just times adorned with virtue and wisdom,
every one of those royal Princes (as Lords of noble manners and behavior)
retained with them in their princely Courts men no less learned than
virtuous. Among which a king there was (called in their tongue) Distes, who
desired much to read hystories, and to imprint in memory the goodly and
profitable examples to direct him and his withal. O noble time and happy
years: in his reign I say lived in this Distes Court this noble Philosopher
Sendebar, so excellent in his comparisons and examples, as no man that went
before or after him could once go even with him, much less exceed him. This
worthy Prince rapt with the excellency of this rare (yea odd) man, most
willingly spent some time in discoursing with him: and this wonderful
Philosopher also with deep and profounde sentences showed his worthiness. But
among all the best things he spoke, he always admonished the Prince to
have a good eye to his Court, and a sound judgment to judge his people: and
chiefly that he should not love, favor, nor esteem for friends (endeavoring
himself all he could to know them) double tongued men, liars, tale bearers,
and vicious livers. And to the end his Majesty should soon feel such Mates
as it were at his fingers ends, he made him a long discourse of their manners
and practices, with these examples which you shall hear, wonderful and
learned.

Behold the pageants and miseries of the court of this World.
THere was a Heyward or neteyarde that had the keeping of a great herd of
cattle in a large common, as Gotes, Sheep, Mares, Kyne, Horses, and
Bullockes. And it happened that a Bull amongst the herd (called by ye herdman
Chiarino) became in love with a iolye young Heighfare, that had diverse trim
marks and spots of her skin, and was favored and belyked also of the
Herdman: who for her beauty and fayrenesse named her likewise Incoronata, and
many times did crown her with a garlande of sundry sorts of flowers. Ill
Fortune willinge it, and her destinye with all, this fair young heighfare
playing and leaping from hill to hill, unfortunately fell and brake her neck,
and with her fall dyed. This herdman simplye fleade her, and with her fair
skin made him an open cassock sauadge fashion. Now I leave you to imagine the
rage and madness of this Bull, lacking his fair young heighfare, that like
other Bulls wandered up and down to seek her. In this raging bestiall love
of his, the herdeman foolishly cast upon him the cassock made of the heighfares
skin, which this Bull seeing runs fiercely unto the herdeman, lowing and
snuffing extremely, in so much as if the herdeman had not hyed him quicklye to
have cast it of his back, the Bull had forthwith panched him. The cloyne being
mad with Chiarino the Bull that had scared him thus, threw his hedging bill at
him, and hitting him full on the knee he cut him such a gashe, as he had
been as good almost have howght him. So this poor Bull with his wound was
left in the field not able to go after the herd. The herdeman after the time
of gisting his cattle came out, and that the season of the year did haste him
home to preserve the beasts from the sharp and bitter wether of the
mountains: he brought them into the playnes again, and delivered up his
account of them all, shewinge in stead of the heighfare his cassock made of
her skin, declaring her death and the Bulls departure. Saying that the Bull
being in love with her, (and in his chief pride) ran his way, and strayed
so far, that he went quite out of sight and could never be set eye on
again: so that the owner amazed with that tale quieted himself. This poor
Chiarino left all alone and sickely, limping went feeding up and down, and
step by step halting on (passing through many mountains and hills) in
many days he happened to come into a solitary (but fertile) country, inhabited
with infinite number of wild beasts: and meeting there with good pasture and
better air, in time he waxed whole and sound as ever he was, sauinge that age
had stolen upon him, by means whereof he had quite forgot Incoronata* to
weete the crowned heighfare. Yet continuing thus without any Make of his kind,
he rored and yelled amiddest that valley and caves, whose lowing ecco
rebounding back with terrible sound, impressed a merueylous fear in all the
herd of wild and sauadge beasts. The Lion that was king of all the rest,
hearing the hollow and fearful noise of this mighty Bull, not acquainted
before with the like noise: notwithstanding his hardiness, yet was he sore
afraid and amazed both, and durst not once for shame say I am afraid. In the
end parplexed thus, he resolved to send a spy, and calling to him secretly
the wild Bore, he sent him straight to see what new and strange thing that
was. This wild Bore running through thickets, thorns, briars, and hedges, at
length came near to the Bull. And when he saw so goodly a beast, with his
sharp horns so pointing out, and with his parted hide (half black, half
white) and blased star in the foreheade, so well shaped with all: he stood
in a maze, as one overcome with fear, and so much the more, because at that
instant the Bull put forth three or four terrible lowes. So that the poor
wild Bore was driven for fear to hide him self in mudde, all save his head
only. Now when he espied his time he returned to the Lion, and told him the
quality and condition of this most terrible beast. I do not tell you now
what fear this Lion had, that princelyke kept his den, as King in deed of
all the reast: and that was a Palace for the counsel, a chamber of presence
for his Gentlemen, wherein they gave themselves to disport. But of this kingly
fear was ware a sauadge Ass of long appointed ears, and privy to the same
also a Moyle, brother to the Ass, which both determined to understand the
cause. The she Ass, Aunt to the Moyle and Mother of the Ass, chanced
sodeinly to hear certain whisperings amongst them, and one softly to say to
the other. It is no marueyle that the King comes not out of his den. It
is no marueyle neither that he goes not a hunting, hawking, fyshing, tournieng
and iusting other while as he was wont to do. The other answered. It is
certain that he is afraid of that great and mighty Beef, and that he
suspecteth his Kingdom should be taken from him. Do not thou mark his
cross aunsweres, how wide from the matter? he is so full of choler that he
will speak to no man, neither suffer any to speak to him: so as he is not to
be dealt withal by any. The she Ass understanding the effect of their talk
by dyscretion, stepping in between them both, she would needs make the
third, and say her mind too. He that is well cannot keep him so. The Lion
takes you both for his friends, therefore seek not I pray you that that
pertayneth not to you. What a goodyere have you to do to meddle in his matters?
are ye out of your wits, or wearye of your lives? be what will be, attend you
on Gods name to your business. For he that is busye in that he knows not,
nor touches him not, and that concerns not his Art: if any mischaunce
lights on him, he has but that he has justly deserved. As I will tell you
hereafter a tale of an Ape, and what happened to him, because he would needs
meddle with a craft he had no skill off. But before I begin to tell you, I
will make a little digression with two words.

IT has been an old and true opinion, that for the servant to search his
masters doings it is both naught and uncomely too: but to desire to know the
Princes causes or affairs, is of all other yet most dangerous. And naturally
who so is given to be a searcher out of other men's doings, he can never be
reckened good nor honest. Now give ear unto the tale.

A tale of an Ape meddling in that he had no skill.
THere was an Ape in our Masters woods, which made many pretty toys and
devises with his hands, for I that carried home the wood from thence saw it,
and therefore I can be witness of it. But one day being busy to meddle with
an Art he had no skill of, in stead of a fish he caught a frogge. I say
therefore that a laboring man of ours went one day to the wood, and hewed out
a lode of wood, which laying on my back I carried home. It fortuned one day
that he cloue certain logges or billets not very big: and to make them fit
for burdens he hewed them with a long axe, riuing them with wedges out of hand,
that the wood opened, so that giving four strokes with the Betell he laid
them on the ground in pieces. Now this blessed Ape got him up to the top of an
Oak and looked diligently after what manner this labourer hewed his wood in so
small pieces, and was very desirous (as it seemed) to prove it with his own
hands if he could likewise do the same, and he had his desire. The wood
cleauer having cloven one half a sunder, left it even so, and went and laid
him down in the shadow to take a nappe: so that the wedges and axe remained
in the wood. Straight comes down this foolish Ape from the Oak, and
ketcheth hold on the steal of the Axe, and tampered so long withal that at
length he gate it out of the logge: but even with his striving the axe coming
out at a twitch unawares laid him alongest on the block, and one of his legs
unhappily slipped into the clyft, which closing together, held his foot as fast
as might be, so that for extreme pain he cried out as he had been gelt. The
cleauer of wood that lay not far of, hearing this noise and loud cry ran
to the place, and saw this foolish beast caught fast in the logge. Which then
to late espied his beastly folly, that he took upon him to meddle in things
that pertained not to him, when he saw this churlish Cloyne lift up his arms
with a Bat in his hands to pashe his brains a pieces: which he full dearly
bought with the loss of brain and life.

IT is not good therefore I tell you plain for you to deal in Princes
matters, to search out their meanings and intents. If needs ye will, mark
well my words, and say I told it you. Upon my life ye both in the end
shall feel the smart and pain thereof. The Ass persuaded by his Mothers
words left off his enterprise: but the proud Moyle said, I intend to know
them, and therefore I will get me to the Court. And I will you know dear
Mother, that manuell craft is one exercise, and to know to behave themselves
in Court is an other Art. Thy words in part are good, to cause them refrain
from doing things they can not bring to pass. But to me that must remain in
Princes Court, I may not go so plainlye and simply to work, but must use
every one with Art, feeding still their humor: to deal in others matters with
deceyt, and in mine own to have a subtle wit, devising still all I may to
be chief about the Prince. And that that now I have told you, I have long
since determined to do. In Princes Courts he that proceeds not stowtely in
his matters, besides that he is thought a Coward, they take him for a fool.
What? know not you that fortune favors still the proud and stowte? think
ye my stowtenesse will not favor me, accompanied with the malice of
understanding, and with the pride of reputing my self of noble blood, which
preheminences obtain happy state in Court? And he that has the name to be
wise, subtle, sharp of wit, and with that to be of noble house: has made him
already a Cloak for sin, and a garment for his naughtiness. That that I have
said I speak with judgment, and for proof thereof I can allege you infinite
examples. The Pecocke though his fair tail cover his foul feet, yet it is
not said that he scrapeth in dunghill at all, but he is reputed the fairest
Foul of two feet. The flesh of the Torteise that is so good and wholesome for
man is not readily sold, but rather lotheth many because of his vglye sight.
If I do but look well into Princes Courts, none go great thither, and those
that come to greatness clime by diverse degrees. Who for virtue, another for
strength, and some (be it spoken with reverence of those beasts that have
understanding) for malice: others by continual service, and numbers by other
means. He that rises thus in greatness, and is noble and virtuous, it
seems he goth into his proper natural house: but he that comes to that
greatness with malice, and feigned appearance, he may make just account I say
that they are but lent him.

Yea marie now thou come to understand me, therefore and thou be wise go
not to the Court how soever thou do. For if Fortune should make thee great,
whether it were by Art, subtlety, or deceit: the Lords and Peers that are
fine and cunning, and know all the points of malice, would do to thee, as a
Judge of the beasts did to the Woolfe. And hearken how.

A tale of the Woolfe concerning breach of promise.
A Wolf was taken in a snare that a shepeheard had pitched at the foot of a
hill (where every morning he found the haunt and tracke of the Wolfes feet)
and at that time there passed by another siely shepeherde, whom the Wolf
called to him, and made a bargain with him, that if he would lose him he would
never take any of his sheep, and thereupon gave him his faith. The shepeherde
newly come to keep sheep, like a fool believed him, and losing him in deed
let him go. The Woolfe being at liberty strayde not far but he had gotten
a fat Weather by the neck: the shepeherde seeing that, complained, and
appealed to the Judges, and told them the pleasure he had done him, and what
the Wolf did promise him. The Woolfe being brought before the Judges, denied
that he promised him ought: and if they would needs make it that he had made
him a promise, he said that in that place where they say he had promised him,
he would go from his word again. The Judges agreed, and went togithers to the
place. The Woolfe being come to the foot of the hill, said to the shepeherd:
was I here? yea answered he. And here then said the Woolfe before these
Judges I do vnsaye it again. Nay said the Judges (knowing his malice) it
will not serve thee, unless thou were fast tied in the snare even as he found
thee. The Woolfe glad to be released of his promise (being in deed a subtle
beast, but yet not drawing so deep as the Judges upon the sodeine) beastly
suffered himself to be snared again as the shepeherde found him. O, now thou
art safe said the shepeherde, keep thee there, deny it now a Gods name, I
give thee leave, thou shall mock me no more I warrant thee. Whilst this
matter was a doing thus, the other shepeherde comes in the nicke that first
had pitched this snare, and so took the Woolfe for pray (as of right he
might) and forthwith he slew him with his sheepehooke. So that now you may
hear how they fare that live upon deceyt. Go not therefore I say, if thou
mean to clyme to high degree by such unlawful and dishonest means. Then said
the Ass unto the Moyle his brother as follows.

BRother Moyle our Mother has reason, and sure she tells thee true. Thou
promisest largely to thy self. Thou seek when thou art caught not to lose
thy self, but to catch others, with no profit to thee but hurt to others: and
this is not thy way to deal. Therefore I my self persuade thee now to tarry,
and bid thee not to go. She says true answers the Moyle. But shall I tell
thee brother Ass? A simpler beast in the world than thou, lives not. Thou
proceedest simply like a good goose. Thou carest for no more so thou have three
or four Thistels to gnaw upon, and a little water to drink serves thy turn.
I pray thee tell me: are there not in the kings Court many meaner in all
conditions than I? if Fortune have favored them, why the goodyere should she
not also favor me? if I had not many times seen (said the Ass) a little
Ass eat a great bundell of straw, I would yield to thee, and confirm thy
opinion. But wotest thou what? a little Axe overthrows a great Oak. The
arrows for the most part touch the heigthes, and he that clymeth up to the
tops of trees, falling has the greater broose. But I see dear brother Moyle
thou shakest thy head at me, and that thou little sorcest my words: and sure
I were a great and monsterous beast to persuade my self to obtain that, which
our Mother could never reach unto. But since it booteth not to persuade thee,
and that thou art self willed and bent to go to the Court, (compelled thereto
by a natural instinct, which for the more part drives every one headlonge
forward, and that thou can not shun it) I will yet show thee what favor
and help I can: but by the way take this for a lesson.

FOr the first thing, thou shall fly ignorance, which ever sits still, and
does nothing, and has two great ears as those of mine thou see: but her
feet take part after the Griffin, and part after the Ass. One part signifies
that the ignorant are familier Asses: and the other that they are greedy of
honor, and of the profit of good deserving beasts. Those long ears signify
the ignorant, which will hear all others doings, and believe they know all
things. Thou must also be true to thy master, and when thou art once retained
in service, thou must not betraye thy Lord for any gold or corruption in the
world. For many times those that are in favor with Princes, and near about
them, are sought unto to practice to poison them, to kill them, to do them
some mischief, or else to rob them of their treasure, and (...) subvert
their whole state. For no respect in the world, whilst thou art in service
(nor after) see thou deceive him not of a mite. I do advise thee also to be
pacient. For these Lords and states I tell thee for the most part are
fantastical, and I marvel not of it at all: for in deed the Princes matters
and affairs does so occupy and trouble their heads, that God knows they
are full of passions, and can ye blame them? Therefore sometimes, will they
nill they, they love and hate again. And when thou perswadest thy self (by
reason of a few smyling looks they have otherwhile given thee) that thou art
in high favor, then they seem not to know thee. And thou must not also look
after recompense of thy service, though unhappily thou have perhaps bestowed
five and twenty years time, and thy youth withal, and yet notwithstanding
have not been the better a rush for all this: and another in four days is
made rich. For thus thou should but wrappe thy self in care to thine
undoing, and yet the thing nothing remedied. And what? they will not stick to
play thee many of these pranckes. Therefore he that cannot bear it patiently,
lifts up his head, and a fly lights on his nose, and byteth him with
these and such like Courtly graces, and so goes his way: so that he loses
his time and years. Patience therefore that often goes to sleep with Hope,
brings thee at least to such end as thou art not ware of, and sometime it
carries meat in mouth, and gets thee somewhat. Fear generally must be thy
right eye to guide thee with. Thou must fear the envy of Courtiers, for they
will make thee stumble and lay thee flat on the ground upon thy nose. And the
more thou growest in favor with thy Master, and that he gives thee, and
makes thee fat in purse: so much more take thou heed to thy self, and
look about thee. Now mark well what follows.

The unthankfulness of Masters.
BVriasso (one of our corporation) was a certain beast that if thou had
known him, thou would rather have taken him for a slouenly beast than a
man. He brought up a Soowe and made so much of her that he himself fed her
with one hand, and with the other he clawed her. And when this Soowe had
oftentimes brought him Pigges, and that good store at a farrowe, he styed her
up and fatted her, and when she was fat, (forgetting the love he bare her) he
sticked her, and in time eat her. There are such like Masters that clawe thee
with one hand, that is, they give thee fair words: with the other they feed
thee, to weete, they give thee draffe. And when thou have served them (which is
understood by the bringing forth of Pigges) a time, and spent thy youth: and
if Fortune be thy friend, then they give thee, and make thee rich. If thou
die before thy good hap, farewell thou, so much is saved. If thou live long,
and art grown fat, some blast of displeasure may call thee to Coram. So art
thou chopped up, the law proceeds on thee, and shortly all the fat and
grease thou have gotten before melts into the Princes Cofers. Howbeit, I may
tell it to thee (be it spoken without offense of beasts of understanding)
there is good provision made to the contrary now adays. For what so ever
becomes of themselves they make all sure that they can: let the carkas go
where it will, the fat and grease they have gathered is betimes disposed to
others for fear of that they looked for. And thus all things are prevented by
polycie. I say no more. This is the world, and so it goes. Keep this in
mind and harcken further.

IF Fortune favor thee so that thy Master make such account of thee, as he
comes to ask thy counsel in any thing: do not as many Counselors do,
and those that are in estimation with Princes: which thinking to please them,
gives them counsel according to the profit they find for them, and
according to the Princes passion, I may not say, will, and right. But be
thou bold to say truly and uprightly, not looking in any bodies face. If thy
Master should happen to frown upon thee, and that he were angry, in any
wise hold thy peace, and reply not again as others do, neither shake thy
head as though thou mislykedst, but get thee out of sight as thou were not
he. Never be afraid of bending his brows, or of a frowning look, as long
as thou stand upright, that is: that thou proceedest truly and honestly in
thy doings. Sometimes they give thee fair words, and do to thee as the fowler
that catches Thrushes, that cried out for cold of his hands amongst the
boughs, and the Thrushes that were in the cage to make a noise, said that he
cried for that he was sorry they came to stoop to the Birdlime. No said a
little Bird look to his hands, and let his eyes alone. Take always heed to
the doings and not to the words. Know thou not of the Quail that hunge
out of the window in a Cage, and a sparrow Hawke seeing her, stooped down to
the Cage, and said unto her. Daughter mine, be not afraid, make no noise, for
I bring thee good news: and began to tell her strange and pleasant fables,
and in the mean while with her talentes she began to tear the wyers of the
Cage. The Quail leaving to give ear unto her bablinges, seeing her woorking
well enough, began to be froward, and to bestirre her. Insomuch as her Master
hearing her fluttering in the Cage (knowing there was somewhat about her) ran
to the window and so saved her. Trust not therefore I say the words of such,
but believe their doings, and always say and do thou well: Give good counsel,
and be always praising of thy Master. And if thou see him take upon him any
enterprise for his profit or reputation, commend it, and exalte it: assist
him, and encourage him to it. Thou must be wise also thou reach not to far,
that thou take not more upon thee than thou art able to discharge, but always
keep thee within bounds, if fortune should never so little favor thee. For
the favor of the Master is a hill full of goodly flowers, and wonderful
fruits and plants. But in this hill there dwells most cruel and terrible
beasts. Some spitteth forth fury, some poison, one spitteth fire, another
smoke: so that thou must always be armed to defend thy self, or else that
thou may not be offended.

THe Moyle being weried with the cumbersome words of the Ass his Brother,
cutting off his talk, as one whose judgment with ambition was corrupted, he
took his heels, and on his way to the Court he flingeth to this Princely
King and Lion. And being come into his Majesty's presence, observing all manner
of duties and reuerences pertinent to so royal a throne (as his subtle and
crafty Moileship knew well enough to do) even forthwith he crept into his
bosom, and got into his favor, saying thus. The fame of your Royal Majesty
which runs through the world, has made me not only to come to humble my
self, and to do my duty, but also to offer your highness my service:
putting him in remembrance also that many years ago (in their first young
flourishing age,) the Ass his brother and he were very familier with his
Majesty: and in manner all one with him. And showing him that he was able to
do his Majesty service in many things, he kissed his feet, and offered him
armor and horses to serve his Majesty and the Realm: adding thereto, that it
would please his highness to accept his poor offer: saying, that a little
toothpike does service to the greatest Prince, which he always occupies in
his mouth, being reckened one of the chiefest places a man has.

THe Moyles words greatly pleased the king, and turning to his Lords he
said. Sure my Lords me thinks he has a deep judgment and capacity,
and as I remember in their very youth his brother and he had excellent wits,
and see I pray you now how trimly he is come forward: I promise you he has
spoken very clarkly. Surely he is able to do us good service at all times
when we call him. And to conclude my dear Lords, virtue cannot long be
hidden, albeit for a time by some evil accident it be oppressed. Flame and
fire also covered with violence, when it bursteth out again, shows the
greater, and makes way where it comes. Behold how orderly he came to me.
And though we cannot know his inward mind, and that it were not that it
shows: yet is it sitting for a noble Prince to entertain him that comes,
not knowing him at all. Although the Needle pricketh, yet a man occupies it to
serve his turn, and is as necessary as a knife. We will place every one in
his rowme. The first seat is for the Elephantes, the other for the Camels: the
Apes in their place, and so forth, to use each one according to his degree and
calling. For the nails may not be placed where the teeth are, nor the teeth
where the eyes stand, much less the eyes in place of the heels: but let
every member do in his place his office pertaining to him. A man to feed
Serpents, were a strange sight and perilous. For he should not only stand in
danger to have his hand devoured of the Serpent, but to be slain forthwith
also with his spitting poison. Our common weal is like unto a body which
diversely does occupy diverse means. The ears go not, the feet hear not,
the nails cry not, neither does the tongue scratch or give any help, as
does the office of the nails. In those Cities where these tame beasts do
dwell: they make not Rattes to ketche Hens, nor Hens ketche Hares, or
Garden worms ketche Flies, nor Flies ketch Grasshoppers, but every one does his
office. The Catte takes Mise, the Greyhounde the Hare, the Fox the Hens,
the Hounde the Fox, and the young the old: The sparrowe Hawke flies at
Quayles, the Goshawke at Phesants, and the Falcon at Partriges. I have a small
Court, and a little Realm, but for those few beasts of head that I keep,
they are able to do service, in respect of other Princes, which keep a
rablement of rascals and miserable wretches, with little honor, and great shame.
I better like my little and fruitful country, than a greater being barren: yea
and I am one of those that love a good servant, though he be a stranger, as I
do those of mine own Country. The fruits of our Ortcharde are good, and
those that are brought far of are not ill. If we should feed of no other
but of our own fruits, we should seldom fill our bellies: saying, I will
none of them because they are none of ours. Then turning to the Moyle, with a
certain loving aspect, he followed on his tale. The worthiness of the mind
and virtue, is that that is to be esteemed. That sure is the known shield and
arms of the true Gentilman, and not the greatness. The King in deed of right
ought to embrace men of such virtues and qualities, rewarding every one
according to his merits, and not to show partiality to any, and to banishe out
of his court all those that seek for singularum comodum, never to repute them
for his friends, nor to accept them for servants. After these and a few
other words he spoke, he took his leave of his Lords, and withdrue himself
into his withdrawing Chamber (as all Princes of like estate are wont to do)
calling the Moyle to him, and secretly they commoned. Who when he saw the king
make of him, and that he laid his favorable hand upon the croope of his
malice, he wagged his tail, aduauncing himself in his Asselike manner, and
finely couched in Rethoricke his cloked flattery: and when he saw his time,
he spared not to speak, and thus he said.

Of the Turkey Cock, and what happened to him.
A Turkey Cock (one of the fairest, of the braggest, and also the stateliest in
all our quarters) was taken prisoner in the battle of the Pigmees, and was
sold to the King of Phesants with condition to be raunsomed. Who seeing so
fantastical a beast with so great barbs, which sometime were a pale blew,
sometime a sky color, now changed from that to white, and then to black
again, he wondered to see those sodeine chaunges: and more, beholding his
swelling and raising up his feathers, putting forth that horn of flesh, he
said he never saw before so goodly a wonder. And talking a little with him,
he found him of a big voice, of few words, but resolute, so as he made
much of him. And wot ye what? thither came a number of beasts of his country
(understanding of his captivity) to ransom him. But he being high minded,
and reputing himself the chief Bird of the dunghill (as true he was) would
never say he was a prisoner, but that he was amongst the Phesants for his
pleasure, and thus despised their favor and the help of them all. On a time
there came a friend of his to him, and secretly offered to give him (that no
man should know it) so much gold as should redeem him out of prison. But he
refused it, and would none of it, because he would not seem to be a prisoner.
In the end (necessity enforcinge him, and remembering his case) he was
contented to be counseled by that faithful and loving friend of his, and
closely took the money (that in fine does all) and paid it, and so departed.
For if he had continued in that foolish reputation of him self still, and had
dwelled in his obstinacy, he had perhaps dearly bought the price of his
follye. It may peradventure seem to your Majesty that I pass the bounds of
modesty, if I should open to your highness my meaning hereby. I come as your
Majesty's humble and faithful servant, and true friend, to tell your Majesty
that I am sorry to see you go no more abroad a hunting, a walking, and sporting
your self at your pleasure as you were wont, but that you keep your Palace
still with melancholy, which was not your wont I know. Well, I stand now
before your highness ready to spend my life and goods in your service and
quarrel: and if I might know your grief, I make no doubt at all but I would
labor so, that your Majesty should be satisfied, and like of my service. If
you be troubled for any matter concerning the state, or any other thing of
importance: your highness must impart it with a few of your faithful
servants, and such as you trust best. And although they be of the meaner sort,
yet they may serve your Majesty with hearty love and good will, and do
their best endeavor. I have presumed under your Majesty's good license to say
thus much, because I reckon my self to be one of the faythfullest servant
your Majesty has ever had, or now retayneth.

THe Lion, as King of beasts, and that knew before by the wild Bores report
the nature and property of this mighty beast the Bull, moved not a whit at
these words, but wiselye hid that inwardly which he openly understood: and
with large words and new devises feigned diverse his particular accidents,
saying that he was not well at ease, and found himself subject to his
ordinarye ague. And thus the King and Moyle discoursing togithers (a happy
chance for the Moyle, and an ill hap for the Lion) the Bull that was hard
at the Court gate gave three or four terrible lowes that the Lion shook
again to hear him, as one that was more afraid now than he was before, by
reason of the great noise and rebounde of his voice: and not able any longer to
hide his grief, he said. This voice so big and terrible runs through my
whole body, and in counsel I tell it thee, (knowing thy troth and fidelity
to me) I promise thee I am afraid of my Kingdom: and my reason is this. That
seeing the voice of this fearful beast is so great (as thou hear) it is
like his body is aunswerable to the rest, which if it be, I am in no safety.
And now without further ceremony thou know the whole cause of my sodeine
change and fear, therefore in this cause I would be glad to hear thy opinion
and judgment.

Mighty Prince, if no other novelty or occasion have caused you to refrain
your pleasures but this voice which I have heard, me thinks it is but small
and not to be accounted off. Your noble courage should not be afraid of any
thing before you know it, and what it is, and whether it be to be feared or
not: as I will let your Majesty know by this tale I will tell you serving for
the purpose.

Of the Fox and his foolish fear.
A Fox with all his family changed his hole, and got him to another, and
hard by the same, there was a little cottage, where dwelled a.xxv. Muletters
with their Moyles, and every morning betimes they came to lade them. You must
understand that the noise of these sundry sorts of belles and other
trappinges that they put about these beasts, made all the country ringe with
that mad noise. The Fox hearing the sound of this ill favored noise ran
quickly to hide himself in his hole, where he lurcked still till the noise was
gone: which was such, that it feared the Pullen, and scared him from his pray.
One day this Fox being on the side of a hill, heard again this fearful
noise of belles, and lifting up his head to look about him, there he saw
these blessed Moyles coming with their belles, and laughing to himself, was
ashamed of his simplicity. The same say I unto your Majesty, that my opinion
is, that this your Majesty's fear is such a like fantasy: and because your
Grace should be informed with speed of this matter, (assuring your Grace to
keep your grief secret) I do offer my self, if it stand with your pleasure,
to go abroad into the Country, and to discover the thing unto you. And so
soon as I shall have knowledge of the beast and of his quality, I will
forthwith advertise your Majesty how it stands, what the matter is, and how
this gear goth about. And you shall know it even as it is, I will not miss a
iotte, least you should be informed contrary of some timorous beast, taking
one thing for another. Therefore I beseech you sir comfort your self, and let him
alone that knows it: and thus he took his leave, and trotted from the king.
The King highlye commended his counsel and advice, and willed him to dispatch
that he had promised.

THis worshipful Moyle was scant out of sight, but the Lion began to have
Hammers in his head, and to imagine a thousand strange devises, and grew in
Choler with him self, suspecting and fearing both at one time: and said. Well,
what and he double with me? yea, and how and if he beguile me with his cloked
color to do me good? sure his soothing words do not like me, me thinks he
is to full of them. May not he tell him with the terrible voice, that I am
afraid of him? and out of doubt for as much as I can imagine, he cannot but be
a beast of a marvelous strength: and adding thereto the others treason, it is
another manner of thing than to be but afraid only. For between them both they
may utterly undo me. Many other mishappes fall out in this bucke, that if I
had not this thought (feeling my fear) might happen. And peradventure too this
beast is enemy to the Moyle, and will set him upon me, to the end that I should
revenge some injury done him: and if he be as unhappy as he seems for, out
of doubt he will not fail to put a flea into his ear. Sure I shall be driven
to fly and have the woorste. O wretch that I am, what have I done? alack I
see I have done amiss, I have taken a wrong Soowe by the ear, and so going in
the darcke I must needs fall. And thus the Lion out of one doubt leapt into
two or three more, and stood betwixt life and death, with no less hope than
great fear. He went up and down his Palace like one half lunatike,
fretting and chafing, now above, then beneath, still looking for the Moyles
coming, which had broken his appointed hour with the King: yet at length
looking out at a window (which opened to the plain fields) he espied the
beast coming with a wondrous joy. His Moyleship bravely yerked out with both
legs, and lively shook his ears and head. He brayed and stong as he had
been mad. The Lion as though he had not been grieved at all, returned again
into his place, and looked for the Moyle. Who arrived, was received ioyfullye,
and with good countenance of the whole Court. The King after these grave
solemnities and ceremonies done, retired into his withdrawing Chamber with the
Moyle: and understanding by him that this beast the Bull was fair, gentle, and
pleasant withal (and that for no respect he should once seem to suspect any
thing in him, but if it had been his Majesty's pleasure he would rat^^r have
brought him to his presence to have done his duty to him) he rejoiced much,
and for very love and kindness embraced and kissed him an hour long together.
And hearing by him that this Bull was wise, and of good capacity, and able well
to execute: he sent him back again with charge to bring him to the Court, at
least to use all means and persuasions he could possible to bring him
thither. The Moyle putting on a new pair of shoes to do the Prince service,
galloped as he had flowne, and straight he was with the Bull, whom he found
lyinge in the shadow, chewing of his cudde: and the Moyle lying down by him
began to talk in this manner.

O Fair Bull, and more than beloved brother: know thou I am Secretary to the
King of all us unreasonable beasts, and am sent to thee from the Lion most
puissant and mighty, not only of men, but of strength above all other
unspeakable. And as a friend I come to tell thee, that this ground thou
feedest on, and dwell in, is not thine, but pertayneth to his Majesty. By
reason whereof he has many times put himself in arms, and assembled his
force, with mind to give thee battle, and chase thee out of his Realm, and
peradventure to take thy life from thee also. But I that am to him as I am (it
makes no matter:) was a mean unto his Majesty (as it is the part of all
honest beasts) and took upon me this journey to thee, and have promised the
King in thy behalf (I know thou will not deceive me) that thou shall come
unto his Majesty, adding further too, that if thou had known his Majesty had
been at hand (as he was in deed) I was bold to say thou would have come
to his highness, and humbly have done thy duty to him. Assure thy self he is
a King that honorablye entertaineth, rewards, and requiteth any service done
him by his faithful servants, and he is not also forgetful of his friends
good wills. And if thou will be but such a beast as thou ought to be, I
warrant thee thou shall set thy foot by the kings, and be no less thought of
than he, and will he nill he thou shall be as well fed every day as he. If
thou will not come advise thee, I have said, think upon it: thou art old
enough, therefore thou know or should know what thou have to do. He is
King here, and will be King too. If thou will not show thy self a subject,
the King is to do as he thinks good, and so I leave thee. The Bull that
had no more the white foam in his mouth, and had lost his lusty courage,
wanting his young and wonted force, considered of it like an aged body, as he
had been a gelt Ox that had drawn in plough a xij. years, and answered many
words confusedlye, running from one thing to another, and thus they went
debating and kneading of the matter togithers a good while: the Bull standing
rather in fear than hope, which fear this Moyle with his true reasons brought
out of his head again. The Bull persuaded by the Moyle was contented to go
with him, relying still upon his promise. Who gave him his word that he should
by this journey (in going to show his duty to the King) have no manner of
hurt, neither in word nor deed: and this promise always kept, he said he
would willinglye abide with the King. Then the Moyle bound his promise with
a solemn oath, yea and that with as great an oath as a Moyle might swear by:
and that was by the ears of the Ass his brother. And then touching their
feet togithers (I would say hands in beasts is understood) they kissed
in the very mouth even with their tongues, and so went on the nearest way. The
King standing in his stately Tarras (mounted in the highest place of his
Princely palace) looking round about the Country, thinking it a thousand
years till he saw this mighty Bull: behold, he spied the Moyle coming and
the fair Bull by his side, marching demurely with his hard horned head, that
in show he seemed a great Lord. Then said the King to himself. O, what a
goodly proportioned beast is he? my Kingdom without his force were nothing.
And even in that moment at the first sight he fell in love with him. And now
come to the Kings presence, this Bull kneeled down, kissed his hand, and
saluted him: and did so finelye and cunninglye excuse his negligence in coming
to his Majesty, that the Lords standing round about the king were ravished
with his words, they did so please them. The king bade him stand up, and
willed him to tell the cause why he kept so long in those fields, and what he
meant to braye and rore so terribly. The Bull took upon him the Orators part,
and standing aside, from the beginning to the end he told him the whole
discourse of his miseries. So that the whole auditorie pitying his mishaps
became his friends. This Bull in his Oration showed himself to be a great
Bacheler in Rethoricke, a great Master of Art in gravity to expound things,
and a marvelous high hill of eloquence. The King wondering at his years,
commanded straight stables should be provided for his Lordship, and gave him
an infinite number of servant to wait upon him, making him Prince of Bulls,
Duke of Beefes, Marquess of Calves, and Earl and Lord great Master of Kyne:
and with a wonderful great provision he furnished his rackes yearly, and made
him of his privy counsel. After he had employed him a while, he knew his
worthiness and discretion: so that in the end he made him Viceroy and
greatest Lord of his Realm.

THis Moile also that lived in Court in service of the Prince, more than a few
good words, courteous entertainment, and familier access he had to the
King, he could never get lands nor possessions: howbeit he obtained many
pretty suites of the King, now for one man, than for another. Further, he was
so bold and familier with him that he would not stick to give him word for
word, nor forbear him an inche. And passed many things by the Bulls means,
which his mighty Bulship gave him gratis, for that he was as a sworn brother
to his Moileship. In the end this Moyle grown thus great began to look hie,
and prouinder pricked him so, that like a beast (forgetting him self) he must
needs take upon him to reprove his Majesty of parcialitie, and ignorance:
and having no body that he might trust to break withal, he was ready to
burst for anger. Wherefore he was forced to go seek out the Ass his
brother, and to make him privy to the matter, knowing he had none so sure a
friend to him whom he might trust but he. When they met, he began to tell him
at large his whole grief and trouble, complaining of the ingratitude of the
King all at once, that he had so long followed his tail, and had never any
thing of him worth his travel: and if I had done no more but brought him out
of the fear he was in, and to bring the Bull to his presence. And here he
poured out to the Ass a world of words, sayings, and deeds. The Ass that
heard him all this while, began now to speak.

I told thee enough that thou would be to busye in matters: in faith
brother thy brain swimmeth now. Thou must not be so fond to take all flies
that fly in the Court: Thou should have considered this in the beginning
brother mine, (but thou would not be ruled.) And have persuaded thy self
that this should happen to thee, and worse. Thou were a very beast, a beast
thou have showed thy self, and a beast thou will continue still, but it
skilleth no matter, as thou have brewed so bake, and there an end. If thou will not be called by the King to deal in his matters, why do thou (fool)
put thy hand in the fire, and meddleth with that thou have naught to do? Thou
that might have lived quietly at home and at ease: what the goodyere aylest
thou to clyme to the tops of trees? See now what thou have done, and whereto
thou have brought thy self: quite out of favor with the Prince. Never sharp
thy knyfe if thou will not have it cut thy hand when thou occupyest it. What
know thou whether the Bull lay this heavy burden on thee, knowing now thy
double dealing with him in his coming to the king? Well, do as thou will, if
thou carry a Snake in thy bosom, what can I do withal? Me thinks this thy
mishap is much like to that that happened to the holy man in the other
mountain by a thief of that country: and because I would have thee know it
to serve thy turn another time, thou may hear it.

IN the top of Pirenei Mountains, hard by Pampilona, a City of Nauarra, in a
mountain called Verrucola dell amiraglio (where the Devil left Malagigi the
notable Coniurer when he brought him to the journey of Roncisualle) there
dwelled a solitary man given altogether to the contemplation of the high and
celestial things of God, who was visited for his holiness and doctrine of all
the Country. So it fell into the king of Canatteria his head to go see him
also, and thither he went. Who when he found him deep in judgment of high
mysteries (as he was most ignorant in base and mean things) he gave him great
treasure to build and sustain him with without travail. An old long
practiced and beaten thief hearing of this richesse, imagined straight with
himself to ketche two Doves with one Bean: and one night he took his journey
toward this holy man, and when he was come to him, pitifully bewayling the
ill life he had led, he prayed the sielye fool to keep him company in his
prayers, and to teach him the good and holy commandments of the law. And
forthwith he gave himself to fasting and prayer. So that this holy and simple
man thought he would have lost his wits, and thus with his cloked devotion by
little and little he made him self master of the house and riches. One night
this stowte thief carried away a great sum and value, clearing the house of
all that was ought worth (as a Barbers basen) and bought him a Hog. This
holy devout man rising in the morning, and missing all his necessaries, he
wondered with himself, but most of all he mused that all his gold, silver,
and things of value were shrunk away. Yet he had such a head that he
straight thought upon the malice of his unhappy scholar, lamenting much the
loss of this strayed, or rather altogether lost man. But to hear of him
again he wandered through many a Country, carefully seeking up and down, at
least to meet with him, though he might not recover his goods, and it
grieved him sore to be in the midst of his sorrow, for the loss of the one
and the other. This good man being in good hope yet, met in the way with two
wild and savage Gotes, which were at deadlye food together, and tried it out
by the heads for life and death, to which fraye came also the wily Fox, that
stepping in between them both, lycked up the streams of blood that fell from
their hard horned heads, and tending still this bloody feast, not regarding
the danger he was in, they fiercelye meeting their bodies together, crusshed
this Fox between them both straight to death: Who deservedly paid his proud
attempt. The holy man seeing this chance, kept on his way, and came at length
to a great town: and because it was night, bichaunce he came to be lodged in a
pore old beade woman's house that played the Bawd, which had laid her eggs
for her self long time before, and then was glad to have others to lay eggs
in her house, of which she otherwhile liked to feed on and to take some
little profit. But at that present time the young fair Hen she had in her
house at half of the profit, she had a Cock by her self, and would be trodden
of no other. Now the Bawd seeing small profit come of her eggs, she took on
like a mad woman. And the young Hen keeping her self still to one Cock, she
was not able to live so on it. This made the woman mad for anger, insomuch as
she determined one day to give him a remedy for this: and the foolish Hen
having appointed her friend and Lover one night, and prepared a certain
drink to breath him in his journey, and to make him lusty, it happened she
unwittingly changed it, and in lieu of her first and costlye potion, she
placed where her Lover should lie a receyt of Oppium. This Cock sleeping
soundly could by no means be awaked: so that the poor broken Maid went up
and down the chamber like one straught of her wits, and thought to go out
for somewhat to wake him, saying that he that gave this potion had sure
changed Violles: and going her way abroad to seek remedy, the Bawd thought
straight to dispatch him. And having prepared already a Quill which she had
filled with fine venomous beaten powder, she went and put it to the mouth of
this sleeping Cock, and blewe at one of the ends to make it enter perforce
into the body. But it happened far otherwise than she looked for. For even
at that instant there came such a blast of wind from him that had the Oppium,
that she having her mouth ready to blow, received with the force of his wind
the whole powder into her own body, which was made so strong that forthwith
she fell down dead. And thus weening to have delivered the young Maid from him,
to have gotten the more gain to her self, she quit her self of her own
life. A man should never for any vile corruption relieve one, to hurt another.
For neither does Gods law nor the law of nature bear it. And in the end the
world will hate such wicked means, though for a while and at the beginning it
seems to favor them. That this horrible fact and mischief was misliked the
world does know it, testified by so many written authorities: showing that he
which gave himself over in pray to vice, and she for her wicked fact, were
both buried togithers in one grave. The whole Planets assembled themselves
together to consult upon condign and solemn punishment: because they would
not such wickedness should pass without memory, testimony, and perpetual
record of each others deed. And all jointly concurring togithers in consent,
agreed to frame a notable Monument, as now follows. They turned the Lover
into a Moyle, and the dead Woman continuallye rode upon him through wild and
savage countries, still laying on him with a rod without ceasing. This holy
man departed from his lodging, and the night following he came to such another,
in manner greater, or at least the like. A young married wife intised by an old
Bawd fell to naughtiness, and still as opportunity served, the young man her
Lover came into the gardein of her pleasures. The husband being ware of her
trade, feigned to go forth, and saw all the becknings and promises: so upon a
sudden he returned into his house and without any word at all, tied his wives
belly to a naked pillar, and laid him down to sleep behind the same where her
Lover must needs come in: who walking at his appointed hour, and missing of
his purpose, went straight to the Bawd, and made her go into the house, which
bichaunce had the keye given her of the fore gate by this young wedded wife. And
when she came in, finding her bound, she unloosed her, and stood her self tied
in her room, and sent this pleasant wife away to fetch a good night. In the
mean time the husband of this young woman awaking, desirous to know how all
things went, he called his wife many times, but the Bawd would not answer
for her because she would not be known. The Goodman rising up in the dark in
a rage said, will thou not answer me? with that he flue upon her and cut of
her nose. The Bawd was whisht all this while and durst not speak for her life.
The young woman that had been feasted abroad, and sweetelye taken her
pleasure, returned home, and seeinge the old Bawd thus vnhappilye dressed for
her sake, it grieved her very sore (yet glad her self had escaped the
danger) and so untying her, bound her self again, and sent this wretched
Bawd home without a nose. The Bawd departed thence, the young woman called her
husband, and making pitiful moan showed her innocence: and that this is true
said she, behold my face (is as it was at the first) made whole again by
God (restoring me my nose) because I am true to thee, and to let thee know
thou have done me open wrong. The foolish husband ran for the candell, and
found her nose fast to her face (which he believed he had cut off) as if he
had not touched her: and asking her forgiveness, ever after he loved her
entierly, and thought her honest. The old Crone and Bawd returned to her
house with her nose in her hand, and her face all besmearde with blood: yet
fortune favored her in this, that she was a Barbers wife, and her husband
rising early in the morning before day to shave the tails of the Monckyes of
Portingale (for there there grows hear on their Buttockes, and no where
else) called to his old wife for his Comb case with razors and other
trinckets. Now she being thus handled as ye have heard, (loath to show her
self) put it to adventure, and giving him all his conceytes within the case,
she reached him the razors in his hand, the blades not put into the haftes. The
poor man hasty of his work, in the darcke hastilye took the razors in his
hands, and all to cut his fingers: and then for anger (feeling his fingers cut)
he threw them from him with great violence. With that this crafty old Bawd
cried out amain, alas, alas, my nose. And taking one of those razors she al to
bloudied it, and straight showed him (her husband coming with the light) the
blood, her nose, and razor. The husband astonished at this, to see this in manner
impossible hap, she standing stowtely to it, caused her friends and
kinsfolks to be sent for, and pitifully complaining to them, they altogithers
went to present this chance to the Lords and rulers of the town, and made
her husband be punished. This holy man (as one in deed that saw this
practice) loath to see the innocent husband suffer for his wifes false
accusation: went to the sessions at the day of his araynement to witness a
troth for the siely man. And as he was bent to speak in favor of this poor
Barber, he sodeinly espied that old beaten thief that had robbed him, and
whom he went so long to seek, who was even newlye punished for an old offense
he had done. This good man forgetting to follow the Barbers cause, and to do
that good he came for: cried out upon the Judge for justice against the
thief (as he that in deed had more mind of his gold than of devotion:) and
besought him he might have some part of his own that was left, since he could
not possible recover the whole. The Moyle that all this while had heard the
Asses long discourse, replied straight, and thus he said.

O I perceive your meaning well enough (good brother Ass) and I know I take
ye right. If this holy man had served God and not cast his whole mind on
this worldly pelf, he had not had that loss he has, nor been troubled as he
is. If this carren Bawd had been at home at her house still, she had kept her
nose on her face. And that other Bawd to, if she had not minded to have
killed the Cock of her young Hen, she also had not died. Lastly, the thief
had not suffered death, if he had let the old man's goods alone: and my self
(to say truly) should not suffer now such grief, if I had but only followed
mine own business. I grant, that if I were as I was at the first, I would
not once stir a foot to meddle in any bodies matters but mine own. But
well well, what remedy now? since I am in for a Bird, and cannot get out, and
being ready to burst for spite I bear the Bull that he is thus made off, and
set up: by the Mass I will end it one way or other, by hook or crook, or
it shall cost me the setting on, run dog run devil. Sure as a Clubbe I
will raise some slander of him, to ease my heart burning withal, and to bring
him if I may out of credit. And this Cockle that I will sow may perhaps be
profitable for the King. For many times we see that men raised to high degree,
commonly practice things hurtful to the Prince and state^: or else that the
subjects otherwhile governed by him they mislike, do straight rebel against
the Prince. If I set in foot, I tell thee it were well done of me, that the
King might not in time receive as much hurt of the Bull, as the Bull has
received goodness of him. The Ass lift up his head, and girned at his brother
to see his stubbornness: and said unto him. O brother mine, I am sorry for
thee. I see thou art in health, and yet thou take Physic to bring thee into
an Ague: for under the color of letting fall thine ears in token of
humility, thou will fling out apace. Better sit still than rise and fall. Put
upon thee honesty and upright dealing, let them be ever thy best friends
and countenance: and lift not up thy heart so much with passion, least it happen
to thee (not thincking of it) as it did to him that shooting at rouers up and
down in the woods (supposing no body to be there) was shot at again with
his own shaft, and so hit in the breast died straight. Thou playest see me
see me not, and perswadest thy self that none will spy thy wicked
practices, when in deed thou shall be paid home and never know who hurt
thee. But I wonder how thou dare once take upon thee to offend such a
mighty beast. He is wise, of great strength, and has great credit, besides
that he is in favor, and does what he list: and what he does, the King does. O
master Ass said the Moyle, how like a fool thou speak. Thou know
nothing if thou believe that the greatest persons only can revenge and none
others. See thou not that sometime the simple and ignorant do not regard
nor esteem the good and virtuous: and many times do them shrewde turns and
displeasures? The Commons rob the Gentlemen. But what more? the little
sometime eats up the great: and the Coward kills the valiant. And because I
have heard thee a while, and have alleged many fables and examples: thou
shall now listen to mine another while, and so we will consult what is to be
done. Jesus thou make this Bull wonderful great, and me but a poor beast
and of no account, but I pray thee yet hear me, being poor and little as I
am.

Of the Eagle and Beetell, and what comes of self will.
IN the cliftes of Mount Olympus, there haunted a young Leueret, feeding
contitinually in that place: and an Eagle spying her, marked her form where
she sat, and at a trice came down to sease on her. This pore Leueret seeing
her self thus distressed upon the sodeine, called on the Beetell that was
making certain little Balls, I can not tell what, and bade him help her.
The Beetell fiercely turning to the Eagle, bade her get her thence, and let her
alone, for she was his. The Eagle beholding the foolish Beetell how he stood
on his feet stowtly aduauncing himself, smyled, and laughing still fed on
the unfortunate Leueret till she had devoured her all, not weyghing the Beetell
one of the woorst and least feathers on her back. The Beetell looked upon
her, and put his finger to his mouth, and threatening her went thence attending
his balls again, as who should say: time will come when I will be even
with thee. Within a while after the Beetell carrying this injury in mind, saw
this Eagle in love, and dogging her to her neast, he came thither so often, that
at length he found eggs, and lifting up his tail he began to roll them
up and down (the Eagle being abroad) and rolled them quite out of the nest,
even in manner when the young Eagles were almost ready to be hatched; and with
the fall they lay at the foot of the rock broken, and quashed all to pieces.
When the Eagle returned to her neast, and saw (having a very good eye) her
children in a hundredth pieces, she pitifully lamented, the tears trickling
down her Cheeks. The little beast that in a hole stood to see the end of
this tragedy, seeing the Eagle take on thus heavily, said unto her: nay nay, it
makes no matter, thou art even well served: thou would not let my Leueret
alone, and with that he shronke into his hole, that the devil himself could
not find him out. So that my good Master Ass and dear brother, a man must
beware of will: for all things may be brought to pass, and nothing is hard to
him that determines to do it. Well, yet hear another, and then wonder as
thou will. It booteth not to strive against the stream.

There was a Raven that in the top of a great old tree, in a hollow place of
the same (where none could find out her neast) did ever lay her eggs. Behold
there came out of a hole at the root of the old rotten tree a Snake, which
leap by leap got up to the top of the tree, and sucked these eggs when
they were newly laid: and worse than that, what provision of vittailes soever
the Raven had brought to her neast, the Snake still devoured, so that the pore
Raven could never have her provision she prepared against foul weather. The
foolish Raven got her to the Fox her Cousin to ask him counsel, and when she
had told all and more, she resolved straight to fly on the top of the Eagles
head, and to pecke out her eyes: and thereupon she desired to know the Foxes
judgment. Beware said the Fox, do it not: for it will not fall out as thou
think. Do thou not remember what our elders were wont to say: that it
booteth not to strive against the stream, nor preuayleth to be revenged on him
that is stronger and mightier than him self? but malice and treason only must
serve that turn. Therefore lysten a little, and thou shall hear this notable
chance.

FIrst of fellowship hear me but four words by the way, and then say on.
That that must be shall be. The Bull was even predestined great, thou a Moyle,
and I an Ass. He that is ordained to be a King, though he be a Plowe man, I
believe sure he shall be King, and that heaven does direct all things aright and
not otherwise. The examples are very good, but yet how things will fall out
the end will try it. Now on a Gods name, say what thou will.

THere dwelled a great Paragone of India (of those that live a hundredth years
and never mue their feathers) a bird of the water, air, and earth, in a great
thick close knot of Rosemarie upon a pleasant Lake, placed beneath amongst
the little hills spread over with herbs and flowers. And always in his youth
he lived (as his nature is) of fish, the which with some devise he took by
Moon light with great sweat and labor. And now being aged, not able to plunge
into the water with his wonted force, he was driven to fly in the air and
feed on Crickets, which being few in number, he was almost starued for
hunger. But one day standing by the rivers side all sad and malincholy, lo
there comes a great Crabbe with her legs spread abroad to the banks side
which said. Sir Foul how do you? in faith quoth he naught at home: for we
have ill news abroad. I pray you what are they said the Crabbe? Certain
fishers said he that within few days with some engines and devises will dry
up this Lake and take up all the fish. But I pore wretch, that yet otherwhile
had one, how shall I do? I would I might save them (since I am like to lose
them) for the benefit that I have had so long time, and that I might take them
out of the Lake, and flying carry them into some other surer place. The Crabbe
hearing so ill news, called to Parliament all the fishes of the Lake, and told
them this matter. The fishes foreseeing the danger at hand, had present
recourse unto the wild Foul for counsel, to tell him how it stood with
them: and said unto him. If this be true, out of doubt we are in great danger
and therefore give us the best counsel thou can, as well for the love thou
bear to this Lake, as for the service we look to do to thee, honest Foul.
The Paragone that knew there was good pasture and a fertile soil, caught
hold, and bitte straight: saying. The great love I bear you (quoth he) dear
brethren mine, for that I have been bredde, fed, and brought up in this Lake,
even to crooked age, makes me truly to pity ye, and sure I am and will be
ready to do ye any good I can. Therefore in my opinion (and ye will be ruled
by me) you shall do best to get you hence, and tarry not their coming, for
they will spare none: all is fish that comes to net with them. And because
I am practiced in the world (as he that goes in every place) I can tell you
there are a thousand places fairer than this, better, and a cleerer water, and
were marueylouslye more for your profit and healthes: and if ye be contented,
I will tell you where and how. All at once yielded to him, and greatly
commended him, (O foolish fishes to believe such a beast) prayinge him to
dispatche the matter with as much celeritie as might be. He willed then some of
them to get them under his pinions, and to hold fast with their bills by the
feathers of his tail, and so to train them on, he dyued so far under water
that they might conveniently fasten themselves in order to fly with the Foul.
And when they were mounted on his back he took his flight fair and softlye
to the top of one of those high Mountains, and setting them down on the
ground he eat them al at his pleasure. This manner of fishing continued a while
because it went forward day by day as he began, still filling his belly. But
the she Crabbe that was rather malicious than not, imagined that this Foul had
wrought some deceit, and even then there was a Tenche that she loved well
ready to go with the Foul as the reast had done before, and this Tenche was
so plumme and fat that she might well serve him for a good meal. In the
end the Crabbe said. O Foul my dear brother, I would thou would carye
me to the place where the other fishes are: and he was contented. So she gate
up on horseback as it were, and with her feet clasped the Foul about the
neck, and he straight mounted into the skies, as one that meant in deed to let
the Crabbe fall and break in pieces: and even then he espied for the purpose
a heap of stones where he thought to work this feate, to let her fall. The
Crabbe beholdinge the garbage and offall of those dead fishes, seeing the
yminent danger she was in, straight opened her mouth and seized on the neck
of the Foul, holding as hard as she could for her life: and she kept her
hold so well, that straight she strangled him, and the Foul fell down
dead, the Crabbe on his back alive without any hurt at all. The Crabbe
returned home to her Lake, and told all the mischief of the Foul, and in
what danger she was in, and how she had freed them all from his devouring
throat. Which understood, the fishes all with one consent gave her many a
thank.

THe Fox telling his tale, came to give this counsel to the Raven, that he
should go into some neighbors house and steal a Ring, but steal it so that
he might be seen take it, hopping from place to place, snatching here and
there till he came into the Serpents hole. For by this means being espied with
the manner, every body would run after him, and then he should let it fall
into the Snakes hole. They to get the Ringe again would dig into it, and
seeing the Serpent, they should by this means come to kill her. The Raven
lyked the Foxes opinion, and robbed from one a Jewel of good value, and carried
it thither, whither all the young people ran after him, and digging the hole,
the Serpent came out amongst them, and they slew her. And thus with one little
revenge he quited many injuries done him. The Ass that knew his subtle
practices well enough, answered. And so am I of thy opinion, specially if one
deal with a fool, or with one that will put a viser on his face, and that
imagines none can make it so fast and fit as himself, and that trusts
altogether to his money, esteeming no body, and lives sitting in his chair
without any care. The Bull does not so, for I have always known him in his
affairs no less subtle than wise, and likes to hear every body, but
specially to follow the counsel of grave men in his matters. And touching
this matter I dare boldly say to thee, and assure thee, that the Bull has a
great confidence in me, because I brought him to the Court under the safe
condite of my word, (although it needed not) and the oath that I made him will
make him believe me in any thing I say: and therefore let him come when he
list, I have done his errant well enough I warrant ye. He reckeneth himself
safe with me, but I will play him such a part as the vicious and wicked Fox
played another Lion (as the story following recites) being like to have been
devoured of him.

Of the Fox and the Lion, and of the Foxes deceit to kill the Lion.
THere was a marvelous drougth in Arabia Petrea, in that year that the hot
burninge winds were, and as I remember it was even upon the making of the
Leap year in that country, and being the first time also of it, so there was
no water to be had any where, but only a little spring in the top of the
Mountain called Carcobite. At that time there lay by that spring a brave and
fierce Lion, which as we poor beasts went to the water to quench our thirst,
set upon us, and devoured us, or at least slew us. So that he made a Butchers
shambles greater than any Butcher makes at Christmas against any feast. Fame
blewe forth this strange death and cruelty, so that the beasts compelled to
assemble dispatched Ambassadors to the Lion, and offered composition, to give
him daily some pray to satisfy him with, and that they might not all die for
lack of water. The Lion accepted the condition, sticking to their offer, as one
that had advised himself well, consideringe that if he had not done it, they
had all dyed for thirste, and he for famine, and thereupon agreed. The beasts
drue lots, and on whom the lotte fell, he went his way to give himself in
pray unto the Lion. So long these lottes continued, that at length it lighted
on the Foxes neck to be swallowed up of this devouring Lion, which seeing no
remedy but die he must (at least as he thought) he devised to revenge the
death of the rest, and to free his own. And forth he runs apace unto this
Lion, and prostrating himself at his feet, began to enlarge his old and
faithful service done heretofore to his ancient predecessors, and told him
also how he was sent Ambassador from the company of the beasts to signifye to
him a strange happened case even at that instant. And this it was. That the
lot fell on a fat Wether to come to pay his tribute, and by the way another
strange Lion met him, and took him quite away, saying that he was far
worthier to have the Wether than you, and that (prowdely) he would make you
know it. If you mean to maintain your honor, I will bring you to him, and
there you shall determine it between you by the teeth and nails. The Lion
mad at this, little suspectinge the slye Foxes wiles and crafts, was ready
to run out of his wits, when the Fox began a new. My Lord he has
dared to say (with such arrogancy) that he will chasten you well enough, and
let you know you do not well, and that you should do better and more
honorably to go into the field, and there to get pray, than to tarry by the
fountain, looking that other should bring it unto you, and as it were to put
meat into your mouth. And at the last, he said plainly you were but a slouch
and sluggardly beast. Come on, come on said the Lion, show me this bold and
dangerous beast, bring me to him where he is without any more ado. The Fox
that knew a Well where they drue up water with ropes, that the beasts could
not drink of it, brought him to the Wells side, and said. Sir, the Lion your
enemy is within the Well. He lustily leaped up straight upon the Curb of the
Well, and seeing his image in the water, he fierslye cast himself into the
Well, supposing to have encountered with the Lion his enemy: by means whereof
he plunged himself into the bottom, and drowned straight. Which news
brought unto the beasts, avouched for troth, they joyfully embraced this
crafty recovered Fox. Therefore said the Ass, thou think thou go in
clouds, and handlest thy matters in such secret that they shall not be known.
But if through thy spite and malice the Bull come to his death, what have thou
done? To hurt him that is the bounty and goodness of the world, it were to
great a sin. Think thou the heavens behold thee not? Beleeuest thou thy
naughtynesse is hidden from Gods secret knowledge? O master Moyle, thou art
deceived, thou know not what thou do.

GOod brother Ass say what thou list, I am self willed in this I tell thee,
and out of doubt I will bring him out of the Kings favor, or I will die for it:
and tell not me of honesty or dishonestie. Tut a fig I am determined. Happy
man happy dole. Sure I will try my wit, and see the end and uttermost of
my malice.

The third part of Moral Philosophy QVOD MOLESTIVS PATIOR TACEO

Anno. 1570.
The third part of Moral Philosophy describing the great treasons of the
Court of this World.
I Can not too much exhort you (good Readers) to take some pain to continue
the reading of this Treatise, knowing how much it will delight and profit you,
having somewhat understood also by that ye have read before, beside that ye
shall understand in reading this that follows. Where you shall know how much a
wise Courtier may do, and a double man, whose end was aunswerable to his
naughty mind and life. Which God grant may come to all such envious and
spiteful persons, that in Princes Courts (and through Christendom) delyght
in so vile an Art, and to commit so detestable treasons. And now give
attentive ear, and you shall hear.

Behold the wicked practices and deuilish inventions of a false traiterous
Courtier.
THis worshipful Moyle when he had reposed himself a few days, and had
lively framed this treason in his head, he went to the King, and showed him
by his looks that he was malincholye, pensive, and sore troubled in his
mind. The King that saw this perplexed beast, and dearelye loving him: would
needs know of the Moyle the cause of his grief. Whom this subtle Moyle
finely answered, and with these words.

Most puissant and mighty Prince, I have even striued with my self to hide
the cause of my inward sorrow, which in deed is so much as it can be no more.
And albeit I have been many days in coming to your Majesty, seeking to ease
some part of my trouble: yet I could never find any devise or mean to release
my heavy and woeful heart of any one jot thereof. And this is only grown (O
Noble Prince) of the great love I bear your Grace, because it touches not
only your highness in person, but therewith the whole state of your Princely
Monarchy. And I that am your Majesty's vassal and subject, and a lover of the
conservation of your Realm and Kingdom, am bound (will I nill I) to
discharge my bounden duty to your command. Truly the trembling of heart that
I have suffered has been extreme, night and day continuallye vexing and
trormenting me, when I have thought of so dangerous a case. The thought that
pricked me on the one side, was to doubt that your Majesty would not credit
me, bewraying to you the danger: and not disclosing it, I had not discharged
the duty of a true subject and faithful servant to his Lord. Compelled
therefore to open (as is the duty of every servant) all that that any way may
fall out to the hurt and prejudice of the Master, I come most humbly to
signify to your Grace the case as it stands.

A very faithful and secret friend of mine not long since came unto me, and
made me promise him, and swear unto him with great oaths that I should not
tell it in any case, because he is a man of great honor and dignity, and
worthy to be well thought of and credited. And he told me that the Bull had
secret practice with the chief of your Realm, and that he had often privy
conference with them. And amongst other things he told them all the great
fear your Majesty had of him, disclosing to them also your cowardly heart and
small force. And he went so far forth in terms of reproach and dishonor of
your highness, that if his counsel, favor, help, and good government had
not been, as he said: your Majesty's Realm (not knowing whether you are alive
or dead) had been at this present brought to nothing. And furthermore he did
exhort them to assemble together for their profit, and to choose him for their
King. Saying, if they would do this for him, he would take upon him to drive
you out of your kingdom: and he being King would so exalt them, and show
them such favor, that they should not find him unthankful, besides that he
would acknowledge the whole benefit proceeding from them. And moreover (the
worst is yet behind) the more part of them, I swear to your highness by the
head of my brother, have promised with speed to put it in practice, and
continually they devise the way to perform it. So that invincible prince, take
not Negligence for your guide, but prefer and entertein Diligence to prevent
the traitorous prepared danger, and to foresee the happy wished health of
your Royal person. I was he that made him promise your Majesty should not
offend him, nor once touch him when I brought him to the Court. I am he that
ever lyked and loved him as my dear brother. But yet am not I he that will
suffer or conceal so high a treason against my Lord and Prince. Tract not
time, most noble Prince, in wondering at these things, but presently put your
self in order for your safety: (so shall you meet with your enemy, and be
ready for him) least your Majesty by sloth unawares be taken tardie, as was
the slow fish which was taken in a Lake with two others in company. And this
is a certain and true tale that I will tell your highness.

Of three great fishes, and what is signified by them.
ALmost upon the borders of Hungary there was a certain Lake that bredde
fish of a marvelous bone, and that of monsterous greatness as was to be
found or heard of in the world. The King because of the wonder of this Lake
would not suffer it to be fished at any time: but that himself when it pleased
him every certain years did draw it dry. The King forgetting the Lake a
great time, and leaving his wonted fishing, three fishes grew therein of a
monstrous bigness and unspeakable hugeness, the which feeding on the lesser
eat up the store of the Lake, leaving it in manner without fish to that it
was before. Now, as still it chances, every thing is known, the devouring of
these fishes was brought to the Kings ear, insomuch as he determined to go
fish the Lake for the three devouring fishes to eat them, that the frye might
increase. Order given to his fishers, he went unto the Lake. My Lord you must
know that every where there is of all sorts, some restie, some liuelye, some
knauishe, some good, some naught, some mad, some swift, some slow, and so
forth. I mean, that of these three fishes one of them was malicious and
subtle: the other of a high mind, and very stowte: and the third was
slothful and timorous. An old Frogge that stood many times with these fishes
in discourse, to talk and play at sundry other pastimes (the which knew
over night the drawing of the Lake) went the same night to seek out these
fyshes, and told them of the danger at hand: and even as one would have it,
they were at the table with three great Eeles, although it were late, (for then
Fishes suppe) and yet for all this news they stirred not a whit, but made the
Frogge sit down, and they began to Carrowse when it was about midnight. So
that within a while having taken in their cups, (bidding well for it) their
heads waxed heavy, and so to sleep they went: Some at the table, some on the
ground, some in one place, some in another. At the dawning of the day the
Fishers began to spread their nets, and to compass the Lake drawing all
along. The Eeles hearing the noise got them into the mudde, that the very
map of Navigations could not have discovered them. The subtle and malicious
fyshe hearing a noise, ran straight into a dytch, and entered into a little
river where he was safe from danger of the net. The other was not quick,
for the nets had stopped his passage, and because he was strong and stowte,
he made as though he had been dead, having his mouth full of stynckinge
mudde, and so floted with the waves up and down. And the third was called of
the Frogge ten times that he should rise and awake: whooe, but all in vain.
He punched him for the nonste, and iogged him again to make him awake, but it
would not be. And he, tut like a sluggarde answered him. I will rise anon,
anon: I pray thee let me alone a while, let me lie yet a little courtesy and
then have with thee. Still the Fishers went on apace with their nets, and let
go the water: and when they saw this great Fish above the water, floting as I
told you, they took him up and smelled to him, and perceyuinge he stoncke
they threw him from them into the Lake again, and cast him into the same
place where they had already drawn their nets, and so he escaped with life.
They happened on the third, which was as a man would say a certain let me
alone, and drowsy fish, and they took him even napping: and when they had
him (thinking they had done a great act to ketch him) they carried him in haste
to the King (but by the way I do not tell ye of the bragges they made in
ketching this Fish) alive as he was. Who commanded straight he should be
dressed in a thousand kinds and ways, for that he was fat, great, and
mightilye fed. Now your Majesty has heard the tale of the slow and
sleepie Fish, I leave it to your highness judgment and determination, to
foresee the danger, reaping the profit: or to leap into it, utterly
overthrowing your self.

THe King set a good countenance on the matter, although these news touched
him inwardly, and seemed as they had not altered him at all, and with great
modesty and courtesy answered the Moyle. I make no doubt of thy true and
faithful service to me, because I know thou can not suffer so much as the
shadow of the danger of my estate and kingdom, much less the hurt of my
person. Although many Princes and Lords in such case think themselves ill
served: yet is it meet and right that the good be rather led by virtuous
instinct, then carried away from the right through displeasure received. I see
thou willest me good, and am sure that the love thou bear me, makes thee
ielous of the maintenance of mine honor and estate. Yet it hardly enters into
me, and me thinks it strange (save that thou tellest it me, I could hardly
think it, much less believe it) that such wicked thoughts should breed in
the Bulls breast to me, since by proof I know him in many things both good,
faithful, and honest in his service: and he knows besides my goodness to
him, how I received him courteously into my Court, and that he may say he is
made Lord in manner of my kingdom.

Sacred Prince (said the Moyle) I believe in deed that the Bull thinks
himself well entreated of your Majesty: (and good cause he has so to do,)
and that he means no hurt to your royal person for any displeasure he has
received of you, or for any conceived hate he has toward you. And I think
sure he takes not upon him so foul an enterprise to other end, but because
prouinder pricketh him, and makes him lusty to fling and play the wanton, and
for that he is well he cannot see it, and that makes him to devise some
mischief, weening to have all in his hands, save the very title of the King,
and that this little, (having all the rest) which is also the most, is easy
for him to obtain. I suppose your Highness has understood me: now take
what way you list. I know well enough that an Ass laden with gold may sleep
more safely amongst thieves, than a King that trusts traiterous officers and
governors appointed for the state. And let your Majesty be sure of this,
that that which the Bull can not compass nor reach unto by his own force and
others, he will certainly practice by deceyt, using such means to bring him to
it, as the Flea did to bring the Lowse to that pass he brought him to, and
that he had long pursued as follows.

A tale of the Flea and the Lowse, and how the Flea was revenged of the Lowse.
THere lodged an old Flea in the chamber of a great Prince, and there dwelled
with him also a gentle Lowse. The one continually fed upon little white
dogs of fine long hear, and after he had filled himself he retired with
safetye all the day, and walked at pleasure. The Lowse that was stronger of
body, and bit harder, many times drove her from her pasture: So that the poor
Flea was mad for anger she could not be revenged. It happened that the
Prince took to wife a beautiful young Lady one of the most delicatest and
finest morsels that ever Prince tasted of in the world, and in that Chamber was
his wedding bed. The Flea drawn to the wedlock bed with the sweet savor
of her blood, conveyed her self straight between the sheets, and in her first
sleep she sweetly fed at will on this angelical food. Now she bit her
yuorie thighs, then she gnawed her breast of congeled milk, anon she sucked
her delicate and soft throat, another while she pretty playde her, pinching
that sweet carcass: and when she had filled her belly she leaped away, and
went to take her rest, shunning the day light. The Lowse attended to feed on
Dogs flesh, (for at that time it was the order, that Fleas fed of men, and
Lyce of Dogs) and lived in Gods peace. The Flea, whom extreme rage did gnawe
to be revenged of the Lowse, went to seek him out with this cloked brotherly
love, and said unto him. Brother, though no cause move me to deal friendly
with thee, having received continual displeasures and wrongs at thy hands,
yet I cannot refrain but I must do somewhat for thee, since so good occasion
is offered me: and I am the willinger to do it, because thou shall know I
love thee, and wyshe thee well. Thou shall understand I feed every night on
the most sweetest blood in the world: and wotest thou who it is? it is of the
beautiful and delicate young Lady newly spoused. If thou will go in my company
I am contented to carye thee thither with me, and will gladly impart my joys
and welfare to thee: and henceforth let peace for ever be concluded between
us. Agreed quoth the Lowse. And with that they lovingly embraced each others:
the Flea inuiting the Lowse, and the Lowse accepting her bidding. With this
new cloked reconciliation togithers they went, to the great joy of the Flea,
not for the atonement made between them, but for the opportunity of time that
had so fitted her to make her revenge: and the more it gladded her to, that her
own force and might being insufficient to encounter with his strength, yet
sleyght and policy supplanted and exceeded his force. The night was come, the
Prince and his Lady were laid in bed to take their rest, the Flea and Lowse
like brethren leaped on the bed, and when they saw them at rest, and fast a
sleep, they disposed themselves to feed, and like staruelynges in manner
famished they laid on lode, so that they raised great broad spots like
pimples, and red as a Rose. These vermins being now in the only gardein of
sweetness, continuing their biting even in good earnest: this tender Lady
forced with their cruel and discourteous bittes awaked perforce, and softly
called her Lord and husband, and told him. I feel my self terriblye bitten
this night with some vermin, and yet I know not what it is that thus has
diseased me. Her husband straight called up his men, and bade them bring
light. The Flea so soon as she espied light, like an old practiser at four
leapes conveyed her self away, and so escaped. The poor Lowse that was no
great horse to leap, was taken tardie, and not able to allege for his
purgation, as a dumb creature received the law, condemned to die, and was
committed to be pressed to death between the Maids two nails, where for his
obstinacy and presumption she thrust out his blood and milk that he
presumingly had sucked of so noble a Lady. Your highness also may take this
example of that old lame creature, crook backed, ill shaped, and deformed,
which with all these impediments (drawing one step after another) went as
far as he that had his limbs and health, though with longer time, and crept
at length unto his iourneyes end to do any business he had. This Bull
wants not time to further his pretense, he will put his hand into the Pie,
and set in foot when he sees his time. And for this time I will occupy your
Majesty no more but with two words only of the Flea, which hearing the crack
of the silly Lowse laughed a while at the revenge that others took of him for
her: and to her self she said. Ah sir, gramercy my good wit yet. Thou have
done that on a sodeine for me, that all the strength I have could not bring to
pass in a long time: and now yet with another man's hand I have pulled out
the Crabbe out of her hole. I am even with him I warrant him.

WHy, what shall we do then? if the case stand as thou set it forth,
what way shall we take? I will hear thee willingly, and follow thy counsel:
with this condition though, that in this interim my Realm and person be not
touched, or that I sustain peril or loss.

Invincible Lord, to have any member festered and rankle, and plainly to see
that if it be not cut off it will corrupt and infect the whole body, and in
cutting it off, the body remains safe and free from infection: what is he so
mad that will not cut it off? The shepeherde findinge in his flock (I speak
more resolutely) a scabbie and infected sheep, does not only cut off his
leg, but riddeth him out of the way, because he shall not infect the flock.

SVre this sodeine matter makes me much muse, said the Lion. For one way
draws me to love him, and that is the credit I repose in him, the long
experience of his good government, his virtues and wisdom, and because I
never found cause in him to detect him any way. The other thing that presses
me much, is fear: which is a great burden. I would feign therefore find a
way between both, that should be betwixt love and hate, or betwixt fear and
trust, and this it is. To call (if thou think good) the Bull, and to examine
him well and straightly. And if I find him any thing at all blotted with this
humor, I will chastise him with banishment, but never imbrue my hands in his
blood, proceeding like a great and noble Prince. This determination lyked not
the Moyle, as he that was sure to live like a wretched beast, and that his
malice by this devise should appear: and straight he answered the King. Your
Majesty has even lighted right on the most stranglingst morsel, and the
hardest Nutte to crack: if you mean to follow that you have propounded. For
he cares not to throw at his enemy, that believes he is not seen: but
stands to behold if it light right. But if he beware once he is seen, then
for shame he sticks to his tackle, and follows on his blow, least he
should be counted a fool and Coward both in his doings. And by such like
means I have often times seen a little sparckle kindle a great fire. O my
Lord, he that fayneth he has not been offended, may at his ease and leisure
be revenged. Contrary to those that never bring any thing to pass that they
would, when they spit that out with their tongue that they think in their
heart. Therefore I am determined (if your Majesty will like my opinion) to
work another and peradventure a better way. I will home to his house, and as a
friend I will feel him to the bottom and grope his mind: and he as my very
friend also (and that assuredly trusts me) will lay himself open to me, I
am sure of it. Such passioned minds will easilye break out at the first, and
they cannot keep it in but out it must. They are besides that great boasters
and vaunters. For they think they stand in deed in that degree and terms of
reputation and honor that they imagine themselves to be in, and they make large
promises, and build Castles in the air: and at every word they say they
will make thee great, and bring thee into favor, and when time serves thou
shall see what I will say and do both. It will not be long to it. Well, well,
I know what I say. So that with such like Phrases and devises, it shall
proceed rightly. And thus in these trains appear yet tokens evident enough
and very notable. If he have not capacity and judgment to conceive me, and
that he even cross not my meaning: I that have an ynckling of the thing
already, I will be with him in every corner, I will not miss him an ynch. If
he raise men, what order he has given, and whether his house be armed or no,
yea, and I will draw out the matter ye shall see finely out of his naughty
fantastical head. And if he go so privily to work that I cannot see him where
he goes, nor know what he does, as I am sure I know perfitely all his
practices: I will bring him to your Highness, and when he shall appear
before you, you shall easilye find him. For his head is not without fear,
and his sight very dull, and he will not come to you with that cheerful
countenance he was wont to look on you before. He will be very suspicious
and not continue in a tale, and I know your Grace shall perceive his malicious
and spiteful practice by many tokens evident enough. And what knows your
Grace whether the pen of his heart will not write all his thoughts in his
forhed? as many times it falls out unhappily, contrary to the disposition of
his thought that has offended.

THis fable filled the Lions head full, and he bade him not slow to bring
his matters to pass. The Moyle when he saw this gear work with the King,
and that his brain was swollen for suspicion, said to himself. Now goodman
Bull is caught, we have him even as we would. So forthwith without delay he went
to Chiarino (the Bull so called) and he was as pale and malincholye as it had
rained upon him. O your Moilship is welcome said the Bull: Jesus what has
become of your Lordship so long? In faith you have been longed for at the
Court, that you have been thus long absent. But I doubt me we shall hear worse
than that, seeing you thus lean and miserably consumed away. But I pray ye how
comes it to pass that I find ye in this wretched state? you will not
marvel I trust I am thus inquisitiue. For you must understand the love I
bear you, and partlye the duty I owe you, (where I may pleasure you with my
countenance or authority) are not to be put in Salt nor Oil to do you
good, and to help you if you be in any danger. Leave off this sadness of
fellowship, and tell me your grief, and I will unfold it well enough be it
never so intricate, and spare me not I pray you, but be bold of me. Tut,
give me but half a look, and then let me alone. With these words the Moyle
made answer.

TRuly faith has left her habitation on the earth, and bounty reigns no
more in any land: neither do I think your wisdom can do more or less,
than the heavens and celestial motions do dispose you to. Lord, what a
marvelous thing is this? that to come to fame and renown by degrees of honor,
it brings a thousand dangers with it. We never (or seldom) do well, when
we follow our own humor or counsel. And he also that out of the books of the
ignorant takes forth any sentence to serve his turn, must of necessity
repent him when he sees his folly. All the Stories of the world affirm, that
a lame man can never go upright. The Sages also agree, that the highest places
are most dangerous to clyme. Therefore it is best ever to bear a low sail:
not to hie for the Pie, nor to low for the Crow.

THy talk brother Moyle (said Chiarino the Bull) me thinks is very
troublesome and idle, and without any manner of reason. It seems a fold of
words that the angry heart discovers, and that he is not in good peace with
his master. How say ye? answer me but to this.

O My good Chiarino: thou art inspired with the holy ghost, the Devil is
within thee thou have so rightly hit me. It is true the King is angry and
suspecteth somewhat, but not through me I assure thee, nor by my means. Now
thou know very well the promise I made for thee, and the beastly oath I
took, which binds me in deed to my word: and let it go as it will, sure I
will not break my promise with my friend that I love for any respect in the
world, let the world run on wheels as it list. Therefore I will tell thee
if thou had not been warned of it before. And harcken how.

Two Gotes my very friends, and of great judgment came to see me, weening to
bring me pleasant news, not knowing that we two are tied as it were by the
nauels together, being both as one in friendship. And they told me for
certainty that the Lion our King is marvelous angry, that he smoked again
at the mouth, making such verses as the Cattes do when they go a catterwawling
in January, and in that fury he spit forth these words. Ever when I see that
Bull before me, I am ready to fall for anger. An unprofitable body, and no
goodness in him at all: brought into the world but to fill his paunch at
others cost. I can not be well, he does vex all the parts of me he does so
much offend me. Well, I will take order for this well enough, and since he does
me no service by his life, I will profit my self by his death at least. When I
heard these words spoken, thou may imagine whether my hears stood upright
or no, and I could not hold but I must needs say. Well, well, such Lords, in
faith they are lyker Plowmen than those they represent. I see they stie the
Hog to fat him up, and so to eat him. O this his ingratitude and cruelty,
(I cannot hyde it) and his so great beastlynesse together has taken me by the
nose, as if I had met with the Mustarde pot. For those good qualities of thine,
for that league that is betwixt us (although I were sure of his Graces
indignation) and because me think thou art betrayde, I could not choose but
come and tell it thee. So that good Chiarino, thou art great and old enough,
look well to thy self, thou need not be taught, thou art wise enough, and
there an end. Thou art past a Steer, and a Bull full grown, nay rather a fat
Ox. But hear thou me, Gods my bones not a word for thy life: for if thou
do, all the fat lies in the fire, and the pottage may be spilt and cast
on the Moyles back.

CHiarino stood a while on the ground like a mased beast, as one that had been
dry beaten, being fronted with so malicious a devise. Then he laid his hand
on his heart, and bethought him of all his business and matters: as of his
government, office, living, authority, and regiment: and knowing himself as
clear as a Barbers basen, he hit the matter rightly, imagining (as it was)
that some had wrought knavery against him, and said. Well, go to: there is
nothing breeds more occasion of mortal hate, than the vile and slye practices
of the perverse and wicked. Our Court is full of envious persons, which stirred
up perhaps with spite to see the Prince favor and like my service (being a
coresey to their heart to abide it) do wickedly practice and devise such
mischiefs. They seeing (as I say) the graces and benefits the Prince
bestows on me, making me honorable, and heapyng great things upon me,
do procure by indirect means to make his Majesty turn his copy, and me to
change my wonted manners. Sure when I look into the matter and advise it well,
it is me thinks a thing not to be credited, and it makes me not a little to
wonder that his Grace without cause is thus deceived: yet in the end truth I
know will take place. God will not long suffer such practices. Neither Law
will in any wise permit that a man shall have judgment before he be heard.
Since I came first as a beast into his Highness service, I never did any thing
that my conscience should accuse me in. But yet I have as great cause to
bewail my myshaps come to me, as he that putting himself to the sea (and
might have gone safe by land) was thrown on a rock and drowned: and all through
his own seeking. All they which busy themselves thus in Court, and run from
table to table, making themselves great with this man and that man, still
whispering in their ears, must (notwithstanding that the Prince reward them,
or that he be very well served of them, and like them) look to be touched at
one time or other, and vnhappilye to fall into the Princes disgrace, and
perhaps to remain so a good while out of favor. And this only rises by
these double reporters and tale bearers, or by the envy of Courtiers, which is
mother of all vice and iniquity. I dare boldly show my face every where, for
any offense I ever did the King. And if I had committed a fault through
ignorance, and not of will: me thinks I should not be punished neither for
the one nor the other. The counsel that I always gave him, has ever fallen
out well, and to good purpose. And if perhaps they have not all taken such
effect as they ought: he must think Fortune will play her part in these
worldly things. And this I say for purgation of my upright and honest meaning
to his royal Majesty. I am sure the King will but proceed with justice,
following the steps of the just: the which will lay no violent hands on any
beast, but will first inquire, whether the cause be just, who are the accusers,
whether he be a lawful man that does such a thing, and if the quality of the
offense agree with the conditions of the accused, with such other like
circumstances and ceremonies pertinent to matters of such importance. He
that gathers unripe fruit, repents him of the marring it. Behold the
fruits eaten in Court: in the mouth passing sweet and lusshious, but in the
body God knows very bitter and hurtful. Lord, how many does the
foolish vain pomp of the world deceive and abuse? I may rightly take my
self for one of those, that scant has tasted of the shadow of his
sweetness, but I am even filled with poison. The heavens beget beasts, and
they join togithers: but I would I had never joined with it, since I shall
leave it so quickly, fool that I was, that I could not know the difference
betwixt him and me, and discern his nature. Go you and serve in a strange
country a Gods name. See what difference there is betwixt him and me. I must
wear the yoke, and he must break it. I am borne to labor, and he must sit
still. When I have meat given me I eat, and tarry not his ravening. Flies may
live abroad in the fields, and yet they fly into men's eyes: so that sometime
with death they pay for their coming, or at least are driven away with hurt
and mayme. And to conclude, I feed on the grass, and fill me, and he
feeds on dainty flesh, and fares well.

THese thy wise reasons, O Chiarino, sincke not into my head said the Moyle
(as he that would needs make him believe he gave him a remedy for his
grief, and presented a cup with poison.) Make no more words, for thou must
put to thy hand to redress it, and not to lament it. For ill stand words in
place where deeds are requisite. To show his grief said the Bull, and to
break his mind to his friend, me thinks it is partly an ease to the heart,
and a lightning of the mind to him that is afflicted. And so much more is this
in me, because I see my self in great danger, and like to be undone. And
although the Lion delighted not in my hurt which I may suffer, (and as thou
say likes him) yet the iniquity of my enemies notwithstanding will so
prevail against me, that the king will give no ear to my innocence. And I am
sure (for I see it in the Element) that the like will fall on me, that lighted
on the Camel with an other like Lion: which tale follows, and this it is.

IN Thebaida (a country so called) before division of caves were made between
the great and little beasts, men abode with beasts many times in one hole,
and lived like brothers: and men were then so scant that they could have no
other men to wait upon them, insomuch as they took unreasonable beasts to
service, as it is written of Olofar King of knaves, which at that time did
never other but lie along on the ground, and was so slothful that he
suffered the Snakes to come and rub his feet to provoke him to sleep. Now
this idle beast dwelled near unto a Cave where inhabited togithers three
beasts, to wit: A Woolfe, a Fox, and a Raven. I pray ye see what a foolyshe
fraternity was amongst these three: and it might be said. The best takes up
the worst. This laysie Knave bichaunce got up one morning betymes at Cock
crowing, and he saw this that I will tell you now. Certain Merchaunts passed
by with a marvelous number of Camels laden, and on a sodeine one of them fell
down for weariness, not able to go any further. Insomuch as the Merchaunts
vnloded him of his burden, and cast it on the reast, to each one some, till they
had it all on their backs again amongst them, and so left this Camel behind
them to the mercy of the wild beasts. The Woolfe, Fox, and Raven, chanced
to come that way, and they saw this poor Camel come as one that had never a
whole joint in him, and as it were half dead. The Camel recommended him
self unto them, and told them by what means he was brought to this miserable
myshappe. These three were sorry for it, and took compassion on him, and as
they might carried him to their Cave, where they refreshed him with such
confections, as were fit for the place and time. And thus they kept him still
in cure till he recovered, and patched him up again. They three seeing so
goodly a morsel of flesh as this Camel was, thought it best to present him to
the king, which was an old Lion, and his palace not far from them. The
Camel hearing them say we will prefer you to the Lion our Emperor, King,
Prince, Archduke, Duke, Marquess, Earl, and chief Lord over us, to be his
Page of his privy Chamber, lyked no whitte of that estimation and
advancement, and would not understand the matter. Howbeit they made so much on
him, and clawed him, that they brought him on fair and softly (as his pace is
not fast) and he went as though one joint would not hang by an other. When he
was come to the kings presence, he humbly kneeled down, and exhibited to his
grace in writing the cause of his coming to him, as he was before instructed
by the Raven, and kissed his hand. The Lion hearing himself called
invincible, most puissant, most noble, right honorable, great Clarke,
Suffragane, and Archking, showed himself very gentle, those royal terms so
pleased him, and would not devour the Camel as the ravening Woolfe had
beckened to him, and as that subtle Fox had wincked on him: but he made him
of his Chamber, and treasorer of his house. And moreover, beyond all their
expectation, he did assure him with safeconduct, and made marvelously on him,
strokyng him a thousand times under the chinne, and received him into service.
This Camel that was fed now with the Chariot horses, and fared as they did,
grew quite out of fashion he was so full fed, and his Cote was as sleeke as a
Mowles skin. So that they that knew him before, and saw him then, spighted
him out of measure, and gave him many an ill look. Yea those chieflye that
brought him first to the Court, were they that looked most awrye on him.

It fortuned one day that the Lion being a hunting in a great wild Chase, met
with an Elephant, who believed and was sure he was the greatest beast of the
world, and looked in all and for all to be the greatest King, as he was in
deed the greatest bodyed beast. Insomuch as after hot words, they grue to
lusty strokes: in the end the Elephante struck the Lion into the thigh with
one of his teeth, that he piersed it quite through. So that he was forced to
set one of his stubbed feet on the back of the Lion to pluck it out, that
he made him have the squirt for woe he so squeased him, and said: Cedo bonis.
And the Elephant departed his way for the Kingliest beast of beasts. This
battle fell out ill for the Lion, so they carried him home upon a wheelebarrow
after the fashion of the Country, and there he was straight ministered unto
with souereygne Balmes, and within short time galantly healed. The Lion
continued his diet a while at the Woolues provision, and his meals were so
slender that he became as lean and dry as a Kixe: that if one had put a
Candle light into his body, it would have given light as through a Lantern.
After this foughten fraye between the Lion and Elephant, not a beast of them
durst once stir to hunt, and the Lion himself was more afraid now than
before, least he should meet with such another banquet. Yet being thus lean as
he was, and such a dearth besides, he was sorier for his servant than for
himself. The Raven, the Woolfe, and the Fox that were all three in manner
famished, one day under good license and color they painted these words unto
him. The benefits received from your Majesty, most excellent Prince, before
the Elephant had thus misvsed you, makes us greatly pity your case. Therefore
we are all determined to our uttermost powers to go out to provide you of
vittayles enough and more than shall serve you. The Lion gave them again
words of Sgratis vobis, and that he was rather bound to them, with many
other ceremonies: yet in the end he prayed them if they would do any thing
to relieve him, that they would do it quickly without delay. These
worshipful beasts laid their heads together, and consulted on the matter,
and having imagined many and sundry ways and devises, and not knowing which
way to bring this gear about: the Raven that always brings evil tidings,
said thus. My masters, this Camel is not of our league and fraternity,
neither comes any thing nere our manners and fashions, nor lives not of that
that we live of. Besides that he is such a stalking fool, a monstrous
gorbellied beast, big as a house, and a laisie lowtish thing: and we are
wise, malicious, valiant, and strong. So that betwixt our perverse fantasy and
his foolish understanding there is as much difference, as betwixt water and
land. Were it not best to show the King that in this necessity he might do
well to eat him, and the rather for that he is very good flesh, and fat as
a crammed Capon. If any will object and say he does all in the Court, and
manigeth the whole affairs of the Realm, O beware what ye do. Then may we
answer. What lack or mysse shall the Realm have of any such paunches? What
wonders or service does he more than others? How say ye, how like ye my
opinion: say I not well? Yes said the Woolfe. And I like it the better
because of his height and stature. For I warraunt you, a good skeyne of threede
and somewhat more will not measure his length he is so tall, but all the better
for us. For there is so much meat on him, that when the Lion has eaten all
the flesh (which will fill him, trust to it) and taken his pleasure, the
shauing of the bones will serve us well eight days. The Fox was of contrary
opinion: and wished rather they should drive a nail into the head of him to
rid him out of the way, so that dying of himself they were sure no body
would come and eat of him, and much less suspect that he were made away.
And thus said he we three shall have meat enough to chawe on, to serve us
galantly for a month, and fare like Lords. Tushe as for the Lions good grace,
let his Kingshippe shift as he list, never take thought for him: Gods Lord is
not he King? he may take and leave where he thinks good. O thou fool said the
Raven, art thou so simple to believe that so huge a carkas as he will dye for
so little a prick or hurt? No, no, thou thinckest thou have a Hen or
Partridge in hand that are soon nipped in the head, and dispatched straight.
I tell it thee for this said the Fox. Sure the King will not give ear to it,
nor hear a word spoken against him: and all because he gave him his word,
and promised him he would not touch him. And what? think ye the Prince can
with his honor go back from his word? no he may not, and I dare warrant you
he will not. The Raven that was the wysest in the town, and a Doctor in
furtis, like a subtle Carin took upon him the burden, with his malice to get
out of these briars well enough: and so togithers they went to the Princes
Palace, and after they had done their due negligences, pulled of their cappes,
and given him bona dies, they sat them down in their seats. The King seeing
them come to him at so rare an hour, began to play on the bridle, and said
to himself. O belly, now prepare thy self, good news and God will. And
turning him to the Raven (that was reaching with his bill as though he would
have spoken to the King) he asked him. Ah sira, how is it with you: what say
you to me worshipful Master Carrin? Have ye provided us of vittayles as ye
informed us? Master Raven blushing like a black dog, set a good face on the
matter, and boldly answered him.

MOst mighty Prince the Proverb says. Who seeks shall find. Like as he
can not see that has not eyes, nor hear that has not ears: So we poor
wretches that starve for hunger, thrust up betwixt the door and wall, we I say
can not see one another, and have lost all our senses. And being thus blinded
we cannot seek, and not seeking ye may well think that we all are ready to
faint and fall down right. But yet we have found a way not to famishe: and
to be plain with your Grace at a word, we would have you kill the Camel,
and the Woolfe, the Fox, and I will be ready to assist you. He is round,
plumme, fat, and as full as an Egg, so that he will serve you a great while,
and also he is none of ours at any hand, neither yet is he called to any
service for his richesse: for I have known him a very beggar ywis. The Lion
cut of his tale and device upon a sodeine, and more than half angry he said to
him. Get thee hence out of my sight thou and thy wicked counsel, vile stinking
beast that thou art, that do nothing else but pluck out eyes, a beast
without discretion or faith. Do thou not remember what I said to the Camel?
Does not he live under my protection and warrant? The Raven like an old thief
let him go on and say his pleasure. And though the King grounded himself on
justice, and sought to perform his word and promise past him, yet he stirred
not a whit, no more than the wild Bore among the thick bushes and Briers, nor
once hid him self for all his heat and hot words, but took heart of grace
on him again. And as one that knew he stood on a sure ground, and that he
spoke for the Princes profit (a good staff to lean on and make a man bold I
warrant ye, for it makes many a bitter fray with honor, and puts him often to
flight: and justice is more corrupted for commodity, than honor does cause it
to proceed with equity.) He replied to the King, and told him a trim tale
with these words. Victorious Prince, your opinion is no less good than just,
and I like it well that your mind agrees with the greatness of your crown:
but I stand in great fear that this your carnal holiness will fall out
very hurtful for your Kingdom. Sure general honesty banisheth from every
one murder: but private profit calls it again. We your obedient vassals and
subjects, humbly beseech your Majesty on the knees of our hearts, that of two
hard choyces ye will take the best, or as they say, of two euyls the least.
Cast not away for Gods sake to save one unprofitable member, so many profitable
and necessary members, making them unprofitable and not necessary. Your life
stands your self and all us upon, and imports all. If he live, you die:
if he die, you live, and we to serve you. My Lord I say, honor for others
that list, but profit for your self. Your Majesty once gone, your subjects
and Realm are like to come to naught. Your preservation is ours also. It is of
necessity one Well must be cleansed to clear the rest. And though in deed
your word and assurance has tied your hands, and that in that respect you
would not break justice: let me alone with the matter: I will work such a
feate for him, that I will make him come and offer himself unto you, and lay
his neck on the block, and yet he shall little think my meaning. And when
you have his head on the block and cannot find means to choppe it off, in
faith you are worthy to starve: and then at your peril be it for me. You see
you are famished, and we starued, and how low you are brought. Follow my
counsel, and I will deliver him you fair and fat: so shall ye save your
self and us too.

THe King gave very good ear to his profer, and bade the Raven hie him, yet
with prouiso always his honor might be saved, and then work with what art
or deceit he would he eared not, handle it as he listed, neither would he
desire to be privy to it. The Raven repaired to the consistory with his
companions, and delivered them his devise and opinion. I would my masters
said he we did devise to overtake this gorche the Camel, for the King
stands in it no more, he is contended it shall be so. They all shronke in
their shoulders, and held their heads awrie, and referred it over to his
charge, as he that had made the promise to the king. Sirs, if my company like
ye, I will do thus. We must have the Camel with us, that he have no time to
prevent the sodeine mischief. All we four will go togithers to the king, and
look what profer I make, the same you may easily make without danger I
warrant ye: And after us out of doubt this fat morsel will offer himself to
of necessity (if it be but for good manner only) and I trow the king will
uncase him, and make him leave his skin behind him. And when they had called
the Camel, they went togithers to the king. The Raven (the cunningest speaker
of them all) with lamentable words began to say unto the king. Sir, these
many years I have enjoyed my life until this present of your sovereign
bounty, under your Majesty's good peace and protection, and waying now the
extremity of your Majesty, it is more than time I should satisfy your
goodness to me in part, though not in all. But when I look into mine own
weakness, alack I see my mysserie great, not finding any thing in me worthy
to present you with, or fit for your highness. I am sorry to see your Grace
alive half dead. Alas that such a king should perish for famine. I have not
great things to offer you, and those not worthy your Majesty, but yet with
willing mind I present my body to you, take and feed my Lord of this my
poor and simple carcas, die not sir for hunger: for it better lyketh me you
should live for me, than it grieueth me to die for you. O it is but meet my
Lord, that that which is profitable in you should be saved, and the
unprofitable in me lost. And here he prostrated himself at the Lions feet,
and made him way for his neck and flesh, lying still as he had been dead. The
Woolfe no sooner saw the Raven flat on the ground, but also with a
Physical history said, and repeated the self same word by word, and chopped
himself straight under the king, that he might take his pleasure of him if he
lyked him. This manner of humility and offer lyked not the Fox a whit, and
step by step he came to make his oration, creping as the Snake to the
charm, or the Bear to the stake. Now when the Camel saw him make no more
haste, he stepped in before him and occupied the place: and kneeling down he
said. My Lord, those that serve faithfully, dispatch their service quickly: lo,
I am here for you, relieve your famine. The crafty Fox that stood aloof
said, although my flesh be naught and an unwholesome morsel for your
Majesty, yet you may if it like you taste it, and so he looked down, and
laid himself on the ground. The Lion seeing these beasts on the ground
like drunken chickens, thanked them one by one, saying to the Raven, that his
flesh was full of ill humors, and if it had been good he would never have
offered it to him: and to the Woolfe also he said, that his was to tough to
digest, and at once he put his devouring mouth to the throat of the Camel,
and set his gripyng talons on him, and tore him in pieces before a man would
have said I am here, when the poor wretch thought he should have escaped
with the rest. O God, that faith assured in words comes to be broken in
deeds: even so avarice becomes enimye to all honesty. But the best was, the
Lion sent the other beasts packing to the Gallows and they would, for he
would not give them a bytte to relieve them with, so they died miserably for
hunger. Sure a fit death to answer so wicked a life.

THis tale I have told thee said the Bull, because thou should know these
Courtlike fables, devises, and practices of vain and wicked Courtiers. I know
them all, and I am so much the better acquainted with them, because I see them
daily used against the good and virtuous, and well disposed minds. And one no
sooner makes way for virtue, but they straight set thorns in his way to
prick his feet. But I will not hasard my life in going about to maintain the
place and credit I have about the Prince. If the love thou bear me be true,
I pray thee do but give me a watch word how I may save my self, and help
me with thy counsel in this distress, for I promise thee I cannot counsel my
self. And for any other to counsel me in so hard a case, I cannot see any
light at all, because me thinks I see some beastly part playde me, and I am
ready to burst for sorrow: and the woorst of all, that I see no end to bring
me to any sure haven. So that I pray thee help to save me: and this thing I
crave of thee, because it is fit for every body to seek for his health.

Thou have said better than a Crabbe that has two mouths said the Moyle: and
surely to seek for thy health it is but reason, and a lawful excuse. For he
that cannot save his life by force, is to be borne withal if he work for his
life by subtlety or malice. Howbeit above all things, every little enemy is
greatly to be thought on and looked unto: now judge thou then how much the
great is to be feared. And he that will not esteem this, and believe that I
say, it should happen to him that happened to the Male and female Linnet in
making their neast.

A man has no greater enemy than himself.
ALongest the sea side, in a few rocks and clyffes full of wild Herbs,
certain Linnets were wont to lay and breed: and breeding time being come to
lay their eggs, the Cock began to make his neast there. In so much as the
Hen said to the Cock: me thinks it were better fore us to go seek some
other place to hatch our young ones, (because this is not certain, and besides
that perilous, as it is often seen) that we might yet once bring up our poor
little fools to some good. What says the Cock, do thou mislyke of this
seat, and is it so dangerous as thou talkest off? Here pass no people, here
it is hot, no winds at all, and an infinite sorts of Herbs do grow here as
thou see: so that we shall have meat at all times at will. O my good sweet
Honey husband, quoth the Hen, it is not fit for us God knows. For in such
like seats is ever great danger, upon any rage of the seas to lose them all,
that it is: therefore I pray thee let us avoid that danger. Will thou do as
the Pigeon, that being asked of a Pie why she returned to the Douehouse to lay
her eggs (where all her young ones were still taken away) answered: my
simplicity is the cause and ever has been of my grief. Thou that have great
experience, and have pyssed in so many snowes, will thou not take it ill to be
handled like a Coddes head in thy old days? and that it should be told
thee he knew it, and would not know it, he believed it not, he did it not,
and so forth? but the foolyshe husband having no capacity to conceive his
wives words, went his way, and slew up to the top of the tree, and the more
she spoke, the worse head had he to understand her. So he stood still in
his own conceyte, thinking he had been handled like a tame fool, if he had
followed his wives fantasy. O how noble a fool, O what a cocks comb. All is
one: she might say what she would, but he would do as he listed, and follow
his own fantasy. And so he dwelled still in his opinion, and made his neast,
and she laid her eggs and hatched them. A man has no greater enimye than
himself, and that beast specially that knowing he did amiss, did rather
continue his obstinacy to his hurt, than for his profit once to accept the
counsel of her wife or friend: And last of all she told him a tale by
protestation.

IN the fishings of the Sophie, there was a world of Fowls that kept about it
to feed of those fishes, and amongst them was a Torteise of the water that had
straight friendship with two great and fat Fowls, who diuing under water drove
the fish all about, and they no sooner appeered almost above water, but at a
choppe they had them in their mouths. The Lake was full of cliftes, I cannot
tell how but by certain earthquakes, and by little and little it began to
wax dry, so that they were feign to void out the water to take out the great
number of fish that were in it, that they should not die in that drougth, but
rather eat them up. The fishes therefore of that Lake meaning to depart out of
that country, came one morning to break their fast togithers, and to take
their leave of the Torteise their friend. The which when she saw them forsake
her, she wept bitterly, and pitifully lamenting she said. Alas, what shall I
do here alone. But what thing can come worse to me, than to lose the water
and my friends at one instant. O poor Torteise that I am, wretched creature
I, whither should I go to seek out water, that am so slow to go? I like not
to tarry longer in this country. O good brethren help me, I pray you forsake
me not in my distress. Ah unhappy was I borne in this world, that I must
carry my house with me, and can put no vittayles into it. In others houses
alack there is place enough for their necessaries: but in mine I can scant
hyde my self. A, woe, woe is me, how shall I do? if ye have any pity on me
my brethren, and if ye have taken me for your friend, help me for Gods sake.
Leave me not here to burst for thirst. I would gladly go with you, and that
you would put me in some Lake: and I would follow mine old trade as I have
done, therefore dear Fowls help me.

These words did penetrate the hearts of these great water Fowls, and
taking no less pity on her, than looking to their own profit, they said
unto her. Dear Mother Torteise, we could not do better than satisfy thy
desire, but alas what means have we to carry thee hence into any Lake? yet
there is an easy way to bring it to pass, so that thy heart will serve thee to
take upon thee to hold a piece of wood fast in thy teeth a good while. And
then we (the one on the one side of thee, and the other on the other side) will
with our bylles take the end of the stick in our mouths also, and so carye
thee trimlye into some Lake, and there we would lead our lives and fare
delicately. But in any case thou must beware thou open not thy mouth at any
time, because the other birds that fly up and down will gladly play with
thee, and laugh to see thee fly in the air, thou that art used to tarry on
the earth, and under the water. Therefore they will tell thee marvelous
wonders, and will be very busy with thee, and peradventure they will ask
thee: Oh pretty she beast, whence come thou I pray thee, that thou art
flying thus, and whither will thou? But take thou no heed to them, see them
not, nor once harken to them I would advise thee. And if they prattle to thee,
saying, Oh what an enterprise of birds, good Lord what a piece of work they
have taken in hand. Whishte, not a word thou for thy life, nor look not that
we should answer them. For we having the stick in our mouths cannot speak
but thou must needs fall, if the stick (by talk) fall out of our mouths at
any time. Well, now thou have heard all, how say thou? will thy mind serve
thee, have thou any fantasy to the matter? who I? yes that I have, I am ready
to do any thing: I will venture rather than I will tarry behind. The Foul
found out a stick, and made the Torteise hold it fast with her teeth as she
could for her life, and then they each of them took an end in their mouth,
and putting themselves up, straight flue into the air: that it was one of
the foolishest sightes to see a Torteise fly in the air that ever was seen.
And behold a whole flight of birds met them, seeing them fly thus
straungely, and houered round about them, with great laughtures, and noyses,
and speaking the vilest words to them they could. O here is a brave sight,
look, here is a goodly jest, whoo, what bugge have we here said some. See,
see, she hangs by the throat, and therefore she speaks not said others: and
the beast flies not, like a beast. These tauntes and spiteful words went to
the heart of the Torteise, that she was as mad as she could be: so she
could no longer hold but answer she would (at least as she thought) and
when she opened her mouth to speak, down she fell to the ground, and pashte
her all to pieces: and all because she would have said, I am an honest woman,
and no thief, I would ye should know it: Knaves, Rascals, and ravening birds
that ye are. So that contemning the good counsel was given her, or to say
better, because she would not believe them, she paid her folly with death.
And now I return back again whence I came.

THe Bird lost her young ones because the sea rose high, and the surging waves
carried them quite away. Now because she would lay no more in any such
dangerous place, she assembled all her parentage and kinsefolkes, and came
before the Crane (Queen of all Fowls) to cite her husband, and told her the
whole matter. The which when she saw the little discretion of her husband, she
rebuked him, and wisely told him how great follye it was (yea rather
madness) to put himself and his the second time in open and manifest
danger, being fallen into it once already. Showing him by example a tale of
the Curb, that being angry with the Well ran against it, thinking to make a
hole in it, but in fine it brake in ten pieces. Learn therefore said the
Crane not to strive with those that are greater than thy self, if thou meanest
not to have the shame and loss. Therefore build thy neast no more along the
sea banckes.

I thought good to tell thee this discourse, said the Moile to the Bull, to show
thee that thou can not be in surety to fight against a King, and to prove
thy strength. But thou should go with a leaden heel: that is to say, with
wisdom, and malice. The Bull answered. The best way I can take in this
matter me thinks is to go before his Majesty, and not to make any
countenance that I am troubled or offended, but even after mine old woonted
manner: and then shall I easily perceive whether he have ought in his mind
against me, and that he stomach me. If at my first coming he do not to me
as king Lutorcena did to Bisenzo his Captain, who having him in some
suspicion, with his own hands threw him to the ground, and slew him.

THe Moyle liked not this determination, (perceiving his reaching head to
prevent his malice) imagining that the King knowing his wisdom, and seeing
in him no alteration, would straight think himself abused, and then were he
utterly shamed and undone both. Therefore fearing his fault, he said unto
him. My Lord Chiarino, and brother dear (I will give thee a watch word to
serve thy turn at need) when thou shall come before the King, if perchance
thou find him very suspicious, and that he cast his deadly eyes on thee, and
bend his short ears, standing upright to hear what thou say, or if any
word thou speak makes him cast up his head, or hang it down: then (trust
me) beware of him that he play thee not some part, therefore carry thy eyes
before thee, and look to his fingers, and stand to thy defense like a worthy
Champion. For when he shall see thee prepare thy self with sword and buckler
to resist him, even at that instant he will change his mind: and so by this
means thou shall see what he will do. The Bull took his (as friendly)
counsel, and went forthwith to the Court. The Moyle also departed from him,
and with great joy flingeth to the Ass his Brother, and told him I have
dispatched this matter. I have done his errant I warrant him. I know he
knows his pain by this time, see thou? Well I said and did so much, that
at the last I brought him to it. And though I had great labor to bring it to
pass, yet better late than never. My subtle and malicious practices at length
yet are brought to good purpose I thank God. Oh what fame shall I get, she
shall be full of eyes though I have seen light. Sound thy trumpet once Lady
Fame through all the Countries round about, far and near: and if my practice
fall out right, thou never soundedst in thy life so goodly a double treason. O
what a perfect counselor should I be, how trimly could I bring a spouse to
bed? be of good cheer brother, the Bull persuaded by me goth to the Court to
seek out the King, if he see him stir any thing at all: and the Lion also
has my Coccomber in his body, and in his head the toys and devises that I
have told him, looking for the Bull with many an ill thought. Now begins the
game. I have so cunningly handeled this matter between them both, that one of
them I hold ye a grote will leave his skin behind him, part it betwixt them
as they list. But I that have my feet in two stirroppes (as God would have it)
am sure enough for falling. Let them try it out by the teeth and horns, I
will save one I warrant thee. I will stand and give aim.

WHen the Bull was come to the Kings presence, and that he saw his head full of
suspicion, and perceived in him those signs and tokens that traiterous
villeyne the Moyle had told him, imagining presently the kings paws on his
back, and his mouth on his throat, remembringe the Moyles pestilent counsel,
he stood straight to his defense. And the King on the other side supposed he
meant to assault him, and being informed before by the Moyle he thought it sure
so, and that it was true that the Moyle told him: therefore without any further
daliance, or tarying his meaning, he rowsed himself, and on him he goes, so
that they began a fierce battle, howbeit in the end the old Lion wearied
the Bull, that he lay dead before him, for such is the justice amongst the
Nobility and worshipful Courtiers of beasts. And yet though the Lion was
stronger than the Bull: dealing with desperate persons, he had but a bloody
victory. The case was such, and so sodeine, that all the Court was full of
sorrow, and the more for that it happened unlooked for, and never a word
spoken of it before: so that they were all by this chance stricken into a
marvelous fear. The Ass being informed of the terror of the matter was very
heavy, and angry with his brother, insomuch as he said to him: O cursed
brother, thou have done a horrible and wicked fact. Have thou not almost
brought the King to deaths door, caused thy friend to be slain, and put
all the Court in fear, danger, and sorrow? and woorst of all, thou have lost
thy credit and good name, shamed thy self, and for ever defamed thy house and
parentage. And if thy wicked practice were known, what should (think thou)
become of thy life? Oh caytyfe wretch. I say no more Moyle, but mark the
end, this mischief will fall on thy neck, and thou shall gather of thy
naughtye seed thou sowedst, naught else but pricks and thorns. For thy
barren and dry ground can bring forth nothing but Burres and Brambles. Gods
divine justice will not suffer such and so wicked a deed unpunished. And though
presently it lights not on thy head, the deferring of it will show thee
how much the whip with time does grow. Oh brutishe creature thou: never to
fear God, nor to love thy neighbor, but always to follow thy self, and to
pursue thy beastly mind without regard? thou mayntaynest thy ambition, and
with that thou would subvert and overthrow a thousand Realms.

THe traiterous Moyle hoong down his head all the while, and knew well
enough that it was true the Ass said, and that he missed not much the mark,
yet he held his peace, and would not answer one word. So the Ass followed
on his tale, and came again to the matter. I see my words but lost, and work
small effect: and I am sure there is no rebuke more cast away and blown into
the wind, than that that is given him, that is neither capable of it, nor
honest and just: nay rather fears no punishment for his perverse and wicked
works. It shall do well therefore (though I be but thy brother by the fathers
side) to take care of thee, least I should fall into that that a little
Popingey fell into with an Ape of Soria.

It booteth not to give counsel where it is not followed.
BEtwixt Dalmatia and the Realm of Granata there is a marvelous great valley,
full of high Fur trees and Pineaples. It happened once in ye winter season
that there went a shole of Apes together from one Country to another, and the
night ouertooke them alongest these trees, so that they stood there cracking
of these Pineaple kirnels, determining to take up their lodging there for that
night. But because the night was somewhat cold, they blewe their nails and
chattered their teeth together a pace. In this mean while one of the Apes had
spyed a Glowe worm in a hedge that shows like fire: and believing it had been
fire in deed, they ran all to go fetch straw, sticks, and dry Pines to
lay upon her, being very desirous to warm them. And when they had laid on
all this wood on the back of her, they began to blow, and to lay on lode
to kindle the fire: but all in vain, for the devil of stycke or straw once
smoked, much less burned, so that they were ready to go mad for anger they
could not warm them. Certain Popingeyes dwelt in those Fur trees, the
goodliest Birds in that Country. Whereof one of them beheld the simplicity
of these Apes at least three hours, how they labored and toyled for life
about Moon shine in the water: So that he moved with pity and compassion
toward them, came down out of the tree, and told them. Good wife Apes, it
grieves me to see your follye and great labor, and quite without profit, that
ye are so mad to believe to set a fire those sticks with that shyning Glowe
worm. Alack poor fools, ye lose your wind and time both, besides that
every body that sees you will think ye very beasts in deed without wit.
For the thing that shines so is not fire in Gods name, but it is a certain
Worm which naturally has that vile shining at his tail, so that ye are
deceived truly: therefore ye were best take another way if ye mean to get ye
heat. One of the she Apes no less tattling than obstinate, comes toward
him, and putting her hand by her side she answered him, like a mad,
proud, Bedlem fool.

Oh idle Bird, in faith thou have but little wit to meddle with that that
touches thee not. What is it to thee whether we know or not know? who
entreated or bade thee come to give us counsel or help? If thou do not get
thee hence to sleep again, and that quickly, I will promise thee a broken
head at the least, and I turn not thy skin over thine ears too, hear
thou me? I pray ye see how he meddles in our matters. Dispatch, get thee
hence I say, and meddle with thy Birds with a murren to thee and let us alone:
least perhaps thou wishest thou had, when it will be to late. And with that
she began to show her teeth, with an evil favored look withal.

THe poor Bird when he saw her make that face to him was half afraid, yet
leaving her he went to counsel the others, supposing by being importunate to
make them know their folly: and so he began to say and repeat very often that
he said to the other Ape before, so that that Ape could not abide him any
longer for spite, but gave a leap or two to ketch him. But the Foul being
wight of winge easilye escaped her: and sure if he had tarried never so little,
and had not flowen away so fast as he did, the Ape had not left a feather on
his back, she had torn him. And like to the Ape art thou, for there is no good
counsel will take place with thee, nor no admonitions or warnings that will
once make thee beware or take heed. I should be the obstinate Bird that
should still go about to persuade thee, but in the end I fear me that would
happen to me, which chanced to a Pie with her Master, being a setter forth
of Plays and Enterludes.

He that diggeth a pit for others, many times falls into it himself.
A Maker of Plays, dwellinge in a town called Baccheretto, gave to a rich
Merchant a Pie (which one of his boys that playde a part ever in his plays
had brought up:) that had a property to blabbe and tell all that she saw
done in the house. This Merchant had a fair wife, which wantonly chose to hyde
her self otherwhile with a goodly young man her neighbor. The husband was
many times told of it, and did in manner perceive somewhat himself too: but
because it was but suspicion and no proof (and if he should have stirred in it
he had not been able to have taken his oath that it was true) he stood
between two waters, as he that was very loath to believe it. And as in such
cases it falls out many times, that the servants and family (for the love of
their Mistress) do depend rather of their Mystresse than of their Master,
and are readyer to please her of both. The husband seeking diverse means to
come to the light of this matter, could never get out of them, but sure sir it
is not so, you are deceived. The good man perplexed in his mind, not knowing
what way to devise to boulte out this matter, remembered at the last that the
Pie he had in his Chamber (upon the window) would serve his turn
excellentlye well for the purpose, so he brought her to his wives Chamber, as
though he had not cared for her (meaning nothing less) and there he left her
a few days. When he thought the Meal had been boulted, he caused the Pie to
be brought again into his Chamber, and she told him all things directly as
they were done, so that he determined to punish her lewd life. But as many
do, whom love does no less overcome than pity, he let it alone yet many
days. All this while he hong up the Pie in her cage in the hall, and at night
made her be fetched in, and then he knew all that was done in the day from
point to point, and what had happened. Who was there, if her Mistress went
abroad, how many pounds of Flax the Maids had sponne, and how many times the
servants had set on the Flax of the Rock and pulled it off again: when, what,
and how. O what a vile crafty Pie was she. The poor Maids of the house never
thought she could have told any thing in the world, nor made any reckening
of her at all. The husband at the first began to groyne and lowre, and to
cast forth certain words and Parables to his wife, the which seemed not to
understand him, though she knew his meaning well enough, and suspected that
some of the house had opened the matter. Howbeit not able to burden any one
particularly, because she would be sure not to miss, she flatly fell out
with them all, and took on with them to badde, brawling and scolding up and
down the house like a mad woman all the day long. In continuance of time,
whether it was that they starued the poor Pie, or how the goodyeare the matter
fell out I know not, but the Pie had found her tongue and spoke plainly to
them, and said: give me some meat, or I will tell my master. When they
heard her prate thus, imagine you what sport the women had with her. And
because she was a beast, out she tattled at once all that she knew of the men
as well as of the women: so that she told them how her Master would ask her
how they used her, and what they did, and counterfeited his fashions and
iestures rightly, asking questions, and aunswering her self, even as if her
master had been present to have asked her.

The Mystresse and Maids glad they had found out the tale bearer, they came
about her with a light, and shut to the windows, and with visers on their
face, disguised, they daunced such a Morresse about her with Glasses, Fire,
Water, and sounding of Belles, beating on the bourdes, showting, and whooping,
that it would have made the wheel of a Myll deaf it was so terrible. And
after they had done this, returning every thing to his place, and openinge the
Wyndowes as they were at the first, there they left her alone, and would give
her never a bitte of meat. When the Merchaunt her master was come home, and
that he caused the Pie to be brought into his Chamber, she began to lay out
her tongue at large, and said. O Master, I have had an ill night to day,
there has been such rain, tempests, and such noyses, and I have seen a
number of Pyes pass by my Cage, but none of them all would tarry with me. O
what a foolish time was it: yet in a moment the wind and water ceased, and so
it was day again. Bid them give me some meat that I might dine, for it is
eight a clock, and I am a hungered. The Merchaunt when he heard her speak thus
foolishly, and tell these fables, he thought they were but toys in her head,
and that she talked at pleasure, nothing touching her Mystresse matters, and
so let it pass for that time. One night the Merchaunt determined to lie out,
and so he did, and left the Pie in his wives Chamber. As soon as it was dark
his wife sent for her Lover, and straight caused the Pie to be taken away
(her Cage covered over) and carried into a Well: and when he that carried her had
let her Cage down a pretty deal into the Well, he uncovered it again, tying
it fast at the top of the Well for falling into it, and being Moonelight the
same night, the servant departed his way without speaking to her, or seeing
her, and so let her hang. A little before day the good wife of the house made
the Cage be covered again trimlye, and brought into the Chamber, and so
uncovering it in the darcke, fell a sleep again (her Lover being gone) till
broad day. The Merchant came home betimes in the morning before sun rising,
and went straight to the cage in his chamber. The Pie that hong in the Well al
night and knew not in what place she was in, nor what house it was, would
very gladly have told her master all, and thus she began. Master, the
Chamber was carried quite away to night, and I was in a great round Glass with
water at the sun shine of the day, all night long almost, and then the
Glass and Cage was removed, but I cannot tell whither: and so God give you
good morrow master. Now God give thee sorrow (quoth the Merchaunt) wicked
beast that thou art: for through thy foolyshe words I had well nere paid my
pore Ione on the Petticote for thy sake. And with that he ran to the bed and
embraced his wife and sweetly bussed her. His wife that saw her time come now
to be revenged, and to free her self of her husbands conceived jealousy,
caused the slouenly Wittall her husband to tell her all the Pies qualities and
tales she had brought him: which when she had heard, out on her whore quoth
she, kill her ylfauored harlotry, what meanest thou to keep that foolish Bird?
Her husband being rather in a rage than well pleased, because he would not
gladly have known that that his wife had told him. Took the cage and the Pie
and thrue her out at the window, and with the fall the pore wretch died out of
hand. Therefore none must intermeddle in things that belongs not to them,
neither in words nor deeds to go about the destruction of any. For he that
diggeth a pit for others, many times falls into it himself.

THe Sea Crabbe disposed to play with a fool, was contented to be ridden of
him, but he like a Cocks comb (not knowing she went backwarde,) put a Bridle
in her mouth, and it went to her tail, and spurring her forwards, the Crabbe
went backwardes. I am a fool (quoth the fool) to think to do well with
thee, since I know not thy nature nor condition.

Now listen what chanced to an ungracious traueyler, and then consider well of
the matter.

Two men of the Mamalechites traueyling by the way togithers, found a great
bag full of Golden wedges, and so jointly togithers they agreed to take it
up, determining to carry it to the City, and to lay it up safe in their
lodgings. But when they were come to the walls of the City, they altered
their minds, and one of them said to the other. Let us divide the treasure,
that each may carry home his part, and do withal as he thinks good. The
other that was resolved to steal it, and to have it al to himself, meaning to
ease the good honest man of his part, answered ex tempore for his profit. Me
thinks good brother it is not meet that our hap should be common, and the
friendship particular: but like as we met in poverty, so let us join in
richesse. Therefore for my part I will not divide it, but we will enjoy it
friendly togithers, and the good hap that lighted euenly upon us. Howbeit for
this time (if thou think good) let us take a piece out to serve our necessity
with, to defraie household expenses, and other extraordinary charges: and for
the reast, it shall not be amiss if it run in common betwixt us, and we will
hyde it in the dark in some secret place, so as we may from time to time
(always as we need it) take of it at our pleasures. The good sielye man (I
will not say fool) did not think of his pretensed subtlety, and that he
went about then like a false Knave to deceive him, but took him for a plain
meaning man like himself, and said he was contented it should be so. So for
company they took each of them his burden, and the rest they safely buried
under the root of an old Elm, which the poor neighbors that dwelled by
called vile Knave, and so with the little burden of their necessary expenses,
each of them repaired to their lodginges. Within three hours of the same night,
the Companion that gave counsel to leave it abroad, went to the place of the
hidden treasure, and secretly carried it home with him. When time had consumed
the honest man's money, he went to the thief his partener, and said to him.
Brother I would gladly have the reast of my part of the gold that remains
behind, let us go therefore I pray thee togithers as we togithers did find
and hyde it, and we will bring it home betwixt us: for I assure thee I am in
great need. Of mine honesty well said (quoth the thief his companion) we
are happily met: for I was even now thinking of that thou tellest me, and I
promise thee I was coming to thee of the same errant. But now thou art come,
in faith welcome, thou have saved me so much labor: come on, gowe, let us take
our horses and away, we will not dwell long about this matter I trow, we
will handle it so nimbly thou shall see: and then we shall live merilye without
any care or thought, and need not fear robbing. Now when they were come to
the vile Knave (the Elm so called) where they had buried their treasure,
being a great and hollow tree, they began to dig for it, but in faith they
might dig under the tree till their hearts aked, as deep and as far as they
listed, for the treasure was flowen. The thief then played the Harlots part
rightly, that weepeth and lamenteth to the honest woman: and began to tell
him there was no more faith in friends, and that love was lost. Trust that
trust list, for by the Mass I will never trust again. And when he had often
repeated this, he began to throw away his cappe, to cry out, and beat
himself, that he was like a mad man, nay a very bedlem in deed. His fellow
that was no natural, though he were somewhat like a Mome, would not be
lowted so, but rather laughed to see his knauerie and craft, thinking
notwithstanding that he had stolen it (as he had in deed) but yet he stood
in doubt, laughing still. Then the thief raged like a beast (as if he had had
reason on his side) and said. None, no none but thou traitor, thief, and
villen (as thou art) could steal this. The siely man that of both had cause
to complain (all hope taken from him to recover his part) in stead of
accusing him, it stood him in hand to excuse himself, and to swear and
forswear: saying I cannot tell of it, I saw it not, I touched it not, neither
did I once think of it till now. But tut al would not serve, nor stay the
thief, but he cried out more and more (and that alowde) and called him al to
naught. Oh traitor, oh slave, and micherlye thief, who but thou knew of this?
What man alive but thou could once have laid hands on it? Tarry a little, by
Gods passion I will tell my L. Mayor of thee, I will do thy erraunt trust to
it: and I trow he will set thee where thou shall see no Sun nor Moon a good
while. Harken after.

THis brawling and scolding continued a good while between them, in the end
they went both to the Mayor: who after long cauillations, intermissions,
paremptories, exigentes, terms upon terms, favors, promises, agreements,
praises, compremises, wagers, and a number of other such like conceytes and
toys, perceived his tale had neither head nor foot. Then said my L. Mayor to
pick out the core of this matter: when ye two hid this treasure, were there
any others with you, or were ye two alone togithers? The Knave that had
occupied his hands as nimbly as he that plays on the Phife, answered straight
as if he had been clear and honest in the matter. My Lord, and if it please
your Honor, with your graces favor, the tree it self and you were there and
saw it, would witness the matter plainly. For we both I am sure put it
between the roots of the tree, and therefore I believe it will show you the
hole which the thief has dug. If God be just, I know he will make the
tree tell, and as it were point with a finger to him that stale it, and show
you of him Sir, of him that stands here before your Lordshippes goodness
(and my worshipful Masters) like a steal Counter now, for out of doubt he
stole it. My L. Mayor that had many times put his finger in the fire before, as
one well acquaynted with such like matters, and that could spy day at a
little hole, said, well then ye stand upon the testimony of the tree, and
seeing ye do so, both you and I will be at the doing of it God willing, and I
will sift it out to the uttermost I warrant ye, fear ye not. They putting in
sureties for their apperaunce, and a day appointed for the matter, were
dismissed the Court. This determination liked the thief of life, for he had
straight devised a mischief to blind my L. Mayor withal. But here I will make
a little digression. He that does his things without advise and counsel can
never do well. The counsel is ever sound and good that comes from old
experienced men, or at least helps in some part. It is every wise man's part
to take counsel in things he goes about, whereof he is either ignorant or
doubtful. He that represents the Moyle, I hope since he will follow no
counsel, ye shall see him smart for it in the end. For it is written. Hear
my son my precepts and counsayles, but the Most was deaf and could not
hear of that side. And now listen how.

THe thief had imagined a mischief in his head, and as soon as he was come
home he said unto his father. O my good lusty old graye bearde, I will
disclose a great secret to thee, which till this day I have kept secret,
secret in my bosom many a fair day, and ever buried it within me, as he
that could find no time I tell thee to tryfle. But father, hear ye. To be
plain with you, the treasure I ask of my Companion, I my self have stolen
it, that I might the better relieve thee in thy old age, and also further and
advance my poor family, a thing that thou and I both long time have desired.
I thank God, and my wise foresight (I should have said before) it goth as I
would have it, I would wish it no better. Now if thou will be ruled, and have
the thing brought to pass (being already in. good forwardness) this cheat
will be ours in spite of the Devil. And so rehearsed all to him that had
passed between them before the Mayor and the Bench, and adding this withal. I
pray thee convey thy self to night into the hole under the roots of the tree
where the treasure was hid, for it is long, deep, and large. And when my
Lord Mayor shall ask the tree: Quem queritis? I would say, who carried away
the treasure? then shall thou answer with a counterfeyt voice: Egus. That is
my Companion, and thou shall call him by his name. The old man that was like
unto his son in every point, had reason to hold of his side, after ninetene
shillings to the pound: but he answered four words.

Son, it is good to be merry and wise. I care not to take this matter upon
me, but me think it is hard and dangerous. A wise man will look ere he
leap. I fear me those eggs will be broken in the mouth while we are a
sucking of them. It happens in an hour that happens not in seven years.
If this gear come out, we have sponne a fair threede. Consider it well,
mishappes are ever at hand. Howbeit, so it happen not to me as it did to the
Bird that would kill the Snake, I am contented: and now hear the story how
she did.

IN the rocks of Popolonia there was a goodlye tree, in the which a solitary
Bird builte her nest: and laying six times, five of them miscarried. Hard by
this tree, there dwelled a great and an unhappy Snake, which (as often as these
little birds were in manner hatched and ready to fly) crept up the tree to
the nest, and devoured them all, that she was ready to burst for fullness. So
that the poor Syer of them was as angry as a Bear, he was so full of choler
and sorrow. One day he determined to ask council in the matter, and
consulted with a Crabbe that was a Doctor in Libris. Hearing his learning, he
said naught else to him, but come and follow me. So he brought him to a Cave
where dwelled a certain beast (a companion of his) a charmer, an enemy to the
Snake for his life, and told him his nature, how that this beast delighted to
eat fish, and made him carry a little dishe full of them, and to go
scattering of them still all along till he came to the Snakes hole. The
charmer having the savor of the fish in the wind, followed the sent, and when
he was come to the place where the Snake made her neast, in a great fury he
dug up the ground: and finding her (as one would have wyshed it) in her
first sleep, he killed her. But because she was so well fed, he went
further groping up and down, searching if there had been ought else to have
lyked him: and having these Birds in the wind to, he got him up to the tree,
and devoured them also.

FAther you cast beyond the Moon, and make doubts where none are: there is no
such danger in this as you speak of. Too it lustily, and be not afraid, I
will warrant thee for an Egg at Easter. What do thou think I have not
wayed the matter to the uttermost? foreseen it, prevented it, looked through
it, and seen to the bottom of it? Yes that I trow I have. And if I had not
seen it done as I would have it, I would not buy the repentance of the life
of my dear, sweet, loving, and tender father. Therefore dispatche, and about
thy business. The tide taryeth no man. Now is the time that in despite of our
foes (do the woorst they can) we shall have our purpose, and that so trimlye,
that we shall swim in wealth, and live all the days of our life after like
Gentlemen, and take our pleasure. So the unhappy (rather than wise-father,
daunced after the sons pipe, and forthwith went and conveyed himself under
that hollow tree, tarying there all night where the treasure had been hidden.

IN the morning betimes, my Lord Mayor, the Shirifes, his brethren the
Aldermen, the Recorder, the counsel of the City, my masters the Judges, and
Justices of peace, with all other of my Lord Majors and the Shirifes officers
attending on him, solempnly went to the appointed place for trial of this
matter, and having heard the parties in partibus and spartitibus, he resolved
upon the testimony of the tree, and cried out. What ho, tree (three times) who
has robbed this treasure? then this old man that had lien under the tree all
night, and had a couple of Nuts in his mouth to counterfeit the matter,
answered quickly on a sodeine the name of the good simple man. When the Mayor
heard this thing, that within the barks of trees there were certain trembling
voices put forth, it so amazed him, that for the time he was extaticke, and
could not speak a word: seeming to him and to those that stood by, that it
was a wonderful and strange thing. And thus wondering at the matter, to hear
the voice come out of the tree, he was about to say: Lord, see what force
troth is off. But with that thought also he began to suspect there was some
knavery in hand, and because he would know it if it were so, he commanded
they should lay a lode of wood or two about the root of the tree, and when
they had done, that they should set it on fire: imagining that if there were
any ill favored worm or vermin in the hollownes of the tree, either he would
fire him out, or at the least burn his coat or tail. And if there were any
deceyte, he knew by this means he should easily boult it out: and having
caused wood to be brought and laid together as he commanded, they straight
gave fire. Now the old man having fire at his tail like a Gloworme, and that
it began to partch him, (think what heart he had) cried out pitifully as
loud as he could. Alas, alas, alas. Water, water, water. I burn, I burn, I
burn. Help, help. I am smothered, I am smothered. Come, come, come. Quick,
quick, quick. Open, open, for Gods sake. I die, I die, I die. And many such
words he spoke, that he made them all ready to burst with laughing. A sir
(quoth my L. Mayor) and art thou there in deed: In faith the spirit is
coniured now, he is sure enough I warrant him. And so he caused the spirit to
be pulled out, that God knows looked like the very picture of strife it
self. When he saw the poor old Devil how he was dressed, at the first he
laughed, and without any choler did straight examine him. But when the troth in
deed appeared as it was, he paid them home with their own device, and gave
them that they had iustlye deserved, and delivered all the treasure to the
simple honest man. So that now thou hear how innocence is rewarded, and
iniquity punished. Let strife go, and we shall live merylie.

THou may now turn this tale to thee, and make thee a short cloak, for in
sooth it is even fit for thy back, therefore put it on thee. Once again I tell
it thee, that the books which thou have studied are false, and the doctrine
naught: therefore I can tell thee they will be thrown into the fire. And if
thou follow that doctrine, and allege their authorities, out of doubt thou will frye at a stake, and thou and thy Doctors will be burned togithers. All
will lie on thy neck and of thy childrens: as it did upon the adulteress, and
it is not long since it happened, as you shall hear.

IN Terra Stolida, in a place called Vallona, it is reported there dwelled a
rich Farmer, whose substance lay most in great Cattle: and at certain times
he drove them into other countries to pasture, where he abode with them many
months. His wife that remained at home, was good and square, and plumme of
body, her brawne as hard as a bourde, and had her face before her as other
women: so that a great rich man also of that Country cast his eyes upon her,
and entertained her in that time of vacation. And she that delighted not to be
kept at the rack and maunger, suffered her receipt to run at large, to fare
more daintily. In so much as at the last (sinning in gluttony) her breasts
grew big, and her belly rose, so when time came, she brought forth a goodly
Babe, which she carefully put forth to nurse and thus it grew: and in fine as
her own in deed she brought it home and fostered it. Her husband being come
home that had been long absent, glad to see his wife, and she (in seeming
also) no less glad of his coming, (but Lord what feast and joy in
outward show between them) they sweetly kissed, and with loving words
embraced each other. Oh my Conye, welcome quoth she. Oh my dear Musse (said
he) gramercy to thee. All wedlock ceremonies duly accomplyshed: her husband
casting his eyes about, and seeing this fair little Boy running about the
house. Musse quoth he. I pray thee whence is this little Knave? what know
thou not Conye said she? it is mine, (and this she told him as she that could
cunningly handle him in his kind) and so followed on, preventing his tale.
Do thou not remember that three years ago there fell a great Snow, (Jesus
how cold it was) and at the same time I remember the Ravens and Crows fell
down stark dead in the streets, and the fish dyed in the Wells. Oh what a
cold it was, and I took it in deed (God knows) with throwing of Snow
balls, the young maids of the Country and I togithers: and I cannot tell
how, I handled so many, but well I wot I came home fair with child, and I
am sure it was no other but the Snow, and that is seen by the Boy, that is as
fair and white as Snow it self, and therefore I called his name White. And
because I know well enough ye men are of such metal, that even straight ye
think all the evil of us poor women that can be, and for that I would not
put any jealousy or toye in thy head, I sent him out of the doors to nurse,
thinking afterward at leisure, when thou had known thy good wife, to send
for him, and so to have told thee even plainly from point to point how the
matter went, and how I came by this good, pretty, sweet, fair, well favored
Boy.

Her husband though in deed he was but an Ass and a dr^mishe fool, was not
moved a whit at her ill favored tale, nor once honge down his head for the
matter, and made as though he believed her: but he knew straight the knavery of
the foolish invention of his wife. Howbeit what for the love he bare her
(because she was worth the looking on ywis) and for that he was but a rude
fellow to behold, and thought himself scant worthy of her, and that he had
married her, pyning away for her sake: he thought it better to carry such things
in his breast than in his head, and the rather peradventure because he doubted
false measure, fearing his parteners ill will that farmed his ground at halfes
with him: in fine, he was contented to bite it in for the time, determining not
to be at charges with other men's children. So one day spying time and place, he
carried out of the doors with him this little Boy White: and such was his walk
that the Boy was never more heard of, nor seen after that. The woman looked
and looked again to see her son return with her husband. But seeing her
husband come home without him, Conie says she to him: I pray thee what have
thou done with my Boy? Her husband that had bought his wit so dear, answered
her. A sweet Musse, the other day unadvisedly (I confess it) I carried him
abroad with me, and we walked a great while in the Sun togithers, and thou
know how hot it was two days ago (alack that I should tell it thee) the
heat of the Sun has quite dissolved him. And then I found thy words true
which before I hardly believed. Alas poor wretch, he suddenly turned all into
water, that woe is me. His Musse hearing this, in a rage flong her away, and
left Conie all alone, so he never after saw her.

I Have told thee this fable, because thou should know, and see both, that
all mischief and malice in the end comes out, and being disclosed, it ever
receives the just reward and punishment. What can be hoped for of thee that
have committed so many and sundry ill factes, practiced such wicked deeds,
devised such abominable practices, and made so many snares to ketch the pore
Bull in, that at the length thou broughtest him to the Axe? And moreover (to
give place to thine iniquity) have brought thy friend to his death, the King
in danger, and thy poor kinsfolks to shame: and woorst of all, both of you
brake your words and promise.

ALthough I be brother to thee by the Fathers side, I may not, nor will not
trust thee an ynche, nor deal with thee for pinnes. For he that hurts his
friend, will not spare to hurt his brother: and he that has once deceived,
knows how to deceive again. But well, once warned half armed they say. I
trow I will beware of thee well enough. Thou shall not colt me be sure, as the
Merchaunt was colted by an evil companion of his whom he trusted: and this
once told thee, we will shake hands and then adue.

THey say there was once a great rich Merchaunt that had as much business as
he could turn him to: and amongst other his substance he had many a thousand
weight of iron. His business falling out so that he must needs go to
Calicut, (which was a good thousand miles off) he gave to his neighbor (a
friend of his) his iron to keep till he came home. The iron tarried the
master many a fair day, and seeing he came not, he took his leave, and went
his way: but he that had it in keeping, took revenge well enough of his
departure, and made merry with it. The Merchaunt after he was come home, went
to his friend, and asked him his iron. But he that was a slye child, had
straight devised an excuse to serve his turn, and said to him. I would to God
you had never left it with me. For ye were not so soon gone, but there came
even the same night an army of Rattes and Myse, (drawn thither by the savor
of the metal) that lay continually at it: so that in few days, before I or
any of my house knew it (think you that hear it how this was likely) they
had gnawen and eaten it up every whit, and had not left by estimation uneaten,
and not spoiled, above four ounces. Now imagine you whether this ill hap
went to the stomach of me or no. The Merchant hearing so loud a lie, could
scant keep him from laughing, though inwardly it grieved him: and yet soothing
him, he made as he believed him, and said. Sure it is a marvelous matter how
this should come to pass: and but that I hear you speak it, I would never
believe it. For doubtless it is one of the woonders of the world. A shame
take him that sold it me. I cannot be persuaded but that he noynted it with
some oil, or gave me some of that soft iron that is made of the water of
Steel. But well, let the iron go where it will, and all my ylles withal,
although it be of no small weight. I tell you truly I love you so much, that
I make small reckening of my loss, but rather I assure you I think it well
bestowed, sith the wicked Rattes yet had somewhat to enterteine them with, and
that they pardoned you and your family. For ye may well know, that sith they
did eat the iron, they had the Woolues disease in them: and if that had not
been in the way to have relieved them, by my faye you had smelt of it. But
since it is gone farewell it, no more words, as Cobbe said to his wife when
his head was broken.

THis crafty fellow (but not so subtle as he took himself for) rejoiced at
these words, supposing the Merchaunt had passed no more for the matter, and so
was pacified: whereupon he did conuite him the next day to dinner to him, and
the Merchaunt accepted his bidding willingly. Howbeit he studied all night to
serve him as good a turn, and he could at least, to be revenged at once of
his loss and mockes, without complaining to the Justice of his wrong: and sure
he showed him a right Northfolke trick, and this was the jest.

THe Merchant sent for to dinner to his house that had stolen the iron, went
thither straight, and was marvelously feasted and made off, (but in deed of
his own cost) howbeit the best pleasure of all was, the Merchaunt made very
much of a pretty little Boy, and he was the only son and heir of him that
had bidden him to diner: and still he fed the Boy, and made him great cheer.
After dinner playing with his son, and making much of him as I told you
before, promising (as they do to children) many goodly things: whylest the
father began to nodde and to take a nappe, the Merchant made the Boy be carried
to a neighbors house of his, and there he hid him. The father when he awaked,
went forth with the Merchant, attending their business, and thought nothing of
his son, as he that was wont to go forth without any such care. So coming
home at night, and not finding his son, out he went all about the town to
seek him, and spared not to ask every body that he met if they saw his
son. At the last by good hap he stumbled on this Merchaunt, that in deed
had stolen him (as the other had stolen his iron before) and being in great
perplexity he sorowfullye asked him of his son. The Merchaunt, all things
framing as he wished, (saving the giving of his iron to him to keep) answered
straight. Yes marry I remember I saw (not long since the wind rose so great)
a sielye Sparrowe catch a little pretty Boy by the hear of his head, and in
that whirlewynde she snatched him up, and carried him quite away into the air:
and sure by your words me thinks it should be your son. Therefore seek him
no more, for by this time he is in heaven, it is so long ago I saw him taken
up from the ground. The father hearing so impossible a thing, began like a
mad man to cry out, and said. O heaven, O earth, O ye people of the
world: give ear unto this strange and wonderful case. Who ever heard such a
thing? Who ever saw so strange a sight? as to see little Sparrowes carry
children into heaven? Are Children become Chickens, or Sparrowes Kytes? What
says the Merchaunt, you seem to have little practice in the world, sith ye
remember not that an Eagle has taken up a man and carried him quite away. But
Lord what needs this wondering: I marueyle at you above all men, sith you are
used to see greater woonders and impossibilities than this. For you have seen
Rattes and Myse gnawe iron, and eat it when they have done: and I that did but
hear it only of your mouth, marueiled not a whitte. By these words his false
friend knew what he meant well enough, and imagined (as it was) that to be
revenged for his iron he kept his son. And seeing no other remedy, fallinge
down at his feet, he asked him forgiveness for Gods sake, and put himself
into his hands, promising he would restore him his iron again, and make him
amends for all his losses. And thus he came by his son again, which
otherwise he should never have heard of.

BY this that thou have heard (said the Ass to the Moyle) of the ill
Companion, thou shall know what thou may hope of booties gotten with deceit:
and consequently what thou may look for of the King, whom thou have
deceived, and betrayed. Which by swiftness of Time (that shortly passes over
many years, and that also is father of Verity) cannot nor will not suffer her
to be hidden by any colored fraud or deceit. So that he will disclose all by
mouth of Verity unto the King, telling him of thy wretchedness: and the
matter being known, thou shall bide the bitter punishment, and he will be
revenged of thee for the Bull. To this answered the Moyle.

THere was a fair woman in love with a Pothecarie, and she could never have
leisure (because her husband kept her straightly) once to speak with him, or
with any others to let him know it. One night her husband even sodeinly being
very sick, was compelled for present remedy to send his wife in haste to the
Pothecaries. So thither she ran with all speed, and in stead of returning
quickly with the medicines, she whipped at a trise up into the Pothecaries
chamber to confer with him of secret matters (you know what) and as she was
running up she cast her handkircher with her money down on the shop bourde
to the Boy, and bade him make ready the medicine in the mean while. The Boy
that had an eluish wit, vndidde her handkircher, and took out her money, and
pretily tied it up again, having filled her handkircher with the dust of the
street, of purpose to mock her, to let her understand, that they that came in
haste for sick folks, did not use to sport them at leisure on that fashion:
and so laid down her handkircher again on the bourd where he found it. When
this woman had well paid the Collector upon her receipt, and that she saw she
had been somewhat to long in her account: she came down from the Pothecarie,
snatched up her handkircher, and ran home as she had been scared with some ill
thing. But finding her husband sleping (the extremity of the pain having left
him) she sat down softlye by the beds side, and opening her handkircher,
found her money turned into very earth and dust. And even at that instant her
husband awaked, who because he knew not how long he had slept, he could not
tell whether his wife came quickly again, or tarried long: and casting his eyes
on the dust and earth which she was looking on, (as she that knew she was
mocked) he asked her. What dust and baggage is that thou have there? what, are
ointments and medicines made of that fashion? his wife straight found his
malice, and answered foolishly.

I running hastilye from certain that were fighting in the streets, my money
slipped out of my hand, and being very dark I sought to take it up, and so with
my hands I took all that I could find, thinking with my self in taking up
the dust to get up my money too: but woe is me, it is sure all gone, and with
that burst out in tears. The husband simply believed her, and giving her
other money sent her thither again: and so with this second commodity she
fully accomplished her desire, and swetely paid the hire of her pleasure.

WHy then do thou think with other new and strange devises yet to occupy
the Kings head? I beseech God he may once pay thee home. But I would advise
thee, look well to thy self. For thou shall find great difference between
such a beast as he is, and another foolish little beast that will easily
believe thee. Unless thou would say to me, that because thou have done the
most, thou shall have the least. To this I reply. That one pay pays all.
And a little theft hangs up the thief for many a great robbery. I have said
to thee for this time, and now farewell.

The fourth part of Moral Philosophy QVEL CHE MI MOLESTAVA ACCENDO ET ARDO

Anno. 1570.
The fourth part of Moral Philosophy, showing the end of the treasons and
miseries of the Court of this World.
ALthough ye find many good reasones spoken under the shadow and color of
beasts without reason, yet ye are not to marvel a whit: for we also that
represent reasonable beasts, do oftentimes things with out reason and
discretion both. And this is excellent to: to see beasts live and work as men.
But how brutishe a thing is it, to see men live and govern themselves like
brute beasts. Ye must also note in this Treatise one thing, yt like as men
sometime say thou, or you, worshipful, Honorable, Noble, or Lordship and so
forth, and do in deed many times mysse to give to each man his right title
and dignity as they ought, and is fit for each man's calling and vocation: even
so these beasts also (for in the end ye know them to be but beasts) do err
many times, speaking false Latin, saying thou for you, and master where they
should say servant. Therefore you may not reckon of such scapes, nor look
after them, though ye see them ^traye a little out of the way, and take a
Goslinge for a Goose, and a Crabbe for a Whale. For it is an old rule, that
both men and beasts will fault in many things.

THe Lion therefore did amiss to kill the Bull, suffering him self and his
judgment to be abused and overtaken, by the deuilish and subtle practices of
the traiterous Moyle. In so much as when his choler was over, and that he had
wreaked his anger of him, cruelly putting the guiltless beast to death: he
then to late looked back on his bloody deed, and repented him of his rage,
knowing he had not done well to kill so wise a subject, and so grave a
counselor. His conscience griped him at the heart to think he had no lawful
cause to use such cruelty to him. Such inward thoughts draw deep, and
touch the quick, and can hardly be holden in and kept secret. So that the
Kings heart burning thus, out he burst a few words, which made the Moyles
ears glowe: as that piece of wicked flesh, that always gave attentive ear,
and looked to be paid home. So that upon a sodeine, to take away these
thoughts from the King, and that he should not think to much upon them,
besides that to continue him still in his error: he ran to the Court, and
down he fell on his knees before the King, and with all humility he said.
Most mighty and noble Prince, thou have brought thy desires now to an end.
The Gods that day did bless thee, in which they gave thee honorable victory,
when thou ouercamest so great and strong an enemy. The world, victorious
Prince, woondereth, that thou having (I mean) cause to rejoice art so sad
and full of pensiveness. Oh said the Lion, when I think of the cruel and
violent death of Chiarino without cause, I am ready to eat my fingers for
sorrow. And continually I think of the great wit he had, of his grave and
prudent counsel, endowed besides with many noble gifts and manners. And to
conclude, I must tell thee plainly, I cannot comfort my self, nor be in
quiet, when I examine the cause of his death. For many things runs in my
head to persuade me that things were otherwise than I took them, and that he
had wrong. But now I know, that that my father said so often is ^^ue. That a
thing often thought upon, can seldom miss but it falls out true.

YOur Lordshippe (said this wicked Moyle) should not thus sorrow and bewail
the loss of him, which made thee live in continual fear and torment. For
wise Princes often times do both punish and cut off many worthy persons, and
those whom they dearly love and esteem: and why? all for their own safety,
and the preservation their Realm. And Sir, of two evils they choose the least:
to kill one, rather than to make a thousand die. Lo here is an example. Do ye
not see my Lord when one is bitten with a venomous serpent, that straight he
cutteth off the member that is bitten, not suffering it to infect and poison
the whole body, by means whereof he saves his life, which else he should
lose? The King seemed to grant him, and the Moyle thought these words had
cleared the Lions heart, and he craftily made much of the worshipful Moyle, and
like a brother entreated him. The Moyle sat him down on a form in the
Chamber of presence a while, and began of himself to think upon the misery
of Princes of light credit, and of the malice of these vile tale bearers, which
set strife and contention betwixt party and party, of their tyranny, of
their opinions, and fond fantasies, in this manner.

LArge, great, wonderful, and infinite are the ways to offend, and
innumerable are the snares and devises that one wicked and naughty disposed
person may devise and spread abroad, to ketch a good and true meaning man, to
overthrow him quite. And there is not so straight a friendship but is easy to
be broken, with the hand of naughty proceeding. As I have proved it. If I
could but write all the things that have happened, the tales that have been
told, and the long wouen cloth: I should teach Princes how they should do
in all their matters, and would make them see the discretion that many have
lost, and what way they should take not to fall into these Courtly flatterers.
Those that bear office, and have charge over others, ought diligently to
search out the troth of things: and not to go as Flies without heads, and
lightly to turn and change as the wavering weather Cock with every wind.
Truly it is a foul fault in mean men to give easy ear to flatterers, but
in great persons it is a far greater fault, and in Princes chiefly a thing of
most detect and slander, and of extreme cruelty.

Now I come to know plainlye, what a great burden is laid on the peoples
backs, that are governed by a Prince of small consideration and judgment: and
in what danger their persons are, besides the grief their conscience gives
them for their state. O poor people, how many thousands of ye recommended
under the scepter of such justice? Ought not Princes to be like unto God? and
if God will take account of all things at his will (be they never so little)
why should not the King among his subjects also do the like? The wickedness
of Ministers and officers (if so it were) would not then run on so far as
it does unpunished. O little faith to Gods laws. O little labor for a man to
know himself. Where we think goodness only harboreth, thence proceeds all
vice and wickedness: and where we believe troth is lodged, there sleeps
deceyt. Who would not have believed that in this Court virtue had remained? but
alas here is the only Court of vice. In outward looks every one seems to
carry troth: but in the inward breasts is hid all dissimulation and untroth.
Three things there are which are unite togithers, and should never be out of
the Princes mind: To wit. To love God, his neighbor, and to govern himself.
And three other things also there are for the subjects to observe unto their
Prince. Love, faith, and obedience. But every one I see has forgotten them,
from high to low. This world then being so full of dangers and deceytes as it
is, what man is he alive so wise can keep himself from them?

THe Lion returned into the Chamber where the Moyle was, he lycensed him to
depart, and the Moyle with due reverence took his leave of the King. Now the
King left all alone, began again to lament, and to repent him a thousand
times that he was thus overtaken with the Moyles persuasion: and it grieved
him so much more, because he remembered the Bulls wise counsels, wonderful
behauior, and noble conversation. And to banishe this inward conceived grief,
that gryped him at the heart, he lyked to be amongst his Lords and familiers,
whom diversely he entertained. And amongst this rowte was the Lybberd, one of
the noblest of blood of all his kynne, and him the King trusted with many
secret things of his life. This Lybbarde one day going out of the palace to
walk, passed bichaunce by the house of the Moyle and Ass, and heard the Ass
crying out upon the Moyle, and bitterlye reproouing him for that vile treason
he used to the Bull: and so he heard from point to point every act and deed
he did. With these words the Lybbard felt a thing touch his heart as one had
spoken to him: and bade him mark well what Gods justice will do. So that he
saw certainly the Moyle could not long escape the Kings wrath, and that he
should dearly buy the Princes grief, falling into that snare he had laid
for many others. Now as all curious searchers do, that desire to hear other
men's doings, he laid his ear to the door, and heard the Ass his brother
speak these very words unto him. O thou would needs follow thine own
fantasy: I could not rule thee. All is well that ends well say I. Mark
the end. Thou reiectedst my counsel, it skilleth no matter: I say naught but
mum. If any mischief light on thee, at thy peril be it: if the King do
punish thee, thou have but well deserved it, and God is just if he pour it
on thee. O goodly act of thine, to betraye an innocent creature, and thy
faithful friend.

Brother mine (said the Moyle) no mo words I pray thee: that that is done
cannot be undone. And it is easier to reprove than to amend. When the Steed
is stolen it is to late to shut the stable door. I know Chiarino is slain
and that guiltless, and I confess I was cause of his death. But let us leave
off this vain talk, and deuyse some way to drive out the suspicion the King
has taken in his head, that he thinks there has been some treachery used
toward him. The Libbard having heard enough, and as much as served his turn,
departed his way, and hied him to the Palace of the Queen mother, whither the
King had sent him for other affairs of his. After he had done his message
from the King her son, he told the Queen mother all the circumstaunce of
that he had heard, and of the rebukes of the Ass to the Moyle, and of his
horrible committed murder. So the Queen mother and he resolved to keep it
secret, because they would not the Ass should have any hurt, knowing he was
a good, honest, plain, foolish beast. In the next morning betimes the Queen
mother went to the Court to see the King her son, and finding him perplexed,
and in heavy case, she said unto him. What aylest thou my son that I see thee
thus troubled, and that these many days I saw thee not merry? If it be for any
thing thou have lost, assure thy self that neither sighs nor sobbes will
once restore it thee again. This inward grief does vex thy mind, feebleth
thy body, and tormenteth thee much I see. But yet give it not way so far as
thou can not call it back again. Impart at least thy deep conceived grief
unto thy mother, and familier friends, such as best do like thee. If any help
at all there be, we all will put to our helping hands. But if still thou
doste burst out thus in tears and sighs, thou will rather show thy self a
woman than a man. For so do women use, for every trifle when they list to
bring forth a tear. Perhaps it grieves thee thou have slain Chiarino. Out
of doubt I can assure thee thou defiledst thy self in innocent blood: for
without any crime, fault, or living offense to thee thou laydest thy hands
upon him. His mothers words at length drue these from him. It is an old
saying, and I have heard it often. Things lost can never be recovered: and this
thing goes to the heart of me. Nay see mother if I have cause to sorrow,
that since his death, and before, I never hard so much as an ill word of my
faithful Chiarino. Sure if he had meant ill to me, it could not have been but I
should have smelt it out, and it would have come to mine ears one way or
other. And therefore to thee mother alone I confess my fault, and I may tell
it thee, the only worker of his mischief was his cruel enemy the Moyle:
which with practices, inventions, and devises has supplanted me, and killed
him, moving me to wrath. Ah my son, now I must needs tell thee again,
thou have been betrayed and deceived both, and this a trusty friend has
told me. The Lion would feign have known of whom: but the Queen mother would
by no means at that time tell him ought. But this she did assure him, that
there was no new invention nor alteration in his Realm that should offend
him in word or deed: and bade him seek well, and in short time he should
know all. So the King since he could at that time get no more of his Mother,
determined to assemble all the beasts of his Realm, and to call them to
Parliament to consult upon this matter, and so he did.

WHen this general Counsel was called, where all the great Lords of his
Realm, and the wysest of the Commons, with all the soldiers were assembled,
he also sent for his Mother. She looking all the beasts in the face that were
present, and missing the Moyle, caused him straight to be sent for. So he came
forthwith. But when he was come to the Palace, and saw the Parliament house
furnished with all the College of beasts: then he knew the Princes
indignation, when looking upon him earnestly he saw his color change, and
that his conscience gnawed him for the death of the Bull. Now the Moyle knowing
himself guilty, began to whet his wits, and drawing near to certain of
the great Lords that stood round about the Queen mother, he said unto
them. Lord what ayleth our noble King? what is the cause of this conuention
here? how comes it he is thus malencholy? What, is there any sodeine or
strange accident happened in the Court, that we may know the cause? the
Counsel has been called very suddenly. The Queen mother answered straight.
Thou need not marueyle ywis at the Kings heaviness. For thou know well
enough (having given him the cause) his sadness, which with thy sweet sugared
words have given him bitter gall. Tell me I pray thee? can thou tell who was
cause of the death of the most noble and worthy knight of our Court? Was it
thou perhaps? But the Moyle (as stout as Golyas) without any blushing
answered straight.

NOw I know the saying which our old ancient beasts used in times past is
true: and I am out of doubt of it. That let one do as much good as he can, his
reward I warrant ye shall be little enough, and that God only is he who
rewards and gives recompense for any benefit or service done. O what a
marvelous matter is it, that he that lives well in this world, cannot
continue to live well, but is compelled to dance after every man's pipe: to
hold with the Hare, and run with the Hounde. The true heart I have always
borne to the King thy son, and sound counsel which (God I take to record)
I have ever given him, do not deserve such reward. For it is known well
enough that the Moyle his servant has delivered him from many dangers, and
present death also: and refused no traueyle for his safety, and that I make
his Lordship judge off. Well, I only crave of his Grace but that he will
inquire of my life and doings. For I know my proceedings will appear better
to him than is thought for: and I would my troth and honesty were openly
known to the world. And for my part, if the least part of that were true that
is spoken of me, and that I were any manner of way to be touched, his Majesty
may be assured I would not tarry an hour in the Court, and much less have
come before these great Lords. And besides that I would not think my self
sure in any place of the world wheresoever I were, if I had but once received
such a thought in me, and much less if I had committed the deed. Therefore I
pray thee noble Lady, lend not thy ears to the words of envious persons,
nor suffer his Majesty to lay hands on my innocence. For if that seem a
strange thing to you, this a fortiore were a wicked fact: a fact without
reason, justice, and any manner of equity. I do not care to be counted wicked
in that case, if all the Court do count me so. For God himself knows well
the troth, in whom I only hope, and am sure he will deliver me from this
suspicion and danger.

THis Moyle in his words seemed to be the best beast of the world, and those
that like strangers heard him, and knew not his Moylish nature (a vile
traitor Moile, a whoreson cankred Moyle, that let a man keep him in the
stable.xxv. years, and make never so much of him: in the end, for a farewell,
and that on a sodeine (when a man thinks not of it) he will yerke out behind
and put him in danger of his life,) were very sorry for his trouble, and did
pity his case. He that by nature was borne subtle and crafty, perceiving a
little parcialitie amongst them, and that he had reasonable audience: went
about straight to intricate the house, and so began a tale Coram populo like
unto this, still drawing water to his Myll.

A tale of the Ioyners wife and the Painter.
THere was sometime in the country of Catalogna a Ioyner of Tharsia, and he
had a very fair woman to his wife as any that came into that city a thousand
years before her. This fair woman became in love with a Painter, and because
the neighbors should not be privy of his access unto her: she prayed the
Painter to make him a garment to be known from others. So that by her eye,
and feelinge (if there were no light) she might yet straight ways know him.
This devise and request pleased the Painter well, whereupon he made him a
white garment painted with Pecocks eyes, and wrought upon it, and so with this
robe in the night he went to her: without calling to any, or knocking at the
door, he went to a place appointed where he found her hidden, and there he
swetely sollaced him self to his great contentation. At this compact between
them for their meeting, one of her servants had closely put himself into a
corner, and heard all that was said and done, who cunningly dissembled that
he knew ought where his Mystresse hid her. This Painter with his white robe
continued his haunt unto her a great while before the servant could come to
bear half of his labor. It happened yet on a night (as fortune would) that
this Painter had occasion to go out of the town for certain business he
had abroad: the servant when he knew it, hied him immediately unto the Painters
house, and bade his wife deliver him her husbands white robe. And when he had
it, he put it on his back, and so went to his Mistress with all: who when she
saw it, and knew it, and believed it had been the Painter (perhaps too, she
lyked to be deceived) began to pursue Venus sport togithers. His errand
delivered, he went and rendered this robe again unto the Paynters wife, who
good soul knew not what her husband meant to wear that robe every night.
Anon after midnight as the Devil would have it, the Painter came home again,
whether the sprite moved him that he must needs go conjure the Devil, or
that his business framed not that he went for, or what it was I cannot tell
ye, it is enough, home he came: and putting on his white robe on his back he
flong out of the doors again in haste, and to the Ioyners wife he trudged.
But when he came there, he found all fast shut up, and no noise at all: so
that he was driven to dance attendaunce without doors and blow his nails,
as the Physicians Moile that waits for his master, and still chaweth on the
bridle. Howbeit the next night he returned, and at pleasure discovered the
country. And being hasty in his journey, what man (quoth she) remember your
self, you rode far yesternight, and you are not yet at your iourneyes end: I
perceive you have yet a Coltes tooth in your head. Well wanton well, you will
tyer your horse: and with such like harlottrie loving words she entertained
her friend the Painter. The Painter hearing these words, began to smell a
Ratte, and thought straight she had taken in more horses into her stable than
two. So he took his leave, and home he went: and when he came home, examining
the matter, his wife told him there came one in his name for his robe. Then
were they both at an afterdeale, and worse than ever they were, for none of
them knew, nor could guess what he should be: insomuch as after he had well
fauouredly ribbe roasted his poor innocent wife, he threw his robe into the
fire. And so she sielye woman bare the blame that made no fault. The King
therefore should not so lightly believe it, before he be justly informed:
that another fault be not punished by my innocence. My Lords and beasts,
think not I pray you that I speak this for fear of death, but to purge my
self of that ye have heard. For death is common to all, and I know I cannot
shun it, therefore I fear it not. But this I fear, that dying falsely
accused, my name and house should for ever be defamed: and to this I take great
heed. The mother of the Lion, that was the very daughter of impacience, could
not abide to hear any more fables, but cast up her head, and turned her about
at those words, and half in a rage, and in choler, said thus to the Moyle.

IF thy deeds were as good as thy words, my son should not be thus grieved
nor offended: nor the poor Bull had been now dead. But thy double dealings
and prittle prattle, who did but give ear unto thee, (and believed thee) not
knowing thee, are enough to turn the Court topsie turuie. As thou did
heretofore to Pannonia, who come home thou made him believe (because his wife
would not grant thy dishonest desire) that she was naught: so that upon thy
words he fell upon her with his feet, and pashed her to death. Then to late
repenting his fault, he heaped one ill on another: for he made all his
Concubines to be burnt. And all this came of thy cursed words. Therefore it
is best for every man not to have thy friendship. With that he lifted up his
ears, and with open mouth thus answered.

IT becomes not Madame the Kings mother to hear the causes, reasons,
contentions, objections, and wrongs of the subject with two ears at once, but
with one alone. For your judgment ought to be upright and equal, if affection
or partiality carry ye not away. And if the matter be for Chiarino: the Moyle
will not for that forget that the King does yet trust him, and that he is a
true servant to his Majesty. And be ye assured Madame, that to trouble my
innocence, and to molest me that to all this Court is so true a slave, it is
an offense to pity. Imagine how the Lioness heart did rise marvelously
against him, because she knew the wickedness of the Moyle: and turning to her
son she said. How think thou of the boldness of this most cruel vncurbed
traitor? that as many as hear him think he has reason. See I pray ye how he
plays the Fox. Behold I beseech ye his looks, what kind of iestures he
makes. Think ye he cannot hit one on the knee at a pinch and need be with
his heels? Yes I warrant ye when ye look not for it. O subtle beast, how he
hangs down his head. O what a traitors look, see his false leering eyes.
Lord how terribly he looks on us. Dismember my son this cursed beast, and
henceforth neither for friends, Courtiers, nor kynsefolkes requests, ever
keep Moyles any more. The Lion for all these words stirred not a whitte,
neither once cast up his head as though he had been moved. The Lioness his
mother mad for anger for her sons grief: why then because thou will not
punish a traitor, do thou not believe me? do thou not credit thy Mother
that tells thee here before them all, and affirms to his face that he is a
traitor to thee?

THen the King called a certain fierce beast, and ugly monster to behold,
begotten of a Satire and of a Griffin, and he made him take a chain and chain
the Moyle. The Moyle seeing so horrible a borned beast come toward him, let
fall his tail for fear and sorrow both, and thus of this hellish fury he was
chained, and carried to prison, and as ye shall hear safely kept and examined.

WHen the Moyle was thus apprehended, the Lioness went to the King her son,
and said to him. The imprisonment of this wicked member, has greatly
rejoiced all the Court: knowinge that now the time is come this malefactor
shall be punished, and receive just reward for his treasons. God, if thou
did but hear what they talk of him in Court, of his naughty tongue, of
his carrying of tales from one to another, of spreading abroad quarrels,
contentions, strifes, debates, and suspicions in every place where he comes,
thou would bless thee, and thine ears would glowe in thy head. O cursed
Moyle. Never agree to hear him, never give him audience, but refer his
matter to the counsel, and then let justice proceed. Now I think thy life
safe, and dare boldelye say thy Realm shall live in peace: sith the Moyle is
forthcomming, and I hope shall be quite dispatched. And because I would not
have thee think I speak obscurely: I will tell thee what reason I have to
speak it. And here the Lioness recites from point to point what the Lybbarde
had told her, and how she heard the whole matter of him. The King
understanding his fact from the mouth of so credible a person, as that of the
Libbarde: then he knew it to be true, and that he had offended, which yet was
not altogether to be believed, and depended somewhat upon the Moyle. And thus
determined to punish the Moyle, he withdrewe himself from the counsel, as all
such like Princes do.

Now when Fame had blown abroad the Moyles imprisonment, and coming to the
Asses ears his brother, he ran unto the prison, and his heart panted, and
bet marvelously: as that Ass that knew how this gear was brought about,
and he told the Moyle. Our play now is like to the play of the two
brethren, that having two Balls in their hands, they gave them each into
others hands, and they were both made of one fashion and bigness: so that in
the end to choose this or that they saw it was all one, there was no choice in
neither. To have thee in prison, alas it troubles me: and to have thee abroad
also it grieueth me. All comes to one reckening. And with that for kindness
he burst out in tears, and wept bitterly. But afterward seeing him with the
chain about his neck, he quaked for fear, and laid him down on the
ground, crying out in his Asses manner, and said. O brother Moyle, what case
art thou in now? Alas there is no more time to reprove thee now, because there
is no remedy, as few days ago there was, when thou might have cancelled
all: but thou like an Asseheaded fool, that might have cleared the country
(knowing thy self to be guilty) why did thou not take thee to thy legs? Thou
despisedst my counsels to thee, and yet they were good if thou had had grace
to have taken them. It is true that is spoken by the mouth of beasts that have
understanding. That the false and untrue man dies before his time. As me
thinks I see by the Element will happen to thee. And this for none other but
for thine insolency, and naughtiness: and thy crafts and deceytes has
brought thee to this trouble. O how happy had thou been if thou had
dyed in thy birth? Cursed, and woe worth be thy false knowledge and envy of
others weal and prosperity: which only is it has brought thee to this
infamous end. Then the Moyle relented, and breaking out in tears also,
answered.

O My good Brother Ass, no living creature, how wise and discreet so ever
he be, can shun his mishappes and ill fortune: and therefore I despised a
thousand of thy good counsels, for so was it given me from above. And if pride
and ambition had not traueiled me still, I could have withdrawn me: but the
envy of others dignity and estimation had to much power over me. O blind
understanding of man's knowledge. It happens to me as to the sick man, who
having prepared for him most wholesome meats, he refuses them, and gives
himself over to his will and appetite, taking them that are hurtful for him,
and fills himself: which does in deed both hinder his health, and continue
his sickness. He knows it, and yet can not abstain. I knew well enough my
perverse understanding, but I never had reason sufficient to bridle it. Now
to late I find my fault, and knowing the danger I am in, my sorrow redoubleth
on me: not so much for my self, as for thy sake, because thou have always
been with me. Thou art my brother, and consequentlye they will believe and
imagine (in deed) that thou art privy with me, and partaker of my doings.
The Kings officers therefore may take thee, and put thee on the rack, and
make thee confess my fault, and when they have done execute thee. (For sure
they shall never have it of me) and by thy confession punish me without
remission or pardon in this world. For of thy words depends my death, and
of my wicked government shall grow thy ill, grief, trouble, torment,
prisonment, and extreme punishment. The Ass hearing his brothers words,
marked them well, that he trembled every joint of him, and quaked like an Aspin
leaf: and a beastly fever took him, with which he went his way home. But
before he departed thence, he said unto the Moyle. Brother, if thou wey my
life, and wilt keep me from peril (as thou can not any way avoid it)
confess thy fault is worthy of death: thus shall thou free thee from the wrath
of the Gods, and after this corporal punishment of thine, doubtless thy
spirit shall forthwith be transported to the heavens. Well said the Moyle, the
last and extreme remedy shall be this. If there be no hope of remedy, let it
be as it will be: for my body well I wot suffers already to much. Now get
thee home, and hide thy self, and let it light on me, as the world, Fortune,
and the Gods will assign. The Ass departed from him very sick, and sore
troubled in his mind, and his pain so held him, that the same night he
ended his sorrowful days. Whose death a Woolfe that dwelled hard by him
greatly lamented, and was a witness afterward that confirmed all the wicked
fact: who heard in deed the same night how the Ass reproved the Moyle his
brother. The Lion sent to the Libbard, and commanded his officers they should
understand particularly the Moyles case, and to dispatch him roundlye.

ALL the beasts got them into the Parliament house, and every one took his
place according to his degree, and sat them down: and the house being set,
there was brought before them in chains this solemn traitor the Moyle. And
when he was come before the presence of such a sight of Asses and fools, the
Libbard stands up, and speaks. Right honorable, it is yet fresh in memory,
that the King killed the poor innocent Chiarino, so that from that time
hitherto his Majesty has not been quieted in his mind, that he put him to
death by the false accusation and envy of my Lord the Moyle. His Majesty
therefore has liked to call us to Parliament, that every one of us should
witness the troth, if we know or have heard any thing of his doings, in what
manner he did it, what Art he used, with whom he practiced, and by whom he was
assisted in this great treason, to bring his wicked mind to purpose. Every one
of us is bound that knows ought to utter it, for the preservation of the
Realm, and his Majesty's most royal person. And then by justice it is meet
such traitors should be punished, and the good rewarded: by means whereof the
good may live under his Majesty's reign and government with safety, and the
ill be rooted out and cut off from the common weal. Every one looked other in
the face, and held their peace. The unhappy Moyle, perceiving that every
body was ashamed to take upon them to tell so ill a tale, cut off Fortune by
the waste even at that pinche, and stepped to the matter himself, rising up
upon his feet (being set before) and boldly said these words.

O Noble and virtuous Lords, what is the cause ye are all thus silent? O my
Lords, how glad would I be (if I were in fault) of this your silence. But
because I know mine innocence, and my self clear in that I am accused off,
it shall not grieve me, let every man say hardily that he knows. But yet
with condition, that he have the glass of Verity before his eyes, and that he
answer justly to that he is asked, and so shall he (what soever he be)
satisfy God, and the world, and I shall remain free and contented. It is
true that every body should be circumspect to speak only that they know:
and not to suffer themselves to be carried away either with favor, envy, or
malice. For then like enough that loss and shame would come to him, that came
to a Physician which had the Tisicke, or if I lie not, was well seen in
Physic. In a certain part of India Pastinaca, there was a Physician in
diebus illis, the which cured all, all the beasts he visited: and sure it was a
marvelous thing, there never died any under his hands that he had cure off.
This man being dead, was reckened for a Saint. Another Physician called
master Mar al, (in our tongue) began to cast waters, setting every Vrinall
by himself, and bought him books to resemble the other as near as he could:
and when he had met with any receipt, oh he kept it full dearly. Afterward he
had a toye in his head, that he took himself for the self same Physician
that was before him, both for learning and practice, so that he boasted he had
done great cures, who could scant know he was himself alive, he was so
poor, and yet he laid on lode as he had been (yea marry had he) the
cunningest man in a Realm. It happened so that the daughter of the King of
that City (where this Physician dwelled) fell sick, and her disease was this.
That being with child her nose gushed out with blood very often. The king that
loved his daughter dearly, and gladly would have had remedy for her and
could not, he was very pensive and heavy, and sighed sore for that worthy
Physician that was now dead, the loss of whom went to his heart, sith none
died under him that he had in cure. This new come Physician knowing the Kings
case, went to his Majesty, and told him that he should not sorrow for the
loss of the other Physician, for he offered himself to satisfy him as much
in his service, as that other excellent and famous man his predecessor: and
that he doubted not but he would find out a present and sovereign remedy
for his Graces daughter. The King rejoiced at those words, believing them as
true as he had spoken them: so he prayde him to minister to her, and to apply
such present remedies as might with speed cease her disease, and restore her
to her health. Now to show himself a rare and learned man, he came to his
books, and tossed and tumbled them pittifullye, turning their leaves vpside
down, believing they were the books of the other famous man, and that those
would able him in his ministration as they did the other. Then he made his man
bring him those Electuaries, Compoundes, and Conceytes that the other Physician
had left behind him, and he began to mingle them and work them together. But
like an unfortunate man in all his doings, there came to his hands a pot of
Arsenicke, and because he thought he had kept and preserved it with great
care and diligence, he took it for a precious ointment, so that he took of
that the greatest quantity, and mingled it with the others. This Arsenicke
(which he supposed as good as Ginger) prepared in potion, he carried it to the
Princess which should have drunk it: saying that straight it would stop
the blood, and restore her to health. The King seeing he had thus quickly
dispatched his medicine, thought him one of the rarest judgments and
singularest Physician in the world. The unhappy Lady had scant drunk off a
part of this potion, but she felt her heart labor and take on unmercifully: so
leaving the reast behind vndronke, making pitiful moan, and screking out for
pain, she woefully in short time left her life. The King seeing his daughter
dead, was become the heauiest man alive, as every man may conjecture: and
apprehending this beggarly Physician, made him drink up the reast, so that he
straight fell down in the place and died. And it happened to him as to the
pore old man, that brake all ye earthen Pottes or Pipkins he found with his
Cudgel. So that one day he met with a hare brained young fellow, of his own
humor and condition, and seeing the Pipkin in his hand, he lift up his Cudgel
and brake it in pieces, so that all that was in it ran out.

Therefore my Lords take no fantasy in your heads that is not honest, for so
ill would come of it: and take not upon you any thing that you are not well
informed off, least yours be the shame and loss. Let every man remember his
soul, and let him not say that he knows not: but to affirm that he has
seen, I am very well contented with that. Sure it were ill done (my Lords)
for any man to speak that he knows not certainly and assuredly, and the
wrath of the Gods with such like ill luck as mine would be poured upon them
and their life: and this none but I knows it better. The master Cook of the
Kings Kitchen (as fat as a Hog) hearing this bravery of his to enforce his
credit, he took heart upon him, and emboldened himself notwithstanding his
nobility, and began to speak in presence of them all, and thus he said.

RIght Reverent and Honorable audience, ye are very well met in this place. Our
old ancient fathers that wrote many books of Phisiognomie, (of the which I
thank the King I have greased a good number, because I studied oftentimes in
the Kitchen) do tell us many things, and gave us diverse tokens to know beasts
and men, whereby we knowing them to be good or bad, they should accordingly be
rewarded or punished. Id est, I mean so, to practice with the good, and to
fly the company of the evil. So it is, yea marry is it, in faith I am sure
of it I. Now for that I have studied, and according to my skyll, (I tell ye
my Lords, I can not dissemble) I find our solemn Moyle here to have many
ill parts in this matter, which show him in all and for all to be envious,
false, and a traitor: leaving out that he is very cruel, and wickedly bent
besides. And ye mark him, he ever looks hier with his left eye than his
right, and his nostrels he turns still to the right side, with his eiebrowes
very thick and long of hears, and continually he looks on the ground,
which are manifest tokens he is a traitor: and all these signs (look ye on
him that list) ye shall see him have them rightly I warrant ye. The Moyle
seeing the Swyne groyne with so ill a grace, although he was even almost
grauelled and out of countenance, yet he turned to him and replied.

MY Lords, if it were true that this malicious Swyne and greasy verlet here
before ye all does tell ye, that the heavens should place signs in us as a
necessary cause of wickedness: then straight as soon as we saw any beasts
brought forth with those perverse lines and marks, either they were forthwith
to be punished, or put to death, that they should not work such wicked
treasons and effects: and few besides that should be borne, that the most
part of them at the least were not marked with these signs, that he and his
goodly books do imagine. I know not if his doctrine shall be of such
authority received amongst you, that it shall condemn my goodness and pure
works. Sure this worshipful beast is deceived, and does as they that see an
old woman present a young woman with any thing, or delivers her some letter
with any pitiful shows: straight without touch of breast, not knowing no
further, they take her for a Bawd. My worshipful Hog should know things
better before he be thus bold and saucie to speak in this presence. But none
is so bold as blind Bayarde I see. Thou weenest to point at me, but thy self
it is that is poynted at, and thou mark it well. Thou supposest to detect me,
and to open my defectes, and do not look upon thy self what thine own do
show thee. But harken to this tale, and then tell me how thou likest it.

Our forefathers and elders sacked a great City, had the spoil of all that
was in it, and put all to the sword save old men and women, and little
children of all sorts. In time these little ones grew, and because they left
them nothing, men and women went naked, hyding only their secrets and priuities
with some thing. One day there came to the town an old country Cloyne to
sell wood, and he brought with him his two daughters, whereof the one went
plainly to work without any ceremony, showing such mark as God had sent
her, and the other comely covered it with leaves as well beseemed her. The
people began to say to the vnmoseled Maid: oh shame of the world, fie for
shame, hyde, hyde, hyde. The old Cloyne because he would not have that
Maygame behind him, turning him, reviled every body that spoke, and was as
mad as a March Hare: and leaving him self bare, gave her his furniture to
hyde her shame. Then they were all on the jack of him, and reuyled him to
badde. His first daughter that was covered, seeing her father bare, said unto
him. Lo says she, ye have made a good hand now: had not you vene better have
holden your peace, and to have kept your own priuities close as they were at
the first? This tale I have told for thee, master Cook of the Kings Kitchen.
Thou do not remember the vile and infinite naughty signs that thou have,
and the great defectes and deformities placed in thy body. Thou, thou art vile,
slow, and ravening. Thou art foul, stinking, filthy, loathsome, and a
wretched thing: borne of a Sow, and gotten of a Bore, and not of a Mare and an
Ass as I am. Thou, a vile deuourer of all things, and a solemn supper of
broth and swill. Thou, a little neck, a vile visage, with thy snowte forward: a
narrow forehead, wide nostrels, and short nosed, so that the office thou have
is ill bestowed on thee. For thou have no part in thee that is profitable,
good, honorable, meet, nor sightlye for any body, but when thou art before
them in the dish.

THe Hog seeing himself thus well paid home in words again, was glad to
hold his peace: and after that never a one durst once speak a word any more.
Thus for that time there was nothing else determined, but that the Moyle was
carried again to prison by a Bear, who safely kept him, and looked to him. And
now being the second time again clapped into prison, there came to the Court a
great friend of the Ass his brothers, who finding him dead, came to advertise
the Moyle his brother being in prison, and was very sorry for the death of the
Ass, which the Moyle had not heard of all this while till now: and the Moyle
took it so inwardly that it pierced his heart, and needs die he would. So
turning him to his friend, which was a Fox well stricken in years, he said
to him. Brother I am determined to die, and will make thee mine heir. And
making him get Pen, Ink, and Paper, he made his Will and bade him write, and
bequeathed him all he had: which was a rich furniture. A double Collar with
three Basenets. A Mosell netwise for his mouth with a bit to the same. A collar
of leather hungry to hang over his neck with belles, a broad Pattrell with
diverse colored fringes made of Girthweb and Canvas. A Basse, a great Crouper
of wood, a Sowser, a Charger, and mayling cords. A broad long Want, a tying
Collar, a pair of Pastornes, and a Tranell: with other civil furnitures
pertinent to his estate. And then he confessed all, and told him his wicked
practices and treason, and that he only (yea marry was he) was the cause of
all this stir. The Fox thanked him heartily, and offered to help him with
the King, and to travel for him the best he could, because he was his chief
Secretary in Court and out of Court: and so departed from him. And he was no
sooner out of his sight, but because he was in deed made heir of that he had,
he went to the Lioness and Lybbarde, and there confirmed the testament
hereditarie of the Moyle. And to further his desire (who desired to die) he
revealed it, and accused the Moyle. So the traitor by another traitor was
betrayed.

IN the morning betimes all the beasts met in the Parliament house, the
Lawyers, Judges, Sergeantes, Counselors and Attorneyes, and all the Kings
officers togithers: and there appeared also the Lioness, and Lybbarde. The
indictment drawn, the witnesses sworn and deposed, they caused the Moyle to
be brought Coram testibus, and the Judges: and the Clarke of the peace to read
his indictment to his face. Now think whether his ears did glow, and his
cheeks blush, when he heard the Fox, the Woolfe, and Libbard sworn as
witnesses against him. He stamped, he snuffed, he cried in his Moylishe
voice, he flong, he yerked, and took on like a fury of Hell. And when he was
wearied with these storms and passions, down he laid him, and rored out
amain. O I am killed, I am killed. I deny it. It is nothing true that is
spoken: and therefore I warrant him it will come to that villain the Fox (who
to have my goods has thus falsely accused me, accursed was I when I made him
mine heir) which happened to him that brought up three Popingeys or Parats.

IN the midst of Tartarie there was a great honest rich man, that had the
most true, faithful, honest, loving, discretee, and gentle wife in all that
Realm: So that her doings were wonderful, and she alone was enough to give
light to half the world. This same Gentleman (husband to this wife) had a
str^^nger to his man, proper of person, and comely to behold. And this
handsome serving man became marueylouslye in love with his fair young
Mystresse, so that night and day he could think of nothing else but which
way to pursue his love. And when he had many times (by tarying at home)
assayde the river to pass over, there was no policy could serve his turn
to obtain favor, but to be enterteyned as a servant still. It fortuned him
that one day being a hunting, he found a Parattes neast, and in the neast
three young Parrattes: so taking them up he carried them home, and familiarlye
brought them up, and taught them to speak some things in his language, (the
Indian tongue) which in that Country where he dwelled no body understood. One
of them could piertly say* Our Mystresse makes her husband a Cuccolde. The
other* O what a shame is that. The third said, it is true, it is true, she is
naught. These toys had the servant devised to be revenged of her, for that he
could not obtain his purpose, and because she would not consent to his
wickedness. Thus all the day these blessed Parattes tampered on these verses
only, and sang them still as they were taught. And for that the tongue was
strange, there was never none of the Country could understand it. There
came one day to the house of this honest man, two Merchants, kinsefolks to his
wife, which because they had trafficked India very well, they had the tongue
perfitely. And being at the table, they talked of many things, and they fell at
length into talk of Parattes. So that the good man of the house caused his men
to bring his three Parattes to him, only to show them unto his kinsemen. The
little Parattes being made of, began to sing their verses, and to repeat it
still apace. Now think ye what thoughts these Merchauntes had, hearing
them speak so vile and slanderous words. And thus looking one at another,
turninge them to the Gentleman, they demanded of him: Sir know ye what these
harlotrie Birds do speak* No not I God knows, said the Gentleman that
ought them: but me thinks it is a pastime to hear them* Well, let it not
mislyke you to understand what they say: for it behooves you to know it by any
means. And so they told him all the story of the Parattes. The Gentleman was
all amazed and troubled in his mind to hear this exposition. And then he
asked them again: but do they sing nothing else all day but this, and still
in one song? yea sure since we came, no other tune nor song had they but
this. With that, very angry and wood as he could be, he flewe on his wife,
and would have killed her. But he was stayde by the Merchants, and his wife
wisely committing her self unto him, besought him diligently to inquire out
the matter, and not to do her the wrong to believe those foolish Birds: so
he was forced to quiet himself. First he sought to know and if the Parattes
could say any other thing or no: and he could not find they could. Then the
fault was laid upon the servant that had taught them. And calling for his
man, he came straight with a Sparrowe hawke on his fist: who was no sooner
come before his Mystresse, but she said unto him. O wicked servant thou, what
have thou taught these Birds to say? Nothing, answered he. They speak like
beasts of understanding, what they see and know. Why then says the husband,
and is it so as they speak? Yea sir, said the naughty servant. With that
the Sparrow hawke on his fist began brokenlye to speak: Believe them not
master, for they lie in their throtes every one of them. These words were no
sooner spoken, but the Merchantes (kinsefolkes to his wife) rose up and pulled
out both the servant eyes: and then to late he restored to his mistress her
good name again, which fell out to his utter undoing.

Behold therefore said the Moyle, see what hate reygneth in men's breasts. O
sacred Prince, be not offended with your good subjects for synister
information given you. Neither determine any thing that is to the hurt and
shame of your neighbor, through the accusations of the enemies of virtue. The
Court does willingly give ear one to destroy another, if the justice of the
Prince step not in between. And every man that can prefer and exalt
himself, (at least as long as he has means to do it) cares not for the
loss, hurt, or shame, of friend, kinsman, or brother. For such is the
privilege of avarice and ambition. Every one that heard the Moyle (knowing his
wickedness) could not abide any longer to hear him: and seeing his vnreyned
arrogancy, the Lybbard stepped forth, and gave evidence before the counsel of
that he had heard and known. The Woolfe followed also with true and evident
tokens, and the Fox with his own subscribed will confirmed his great treason.
The King gave sentence his skin should be turned over his ears, his carkas
left for the Ravens, and his bones should be burned for sacrifice, done in
memory of the Bull, and in testimony of his innocence: and lo this was a
worthy punishment for so vile a carkas, that had wrought such mischief.

We must all therefore endeavor, great and small, high and low, to work well,
and to live with purity of mind, and an upright conscience. For the heavens,
after long abstinence and deferring of punishment, do by determined justice
rain upon us a double plague and correction, to those that justly deserve it.
But the just and virtuous sort they recompense also, with infinite benefits of
life, estate, commodity, honor, and estimation.

FINIS.
Here ends the Treatise of the Moral Philosophy of Sendebar: In which is
laid open many infinite examples for the health and life of reasonable men,
shadowed under tales and similitudes of brute beasts without reason.
Farewell.
OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT


Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the
sign of the Star 1570. Cum Priuilegio.

Faults escaped.
Folio. Page. Line. Faults. Correction. 4 1 9 debating with himself occupying
with himself, 12 1 12 of my Genitours. etc. of my Progenitors. etc. 42 1 8 if
thou will not be. etc. if thou be not called by. etc 42 1 8 the goodyere
aylest. etc. the goodyere ayl^^st. etc. 42 1 12 so bake, so drink, 69 1 19
take heart of grace. etc. take heart of grass. etc. 76 2 11 wearied the Bull,
worried the Bull, 95 1 14 Preservation their. etc preservation of their etc.


