The effect of certain Sermons TOUCHING THE FVLL REDEMPTION of mankind by the
death and blood of CHRIST JESUS: WHEREIN Besides the merit of Christ's
suffering, the manner of his offering, the power of his death, the comfort of
his Cross, the glory of his resurrection, Are handled, What pains Christ
suffered in his soul on the Cross: Together, With the place and purpose of
his descent to hell after death: Preached at Paul's Cross and else where in
London, by the right Reverend Father Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester. With a
conclusion to the Reader for the clearing of certain objections made against
the said doctrine.

1. Corinthians. 3. I esteem not to know any thing save Christ Jesus, and him
crucified.

Athanasius de Incarnatione verbi dei. Therefore the son of God took to him
a body that might die, that, enduing it with a reasonable soul, it might
suffice for a full satisfaction to Death for all.

Imprinted at London by Peter Short for Walter Burre, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Flower deluce. 1599.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is some time since (good Christian Reader) that lying in London, and
preaching at Paul's Cross, as the feast of Easter drawing near did admonish
me, I made choice to speak of the redemption of mankind by the death and
blood of Christ Jesus. And because that City then had, and yet has, as many
learned and religious preachers; so some conceited and too much addicted to
novelties, who spared not in their Catechisings and readings, to urge the
suffering of the very pains of hell in the soul of Christ on the cross, as
the chiefest part, and maine ground of our Redemption by Christ: I, finding how
fast that opinion had increased, since it was first devised, and doubting where
it would end, thought it my duty publikelie to warn them that were forward in
defending this fancy, to take heed how far they waded in that late sprung
speculation: For as these words of Psa. 18. and 116
David, The sorrows of hell besieged me, and these of Jonas. 2.
Jonas, Out of the belly of hell I cried, and thou heardest my voice, may be
tolerablie applied to Christ, if they be metaphorically interpreted of Christ,
as the scriptures mean them in David and Jonas; so if we grow from the
figurative use of the word HELL, to the proper signification thereof, and rise
from the degrees of sorrows and fears, which pursue the Saints in this life,
to the highest sense and suffering of ALL, and THE VERY SAME pains and
punishments which the damned do and shall endure for ever; freeing Christ from
nothing but from the place and continuance of hell: we make not a curious and
superfluous, but an erroneous and dangerous addition to the mystery of our
Salvation.

The better to slack their inconsiderate heat, I labored to prove these
four points unto them. First that it was no where recorded in the holy
Scriptures, nor justly to be concluded by the Scriptures, that Christ
suffered the true pains of hell; and so the Consciences of the faithful
could not justly be forced to the necessary believing of any such strange
assertion. Secondly, that as the Scriptures describe to us the pains of the
damned and of hell; there are many terrors and torments, which, without
evident impiety, cannot be ascribed to the Son of God, as namely extreme
Darkness, Desperation, Confusion, utter separation, reiection and exclusion
from the grace, favor, and kingdom of God; remembrance of sin gnawing the
conscience, horror of Devils tormented and tormenting, and flame of fire
intolerablie burning both body and soul. Thirdly, that the death and blood
of Christ Jesus were evidently, frequentlie, constantly set down in the
writings of the Apostles as the sufficient price of our Redemption, and true
mean of our reconciliation to God; and the very same proposed in the figures,
resembled in the sacrifices of the Law, and sealed with the Sacraments of the
new Testament as the very ground work of our salvation by Christ; and so
have been received and believed in the Church of God fourteen hundred years,
before any man ever made mention of hell pains to be suffered in the soul
of Christ. Lastly, where the Scriptures are plain and pregnant, that Christ
1. Corin. 13.
DIED: for our sins, and by his Hebre. 2
DEATH, destroyed him that had power of death, even the Devil, and reconciled
us, when we were strangers and enemies, IN THE Colos. 1.
BODY OF HIS FLESH THROVGH DEATH, (for we are reconciled to God, by the Rom 5.
DEATH of his son, and sanctified by THE OFFERING OF THE Hebr. 10.
BODY of Jesus Christ once, who 1. Pet. ^.
himself bare our sins in his BODY on the Tree: where he was put to death
concerning the FLESH;) Besides that the holy Ghost in these places by express
words names the bodily death of Christ as the mean of our redemption and
reconciliation to God: no considerate divine might affirm or imagine Christ
suffered the Death of the soul; for so much as the Death of the soul must
exclude Christ from the grace, spirit, and life of God; and leave in him
neither faith, hope, nor love, sanctity, nor innocence; which God forbid any
Christian man should so much as dream. We should therefore do well to
reverence the manifest words of Gods Spirit in so high a point of Religion,
and suffer our selves as scholars to be taught by the leader into all truth,
what to believe and confess in the mystery of our redemption, and not to
control or correct the doctrine so cleerelie delivered in the Scriptures, so
consonantlie retained of all learned and unlearned in the Church of Christ, for
so many hundred years. And if any man to maintain his devise would invent a
new hell and another death of the soul, then either scriptures or fathers
ever heard or spoke of, they should keep their inventions to themselves; it
sufficed me to believe what I read, and consequently not to believe what I did
not read in the word of God, which is and ought to be the foundation of our
faith.

Thus far I purposed, when I first entered, by Gods grace to proceed in this
cause, according to ye simple understanding wherewith god has endued me for the
good of his Church. The article of the Creed, Christ DESCENDED INTO HELL I
meant not to meddle with; choosing rather to leave yt untouched, then to press
any sense as a point of faith, for which I had not so full and fair warrant,
as for the redemption of man by the death and blood of Christ Jesus; but the
vehemency of some contradicting that I taught, and the importunity of others
requesting to know what they might safely believe of that article, made me
to alter my mind. For when some urged, others doubted, that if Christ did not
suffer the pains of hell whiles he hung on the Cross, that part of the Creed
was added in vain; and the words of Psalm. 16.
David, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, applied by Acts 2.
Peter unto Christ in the second of the Acts, could hardly have any good
construction: (because it seemed far fet, and altogether repugnant to the
proper signification of the words, to take the soul for the body, and hell
for the grave; and as for the local descent of Christ to hell after death,
they counted that but a fable:) I was forced to promise that I would openly
deliver, which I thought was the likeliest and safest sense, as well of that
article in the Creed, as of those words of David, fulfilled in the person of
our Savior. This occasion drew me to the next question of Christ's descent to
hell. Wherein I resolved as by perusing the later part of this treatise will
better appear, that Christ's descent to the very place of hell after his
death, did best concord both with the Creed, and with the truth of Christian
religion, so we took care not to swerve from the Scriptures, in setting down
the cause why he went thither: which was to overthrow and destroy the kingdom
and might of Satan in the place of his greatest strength, even in hell, and as
our head to free all his members from danger and fear of coming thither: the
sorrows and terrors whereof he loosed with his presence, treading them under
his feet, and rose again into a blessed and immortal life, leading
captivity captive, and taking from hell and Satan all power to prevail
against his elect.

Both these resolutions that Christ suffered not the true pains of hell in his
soul on the cross; and that he personally conquered and disarmed the powers
and terrors thereof before his resurrection; some (as in such cases is common)
misremembred, some misconstrued, and some misliked: vvhereupon I was both
advised and entreated by men of greater place then I will name, to put the
effect of that which I had delivered in vvriting, that by mine own words,
and not by other men's conceits or reports, the learned might judge of the
doctrine. Which I did that very Summer, and had it ready for the press
before Bartlemewtide, but that the Parliament of States approaching, wherein men
should be otherwise employed; and a great hurl raised against it by certain
popular preachers in that city, through whose mouths the contrary had often
passed to the people as current, I was desired by the same persons again to
stay, till that time of business were over past, that heat of contradiction
somewhat alaied, and respite given that it might be translated into Latin,
which also is now performed, as well as published in English. To whole counsel
I yielded, referring the time wholly to their judgments, notwithstanding I were
by many traduced in many places as a teacher of strange and false doctrine. But
I have been and am the more willing to bear the reproaches of maligners,
because I seek not my self herein, but that the church of Christ here in
England should hold fast that ancient and sure foundation of faith which
hitherto it has kept; and profess that doctrine touching our Redemption by
Christ, which as well the public laws of this realm, as all the catholic
fathers do uphold and allow.

In setting down the sum of that which I preached, I neither do, nor can
promise thee (gentle Reader) the same words which I then spoke; I wrote them
not; but I assure thee before him that knows all things, that I have not
swarued nor altered any material point from the method, propositions,
proofs and conclusions, which I then used, nor from the words as far as
either my notes, or my memory upon the fresh foot could direct me; which I
have yet to show. Many proofs and authorities I omitted in the pulpit, which
the time shut me from; and some objections I have answered here more largely,
then the course of Sermons would permit: but here is the self same in effect,
which then I uttered and purposed, if the time would have suffered. The manner
of handling this question, I always wished might be temperate and sober, as
best became christian professors and teachers; least by catching advantages
besides the cause, we increased quarrels, and so much regarded our credits
that we neglected the truth. I have therefore in the Treatise it self touched
no man's name, oppugned no man's words, traduced no man's judgment; but
admitting and retaining as much as I thought might stand with the truth, I
have pared off certain extremities, and rejected certain additions, which the
first inuentors did refrain; for that Christ suffered the death of the soul,
or all the same torments, which the damned do and shall, are positions lately
coined, and derived from the proportion of Gods justice as they call it, but as
I think from presumption of man's reason intruding into Gods secrets. The
doctrine which I defend, that we are sufficiently redeemed by the death and
blood of Christ Jesus, (without adding of hell pains to be suffered in the
soul of Christ) has the constant, full, and express warrant of the
Scriptures, and the like approbation from all the fathers without exception. And
therefore howsoever some men may despise all ancient writers, and frustrate the
scriptures with their figures; al sober and wise christians will, I doubt not,
beware how they admit this strange and late found nouelty into their Creed or
consciences. The second point I press nor with like vehemency, because it
has not like certainty. So long as we confess (which the Scriptures do
confirm) that Christ's humane nature after his extreme humiliation on the
Cross, and before his resurrection, conquered and spoiled not death only, but
hell and Satan also, of al their power and right over ye faithful, and
ascending on hie lead captivity captive, and took the keys of death and of
hell into his own hands; with the precise manner and hour I will not burden
any man's conscience, that cannot be persuaded by reading the latter part of
this treatise; though I my self, after long and diligent search, find no sense
so agreeable to ye words of the Creed, so answerable to the rules of the
sacred Scriptures, and so fully followed by all the Fathers, as Christ's
descent to the very place of hell for the purposes aforesaid.

Having premonished thee (Christian reader) of thus much, I am not willing to
detayne thee any longer from vewing and examining the book it self, but
only to tell thee that whiles I stayed the printing hereof, till others did
like it, as well as my self, one more hasty then either advised or learned,
calling himself H. I. would needs traduce it and confute it before he saw it,
resting belike on such notes, as his angry mind and brickle memory took at
the time when I preached of these points. Wherein though others condemn his
folly, yet I commend his policy, that least he should trouble himself with
more the^ he could answer, he thought it ye best way to come into the field
alone, and like a stout Champion fighting with his own shadow, to say no more
the^ he would be sure to deny or decline with one shift or other. To make the
easier conquest of that I preached, he clean changes the state of the first
Question, he offers to prove that which I never denied, he confuteth that
which I never affirmed, he runs at Random no man can tell whither, he
peruerteth my words, he maymeth my reasons, he skippeth all my authorities;
he scornefullie rejects the judgment of the Fathers when I allege them,
the Scriptures he turns and windeth at his pleasure, he wadeth desperately
through thick and thin in matters of most importance, his best reason is
every where his own opinion, outfacing the world with his ignorance; in sum,
he shows us by his example what it is for a man in matters of faith to
despise both authority and antiquity, and trust only to his own fancy. Such
an opponent the wiser sort will think I were better neglect then encounter,
which resolution I my self do retain; only lest my silence should augment
his boldness, I thought it not amiss in the conclusion severed from the
treatise, to give thee a taste of the rashness and weakness of his enterprise,
entreating thee in the mean time to read advisedly and judge indifferently,
for that the cause is weighty and touches thee as near as me. For if we
suffer the main foundation of our faith and hope in Christ to be wrenched
never so little awrie; the whole building is more endangered then we are ware
of. In Gods causes, let Gods book teach us what to believe, and what to
profess. If thou think it thy duty in matters of faith to beware of
unwritten verities, in the greatest point of all, which is our redemption by
Christ; take heed thou easily admit not unwritten absurdities. This matter
began in more general and more tolerable terms, if they might be rather
soberly mitigated, then too vehemently pressed; but as when we run down an
hill we can hardly stay; so in matters of religion when we fall to inuenting
beyond the scriptures we quickly miss and seldom recover the truth. Farewell
(gentle Reader) and pray that our thoughts and wits may be subjected to the
truth of Gods word, and that we loath not the simplicity which is in Christ.

THE FVLL REDEMPtion of mankind, by the death and blood of Christ.
GALATH. 6. verse. 14. Be it far from me to rejoice but in the Cross of
Christ.
AS the natural man no where likes nor allows the things of God, because
they seem foolishnes unto him: so of all the ways and works of God there is
none, that more displeases and offends the unbeliever, then the Cross of
Christ. 1. Corinthians 8. The cross of Christ despised both of Jews and Gentiles.
We preach Christ crucified (says the Apostle) to the Jews a stumbling
block, to the Grecians foolishness. The Grecians ^auoring nothing but
worldly wisdom, and fleshly reason, counted it a mere folly for the son
of God, to leave his Throne of glory in the heavens, and as a man amongst men*
to taste of ma^^e miseries; and to suffer a cruel and shameful death at the
hands of his enemies. The pri^^ of our Redemption, for whose sakes he died,
and the power of his resurrection, by which he raised us to the imitation and
expectation of a better life, they did neither conceive, nor believe; and
therefore they rejected his birth, and specially his death, as a dream of
simple and unlearned men, such as they took the Apostles to be. The Jews
having their ears full of those excellent promises, which God made by his
prophets, concerning the kingdom of the Messiah, and referring them to an
earthly king, that should sit on the throne of David, brusing his enemies with
a rod of Iron, and ruling the world with justice and equity: when they saw
the weak and base condition of our Savior, in outward show promising nothing
but reproach and penury; they so disdained and detested him, that they could
not be quiet, till they had crucified him; being then, and ever since ashamed,
and grieved that any should say, or think, he was the Messiah, so much
spoken of in the prophets. Thus the Jews looking for wonders, and the Grecians
for Wisdom, did both condemn the cross of Christ: the one of weakness,
the other of foolishness: and for that cause fell at the stone of offense: but
such as were called both Jews and Gentiles to be heirs of the promise, did
plainly perceive, and fully confess Christ crucified to be the mighty
power, and manifold wisdom of God for their everlasting joy and bliss; and
were so far from being ashamed of Christ's sufferings, What it is to the
believers.
that they were willing partakers and open reioicers in the cross of Christ,
as the Apostle here says of himself. Galath. 6
Be it far from me to rejoice, but in the Cross of Christ, by which the
world is crucified to me, and I to the world. And indeed if we behold Christ
crucified with carnal eyes, as did the Jews, we shall see nothing in him but
earthly weakness, and deadly wounds, as they saw: but if we bend the
eyes of our faith to the tr^th of his person, and to the force and fruit of
his death, as must all his saints; we shall find the power and wisdom,
justice and mercy of God so tempered in the cross of Christ for our good;
that by his pains we are eased, by his stripes we are healed, his weakness
is our strength, his shame is our glory, and his death our life: worthily
therefore does the Apostle profess, that he did, and we should not rejoice but
in the cross of Christ.

And where he says, he did rejoice in nothing but in the cross of Christ; he
thereby teaches us to repose all our faith and hope, as well as our joy, in the
favor of God, which Christ has purchased for us, by his death and blood. Romans
1^.
Rejoice in hope, says the Apostle; that is in the expectation, not in the
present fruition of heavenly things, which God has prepared for all that
love him. Now hope without faith there can be none. Hebr. 11
Faith is the ground work of that we hope, for how can we with patience
look for that, which we do not believe we shall receive? The doubting of
Gods promises is the plain distr^sting of them; and breeds rather a fear we
shall miss them, then an hope to enioie them: and in fear there is 1. John. 4.
PAIN, as saint John says, and no JOY. Then as there is no perfect joy, but
in hope assured by faith, so if we must not rejoice but in the cross of
Christ, our faith and hope must wholly depend on that peace and atonement*
which Christ has made betwixt God and us, by the sheading of his precious
blood for our sakes; that is by his cross. Since therefore Christ crucified is
the wisdom and power of God to save all that believe, and the cross of
Christ is the full support of all our faith, hope and joy; there is no one
point in christian religion, that more mainelie concerns, and neerelie
touches the salvation of our souls, then the right understanding and only
relying on the cross of Christ; least we mistake the truth or distrust the
force thereof, to the dishonor of Christ, and danger of our own souls.

To prevent this peril, The method of this treatise*
I think best to observe this order in that which shall be said, ^o show
first what the Cross of Christ CONTAINS, next what the cross of Christ
PERFORMS: that knowing the contents and effects of Christ's cross, I mean
the pains which he suffered; and the work which he accomplished by dying on
the cross; we may be settled and assured, how far it extended, and what it
effected for us.

To begin with the CONTENTS of Christ's cross: The cross is sometimes taken
in the Scripture for all manner of affliction, Luke. ^
He that will come after me, let him deny himself, and daily take up his
cross and follow me. Matthew. ^^
He that does not take up his Cross and follow me, is not worthy of me. In
this sense, says Bernarde, De passi. dom. cap. 5.

The cross taken for all kind of affliction.


The whole life of Christ was a cross and a martyrdom. The reason (...) Christ
so used the word (for he first used it) was, for that he saw before hand,
that going to his cross he should taste all kinds of calamities: and so came
it to pass. For between his last supper, and his death, he was betrayed of
Judas, abiured of Peter, forsaken of all his followers; he was wrongfulli^
imprisoned, falselie accused, unjustly condemned; he was buffeted, whipped,
scorned, reviled; he endured cold, nakedness, thirst, wounding, hanging, shame,
reproach, and all sorts of deadly pains; besides heaviness of heart, and
agony of mind, which oppressed him in the garden. Rightly then may the
cross note all manner of miseries, forasmuch as our Savior going from the
garden to the grave, suffered all sorts of afflictions: howbeit this is no
different signification, but rather a participation of the cross of Christ.

The church of Rome honoreth the cro^se and dishonoreth the death of Christ.
The Church of Rome has wedded a great part of her devotion to the cross of
Christ, but under that name she adoreth the matter and form of the cross: as
for the force and effects of Christ's death, which is remission of our sins,
satisfaction of Gods wrath, and donation of eternal life, she prodigally
imparteth that to her pilgrimages, pardons, and purgatory, yea to the works
and prayers of quick and dead; and so magni^^eng the sign and wood of the
cross, she dishonoreth the merit and fruit of Christ crucified. But of her
painted and ca^ued crosses, the scripture makes no mention, and therefore I
shipped it, rather as a manifest illusion, then any signification of the cross
of Christ.

What the scriptures mean by the cro^se of Christ.
Most commonly in the Scriptures by the cross of Christ, the holy Ghost
means the person suffering, and the pain suffered on the cross, that is,
the punishments and torments which the son of God suffered for our sins,
after he was fastened to the tree: the rest which went before not being
excluded as superfluous, but continued and increased by that sharp and
extreme martyrdom which he endured on the cross. And so Christ crucified as
the scriptures describe him, had from top to toe no part free from pain and
grief; but hoong on the wood, having his flesh torn with whippes, his cheeks
swollen with buffets, his face defiled with spittle, his head stuckt full with
thorns, his eyes dejected for shame, his ears burning with taunts, his mouth
sowred with vinegar, his hands and feet wounded with Iron spikes, his bones
vniointed, his sinews pricked and strained, his whole body hanging by the
soreness of his hands and feet, and lastly (though he were first dead) his
heart pierced with a Spear, whence issued blood and water. His body thus
wounded and tortured unto death, his blood thus shed, and as it were powered on
the earth, are said in the scriptures to be the ransom of our sins, and
price of our redemption. 1 Peter. 2.
He bare our sins in his body upon the Cross (says Peter:) and again, 1
Peter. 1
You are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted
and undefiled. I do not amplify the bodily pains which Christ suffered, of
purpose to make them seem greater then they were; I find my self rather
unable to express them; but least we should too much diminish them, and ask,
What great matter it was for him to go securely, and as it were sportinglie to
his death, I thought good shortly to touch them, and leave the fuller and
further consideration of them to the godly at their private leisure.

In the mean time I may not omit in his Stripes, Thorns, The pains of
Christ's cross.
Crucifying and Death, to observe that which the Reader will happily
ouerskippe in the history of his passion, unless he be both advised and
learned. In his STRIPES I note, that Pilate having a purpose to save the life
of Christ, and not neglecting to satisfy the people that were incensed against
him, caused him extremely to be whipped, and showed to the people in that
plight with these word, John 19
Ecce homo Behold ye man; to let them see that Christ had received very
sufficient correction, no crime being proved aga^^st him, and so to withdraw
them from seeking his death. ^n CROVVNING him with thorns, the soldiers did
not onel^e wreath him a thick crown of thorns, to stick his head full of
them: but after the putting it on, to fasten it, they did strike him on the
head with their Canes, as Matthew. 27. Mark. 15.
Matthew and Mark do plainly testify. In NAILING him to the Cross, besides
the greatness and soreness of his wounds, which were worthy to be marked,
they so strained his body least he should stir hand or foot, that all his
bones might be numbered. The greatness of his wounds David foreshewed by
th^se words: Psa^. 22.
Foderunt manus meas, and pedes meos; they dug my hands and my feet;
noting how wide wounds they made in both, which were rather dug than
pierced; and so big were the nails, as the Ecclesiastical history
reports, that Constantine made of them (when his mother had found them in the
mount where Christ was crucified) Socrates lib. 1. cap. 17
A bridle, and an helmet for his own use. How tender and sensible the hands
and feet are above other parts of the body, and what pain and anguish the
pricking, straining and tearing of the sinews, ligaments and joints in either
(which are very thick, and full of sense in both those places) did breed and
kindle in the whole body, nature can teach us without any further proof. Of
RACKING his ioints, Bernard makes this collection out of David: De pass. dom.
cap. 7.
Tantum distentus sum^ vt corpore nudo in modu^ Tympanicae pellis distonto,
facile possint omnia ossa mea dinumerari. I am so strained (says he in the
person of Christ) that my body naked being stretched like the head of a
timbrell (or drum) all my bones may be numbered. If this proof reach not home,
David has plainer and expresser words, in the 14. verse of the same Psalm,
which cannot be contradicted. HITH PAREDV.i. Separauerunt se omnia ossamea, All
my bones are out of joint, or pulled one from the other. In this horrible
torment of Stripes, Thorns, Wounds, Sinews and joints, our Savior hoong on
the cross above three hours, in most perfect sense, with most extreme pain,
till the very instant that he breathed out his soul. A violenter death by
fire, or otherwise, our Savior might happily have suffered; but a more
painful, with perfection of patience, never martyr, much less malefactor, did
or could endure.

The torments of others when they are violent, Christ had no pangs of death but
perfect sense of pain unto the end.
do either hasten death, or ouerwhelme the sense, and so the pain when it is
most grievous, is least perceived. In Christ there was no such thing. He died
not by degrees as we do; his senses did not decay, no pangs of death took hold
of him, but in perfect sense, and perfect patience both of body and soul, he
did voluntarily and miraculously resign his spirit (as he was praying) into
his fathers hands. Longer tortures others have endured, but never greater for
the time, nor with like patience. For in all men (Christ excepted) though the
spirit be never so willing, and the measure of faith never so strong, yet unless
it please God to shorten or lighten the rage of their pain, the flesh repineth
at the present anguish, howsoever grace support the soul, that it sink not
under the burden. But Bernard de pass. dom. ca. 41.
He which shortneth and lightneth the force of torments in his saints when they
be grievous, in his own would do neither. He spared not himself, that
knows how to spare his; but suffered and endured all to the uttermost, with
so exact obedience and patience, that he did not shrink at the pain, nor
strive with death, but y^elded so voluntary a sacrifice to god, that in, the
sharpest torments he made no show of sense: nor suffered his flesh so much as
to tremble or struggle with pain or death. He died voluntarily.
The manner of rendering up his soul the Scriptures and Fathers do carefully
observe. Saint John thus describes it. John. 19.
When Jesus had tasted of the vinegar, he said (all) is finished, and bowed
his head, and gave up the Ghost.. Whereupon Bernard says: Sermon. 4. Hebdoma^ae
p^nosae.
It is a great infirmity to die, but so to die, does plainly prove an infinite
power. S. Luke reports that Jesus Luke 13.
cried with a loud voice (to show himself to be free from any touch of death)
and said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Whereupon Hierom
observes, that the Centurion hearing his prayer, and seeing him quaest. 8. ad
Hedibium.
Statim spiritum sponte dimisisse, presently of his own accord to send forth
his spirit, Commotus signi magnitudine, moved with the greatness of the
wonder, said; Truly this man was the son of God. Augustine largely handling
the manner of his death says; Tract. 119. in Johan.
Who can so sleep when he will, as Christ died when he would? Who can so lay
aside his garment at his pleasure, as Christ laid aside his flesh? Who can so
leave his place, as Christ left his life? with how great power shall he come to
judge, that showed so great power when he died? Christ himself ralifteth these
observations with his own mouth in the Gospel of saint John John. 10.
: None takes my soul from me, but I lay it down of my self. By this we
may perceive, the conjunction of the Humane nature with the Divine in the
person of Christ was so fast and sure, that neither sin, death, nor hell
assaulting our Savior, could make any separation, no not of his body; but he
himself of his own accord must put off his earthly tabernacle, that dying
for a season he might conquer death for ever; and so the laying down of his
life was no imposed punishment, nor forceable invasion of death upon him, but a
voluntary sacrifice for sin rendered unto God for our sakes, to appease the
wrath and satisfy the curse, which our manifold wickedness had most justly
deserved.

How the opinion of Christ's suffering hell pains has grown by degrees.
Thus far without fear we may freely extend the cross of Christ by the
warrant of the holy scriptures. Some men in our days stretch it a great deal
farther, to the death both of body and soul, and to the WHOLE PAINS OF THE
DAMNED IN HELL; but upon how just grounds, when you hear, you may judge as you
s^e cause. This opinion has grown by degrees; and every day takes new
increase. At the first, men contented themselves to think Christ suffered the
pains of hell, that is great and intolerable pains; which metaphorical kind
of speech the Scriptures will bear; if we conclude no worse meaning with^^
those words; Jonas. 2. Psalm. 18. Psalm. 116.
Out of the belly of HELL, (says Jonas) I cried and thou heardest my voice.
The sorrows of HELL compassed me about (says David) and the griefs of HELL
took hold of me. Some others affirm, that Christ, in sustaining the wrath of
God due to us, wrastled with the very powers of hell that sought to fasten on
him, and howsoever beholding the terror of Gods vengeance provoked by our
sins, he did sometimes tremble, yet by firm faith always fixed on God, he
repelled and repressed those assaults of Satan, and so saved not himself
only, but us also. This might be endured if men could stay here; and it were
to be wished, that in matters of so great weight and danger, we would rather
try where we are, then hasten to go onward. But as water breaking her banks
still runs and never stays; so some lighting on other men's inventions
never leave adding till they mar all. In the case which we have in hand, the
name of Hell pains being once admitted into the work of our redemption, some
in our days will no nay, but that Christ on the cross suffered the self same
pains in soul, which the damned do in hell, and endured even the death of the
soul; yea others auouc^ that he sustained far greater torments then any
are in hell, to wit, as much pain in 15. hours, as all the faithful should
have suffered everlastingly, and that as well in body as in soul. To these
dangerous devises are some men slipped in our time. And because I know not when
or where they will make an end, I think it needful for discharge of my
duty, and direction of your faith, as well to set down certain limits beyond
which you may not go, as also to reject such extremities as by no means may be
closed in the cross of Christ, without apparent impiety.

The pains of hell (if I be not deceived) make a fourefold impression in the
souls of men; How many impressions the pains of hell make in the soul of man.
a careful fear, which declineth them; a doubtful fear, which conflicteth
with them; a desperate fear which sinketh under them, and a damned fear which
suffers them. The first is and must be in all the godly; and chiefly in
Christ himself: For the more we love God, the more we detest and shun all
separation from God. Hell therefore which is an utter exclusion from the
kingdom of God, is most justly abhorred of all his saints, and specially of
his own Son: who not only by will, but by nature is one with his Father. A
conflict with Hell if it come not from the inward motion of the mind, is but a
temptation to try the heart, or show the strength of the godly. So was Adam
tempted in Paradise by Eve, and Eve by the Serpent, to prove how mindful
they were, and thankful they would be for the blessings of God bestowed upon
them. So was Christ tempted in the wilderness by Satan, and all his life long
by the wicked, which were to him but occasions to declare the innocence and
integrity of his humane nature. But the inward temptation of the heart and
conscience, though it be in all the children of Adam, (the elect themselves
not excepted,) by reason of their flesh lusting against the spirit, their
conscience accusing them for sin, and their faith sometimes fainting; yet in
Christ we must grant no such thing, because in him there was neither
corruption of flesh, nor remorse of sin, nor weakness of faith, that
should any kind of way breed or yield to the worm, that gnaweth at our
consciences. A desperate fear is when the wrath of God awaketh the wicked to
know and acknowledge, what vengeance is prepared for them, in the life to
come, and so having lost both faith and hope, they fall to an horrible
expectation of judgment, and flaming fire, which shall devour the adversary.
But yet even these men, whose case is most despaired, are not while they live
here on earth, in the true pains of Hell, but are as far from that, as
expecting is from suffering. The last I know not how to call, but by the name
of a damned, rather pain, then fear; which the wicked departed this life do
presently feel. For pain that is present, inflicteth rather torment, then
fear; since fear is properly the trembling at evil, before it come, and not
the grieuing at it, when it is come. Of these four impressions, ye see which
I attribute unto Christ, and which not. Despairing, or so much as doubting of
his salvation, we cannot ascribe to him without evident impiety. And as for
Christ's suffering the same pains which the damned souls in Hell do, to my
simple understanding, it is rather a dream then a doctrine to be taught in
the Church of Christ. Did they defend as great sense and anguish of pain to
have been in Christ's body or soul, as hell fire does inflict to the damned,
though that were a very presumptuous and audacious position, yet is it not so
impious, as when they affirm he sufred the self same which the damned do. For
the damned have many sorts of pains in hell, which by no means could fasten on
Christ's person; and since there be degrees of pain in hell even for the
damned; these curious teachers must show us which of these degrees Christ
suffered, and by what warrant of gods word, they a^iunge the very pains of
hell to the cross of Christ.

To persuade them to hold fast the form of wholesome words, 2. Tim. 1.
which the holy ghost observes throughout the scriptures, I fear is but lost
labor; having lighted on a strange doctrine, they are forced to use strange
speeches, such as no where are found in the word of truth, expressing man's
redemption by the death and blood of Christ; yet somewhat to rebate the heat of
such as despise all other sufferings of Christ in respect of their hell-paines,
I think it not amiss to examine the weight of those allegations and reasons
that are brought to support their assertion. The proofs which are brought that
Christ suffered the pains of hell.
The proofs that are pretended for this opinion may be recalled to three
principal heds, which are these, PREDICTIONS that Christ should suffer the
pains of hell in soul; CAUSES, why he must suffer them; SIGNS that he did
suffer them. Predictions, that Christ should suffer the pains of hell are cited
the se, Psalm. 16.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell; and again, Psalm. 18.
The sorrows or streights of hell have found me out, and beset me round. The
causes why he must suffer them are enlarged by some into many branches, but may
be contracted into these two; THE PART that chiefly sinned in man; and the
WAGES due to man for sin. The WORK of sin appeared first and most in the soul
of Adam, and therefore in ye satisfaction for sin, the soul of Christ, as they
say, must properly and principally suffer. The WAGES of sin is expressly
death both of soul and body, and therefore Christ, as our surety and for our
sins, must taste of both, (as they affirm) before he can discharge us from
both. Signs that he did suffer, were his AGONY in the garden, when he sweat
blood; which for a corporal death he would never have don: and his COMPLAINT
on the cross, that he was forsaken of God, which (as they think) proouesh he
felt in soul a most fearful judgment of God, pronounced against our sins.
To every of these I will speak in order, that finding the weakness of their
foundation, we may the sooner see the lamenesse of their conclusion.

To the first I might answer with Saint Austen; these words of David specify
not any suffering of hell pains on the cross, but rather a descent to the
place of hell. Predictions that Christ should suffer ye pains of hell. ^^gust.
epi. 99
That the Lord after his body was dead came to hell is certain enough: for
neither can the prophecy be contradicted, which said. Thou will not leave my
soul in hell; (which least any man should dare otherwise to interpret, Peter
in the Acts of the Apostles so expounds;) nor the words of Peter be
avoided, where he says that Christ brake the sorrows of hell, the which
could not possibly take hold on him; who then but an infidel will deny that
Christ was in hell? But with antiquitte I will not urge them; if the text do
not refuse their exposition, I will release them this authority. That this
saying of David does not import any pains suffered while Christ lived, but
some honor done to his soul after his death, may three ways be proved; by
the words next praecedent, by the words next adjoined, and by the application
which Peter makes, when he cites this place. The words next before, (which
are these, Psalm. 16.
My flesh shall rest in hope) note Christ's burial: and this is brought as a
reason why Christ's body should rest in hope, not on the cross where it had
no rest, but in the grave after he was dead; because thou will not leave my
soul in hell. If this respected any thing endured on the cross, the holy
ghost must have said in the person of Christ, because THOU HAVE NOT LEFT MY
SOVLE IN HELL: the pains, and time were both past; but he speaks in the
future tence, and of future things, Thou will not leave my soul in hell. And
this was the hope in which Christ died. Now hope never tends to things past
and known, but to that which is to come. This therefore touches something
consequent after Christ's death, which he hoped for when he died, and not any
pains suffered on the cross, or in the garden, whiles he lived. The words
annexed infer the same. Psalm. 16.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. Both these being jointly spoken of Christ, must both be jointly
verified in Christ; wherefore Christ's soul must then not be left in hell,
when his flesh lying in the earth saw no corruption. They may not be severed
in performance, which the holy ghost knitteth together in coherence. Lastly
Peter in plain words sa^eth, Acts 2,
David spoke (this) of Christ's resurrection. If this concerned his
resurrection, then not his passion on the cross; but after death, and before
he rose, as his flesh saw no corruption; So his soul was not left in hell.
Yea, God Ibidem.
raised him up (as Peter says) breaking the sorrows of death (or hell before
him) of which it was impossible he should be held; August epist. 99.
not that he was ever in them, and so loosed them, as a man does chains,
where with he was once bound: but as the snares of hunters (says Austen) are
broken, Ne teneant, non quia tenuerunt: before they take hold, not after they
have taken hold. For Christ was to rise again, not as others before him were
restored to this present life; but as the full and first conqueror of death
and hell, he was to rise both in body and soul to eternal and celestial
glory; and therefore he brake, when he rose, the pains and powers of death and
hell; that they should not prevail for ever against him or his.

The other places of the Psalms, have as many aunsweres as they have words;
for every word is an answer. First David speaks of himself, not of Christ;
and David's words to Christ's person we may not refer at our pleasures, without
farther and better warrant. Again, David does not say, the TORMENTS, but the
Psalm. 18. and 116.
SNARES, or STREIGHTS of DEATH, as well as of HELL (for the word Sheol
indifferently signifies both, if there be none other circumstance to limite
it to either; and David by the rules of divinity was never here on earth in
the true pains of the damned,) have FOUND me out, or BESET, and besieged me,
but not oppressed, nor overwhelmed me. And if we take the name of HELL never so
properly, it is no inconvenience, that the gates of hell, I mean the craft
and power of Satan, should hunt after the godly here on earth, and seek to
entrap, even Christ himself; but the true pains of hell, the wicked and
desperate do not suffer in this life, much less the elect, least of all
Christ. It is a judgment following death, and may no more be defended to be
here on earth, then the ioies of heaven may be possessed in this life.

The causes why Christ must suffer the pains of hell.
In the causes, why Christ should suffer the pains of hell, we may do well not
to be too forward with the rules of reason: as well for that there is no
proportion betwixt the person of Christ and us, as also for that we may not
sit judges with God, and prescribe when or how his justice should be
satisfied. It is requisite in our selves to confess that as both parts of man
sinned in Adam, so the wages of sin, which is everlasting death, is due to
both: and as the soul should have principally enioied God, which is her
life, if she had persisted in obedience; so in falling from God, her loss,
and smart, must of the twain be far the greater; though the body shall not
want both grieuaunce and vengeance intolerable: but if we stretch these rules
to Christ, and subject his person, as our surety, to the very SAME WAGES of
sin, which we should have suffered, I know not how in fewer words a man
may couch more gross and open impiety. For we should have been WHOLLY
SEVERED, IVSTLY HATED, and UTTERLY REJECTED from God, yea ETERNALLY CONDEMNED
BODY AND SOVLE, to hell fire. May any of these things be affirmed or
imagined of Christ without heinous and horrible blasphemy? This was the wages
of our sin; must he endure THE SAME, before we can be redeemed, or Gods
justice be satisfied? I hope no sound divine will so conclude.

They will release eternal death to the dignity of Christ's person, Christ
could not suffer the death of the soul, which was the chief wages of our
sin.
but he was (as they say) for the time to taste the very same death both in
soul and body which we should have done; and which in us should have been
everlasting. First by their leaves, hell in the scriptures is an everlasting
torment, and therefore if the excellency of Christ's person exempt him from
everlasting misery, that cleerelie quiteth him in body and soul from
suffering hell. Again, as sin is the voluntary defection of the soul from
God, so hell is the TOTAL, if not FINAL EXCLVSION of the soul from all
fellowship with God; less th^n the death of soul it cannot be. It is the
wages of sin, and therefore it must be the death as well of the soul, as of
the body; and chiefelie of the soul, because the soul of man is the
principal agent in sin. S. John calls hell the Apocal. 2.
second death. If then the soul of Christ suffered either hell, or the wages
of our sin; of necessity for the time it must be dead. The Rom, 6.
wages of sin is death. If for the time Christ's soul were dead, it had no
communion with God, nor God with it, no more then death has with life, or
darkness with light: It lost for that time all faith and love of God. For by
faith the just do Galat. 3
live: and he that 1. John. 4.
abides in love abides in God. And since God is the life of the soul, Christ
could not suffer the death of the soul, which is the wages of our sin, no
not for a day, or an hour, but he must be severed from God, and forsaken of
God. August. decinitate dei lib. 13. cap. 2.
Mors animae fit cum eam deserit deus, the death of the soul is when God
forsakes it. Idem de Trinitate. lib. 4. c. 14
Mors est spiritus a deo deseri, it is the death of the spirit to be forsaken
of God. Idem de verbis domini super Matthae^til. sermon, 6.
Mors animae deus amissus: the loss of God is the death of the soul. To lose
God, or to be forsaken of God, is to have no conjunction, nor fellowship with
God; the soul then that is dead, is excluded from the favor, and grace;
truth, and spirit of God; and if any be so irreligious or impious, as once to
affirm these things of Christ, he may avouch, that Christ's soul suffered the
true wages of our sin; but if we abhor these things as sacrilegious and
monstrous absurdities, as I doubt not but we do; then certainly the soul of
Christ could not be dead, no not for an instant, and consequently the true
wages of our sin the soul of Christ could not receive, nor suffer on the
cross, or in the garden: but we must rather give ear to Peter, which says,
Pet. 2.
Christ bare our sins in his body on the tree; where he was quickened in
spirit, though mortified in flesh, and strengthened in the inward man by the
joy proposed, for which he sustained the cross, and despised the shame
thereof. Christ then took the burden of our sins from us, and laid it on
his own shoulders, yea the Lord I^say. 53.
Laid upon him the iniquity of us all; but when it came to light upon him, the
very justice of God found great difference betwixt his person and ours; and so
great, that what should have condemned us body and soul for ever, that could
take no hold on him; but so far forth, as he did voluntarily yield himself to
be obedient unto the death of the cross, and in our flesh to quench the curse
of the law pronounced against our sins; insomuch that neither sin nor
death were able to sease on his body, till he did of his own accord resign
it into their hands. If we think it strange to see so much difference betwixt
him and us, we must remember, we were sinful, he was innocent; we were
defiled, he was holy; we were hateful, he was beloved; we were the servants
of sin, and enemies unto God, he was the Lord of life and of glory; we were
severed and estranged from God both in body and soul, his very flesh was
personally united and inseparably joined unto God; besides that himself was
the true and everliving son of God. What marvel then if sin, which should
have wrought in us an eternal destruction both of body and soul, could not
farther prevail in him, but to the wounding of his flesh, and shedding of his
blood for the just and full satisfaction of all our sins, even in the
righteous and sincere judgment of God? Though therefore THE SAME PART might,
and did suffer in Christ, which sinned in man I mean the soul; yet by no
means could it receive THE SAME WAGES which we should have received. And since
hell is the greatest vengeance, that God inflicteth for sin, if Christ's
soul were free from any, it must needs be cleared and acquitted from that,
which is greatest, and most repugnant to the fullness of grace, truth and
spirit, that dwell in the humane soul of Christ: but hereof I shall have
occasion to speak afterward again.

The signs that Christ suffered the pains of hell are left: The signs yt
Christ did suffer the pains of hell, are his agony in the garden, and his
complaint on the cross.
and those are his agony in the garden, and his complaint on the cross, that
he was forsaken. Of Christ's agony, since the scriptures have nor revealed the
right cause, it is cut los^tie to examen, presumption to determine,
impossibility to conclude certainly what was the true cause thereof. Howbeit
if we will needs conjecture at causes, we must take heed, that with our
obscure and private guesses, we do not contradict such plain and evident
places, as testify the perfection and conjunction of Christ's humane nature
with this divine, and so wrong the person of our Savior. This rule remembered
(though I be most willing to refrain the searching of that, which is
concealed from us) yet since they make this the most advantage of their cause,
that there cannot be any other reason assigned of Christ's sorrow, besides his
suffering the pains of hell. I will let you understand how many there might
be besides that which they bring^ and that theirs of all others, is least
probable, if not altogether intolerable. I will offer you six causes, that
might be, of Christ's agony; every one of them more likely, and more godly
then this devise of hell pains; others at their leasures may think on more,
which I shall be content to hear. Those six are these. Christ's SVBMISSION to
the majesty of God sitting in judgment; Six causes that might be of Christ's
agony in yt garden.
The REIECTION of the Jews; The DISPERSION of his Church; The LAMENTATION of
man's sin; The DEPRECATION of Gods wrath; The VOLVNTARY DEDICATION of his
blood to be shed for the sins of the world, and sanctification of his person
to offer his true and eternal sacrifice.

So great is the MAJESTY OF GOD, every where and at all times, but specially
sitting in judgment, and so far excelling the capacity of all his creatures,
that no flesh lining is able to appear before him without fear and trembling,
Joel. 2
The day of the Lord (whenever he rises to judge) is great and fearful,
and who shall endure it? When God gave his law, which was but the rule of his
judgment, so Hebre. 12
terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I fear and tremble. Psalm. 119
My flesh (says David to God) trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy judgments. Since then it is a point not only confessed but urged, by the
defenders of this new devise, that Christ appeared here before the tribunal of
God, to submit himself to his fathers pleasure; and the words of Christ in
that twelfth of John tend to that effect, where he says, John. 12
Now (even at hand) is the judgment of the world. Now (even shortly) shall
the prince of this world be cast out, and if I were lift up from the earth, I
will draw all unto me: why might not the humane nature of Christ tremble
before the majesty of that judge, whose glory the Seraphins in heaven do not
behold without Esaias. 6
yealing their faces? whereby Christ teaches us not to press into Gods
presence, whiles we are laden with sin, but in much fear and trembling; since
he would not appear before God to take our sins on him, but in this agony.

The reprobation of ye Jews.
The REIECTION OF THE JEWS might be another cause of his agony. Luke. 19
He wept over their city, when he beheld it, and remembered the subversion of
it; how would he then be grieved when he foresawe the final reiection of ye
whole nation? and his blood to be laid on them and their children for ever? for
their sakes Moses desired Exodus 32
To be wiped out of Gods book, and Paul Romans 9.
could have wished himself to be separated from Christ for his brethren the
Israelites. If the servants of Christ had so great heaviness and sorrow in
their hearts for their kinsmen according to the flesh; what agony must it
needs breed in their king, and Messiah, in whom were the bowels of mercy
and pity, to see the wicked rage of the people kindling Gods fearful
vengeance against themselves, and their offspring by putting him to a most
cruel and shameful death, that came to redeem them from sin and death? This
cause is observed by Ambrose, Hierom, Augustine and Bid. Ambros. in L^cam.
lib. 10. de tristitia and dolere Christi.
Nec illud distat a vero, si tristis erat pro persecutoribus: neither is that
dissonant from truth (says Ambrose) if he were heavy (in soul) for his
persecutors, whom he knew should dearly pay for their sacrilegious putting
him to death. He was not then afraid to die, but he was loath to have them
though they were evil, to perish; least his passion should be their
destruction, which he meant for the salvation of all. Christ's soul was not
heavy (says Ierom and Bid) Hieron. in Matthew. cap. 26
for any fear of his passion, but for that most unhappy Judas, for the
scandal of all his Apostles, for the reiection of the Jews, and subversion of
wretched Jerusalem. Peda in matthew. cap. 26.
And Austen, If we say the Lord was sorrowful (for the Jews) when his
passion drew near, where they would commit so heinous a sin, August. in
Psalm. 87.
non incongrue nos dicere existimo, I think we speak not without reason.

If respect of his persecutors could thus agonize him, what could the regard of
his own followers do? The dispersion of his church.
how did the weakness of his own disciples afflict him, when the wilfulness
of his enemies did so prevail with him? He warned his disciples of the
danger, and they vaunted of their strength; he willed them to Luke. 2^
pray, and they slept; and when he was apprehended they did every one forsake
him; yea the stoutest of them did plainly forswear him. He might therefore
justly be grieved with their infirmity, and earnestly pray for their
security. His tender care of them, and earnest prayer for them appears in
the 17. of John, even as he entered into the garden; he called upon them to
Ibidem.
watch and pray, that they entered not into temptation. Ambros. in Iu^cam. lib.
10. de tristitia and dolere Christi.
Dormiunt (says Ambrose) and nesciunt dolere pro quibus Christus dolebat: the
Disciples slept, and ca^nottel how to sorrow, for whom Christ sorrowed. Tristis
erat non pro suapassione, sed pro nostra dispersione. Tristis erat, quia
nosparnulos relinguebat. He was sorrowful not for his own suffering, but for
our dispersing. He was grieved because he left us young and weak. Hilarie* in
his tenth book de Trinitate largely pursues this occasion of Christo agony,
and concludes: Hilarious de ^rinitate. lib 10
Non ergo sibi tristis erat* neque sibi orat, sed illis, quos monet orare
peruigiles: Christ is not sorrowful for himself, nor prays for himself, but
for those who^ he warns to watch and pray. And for their sakes he ^aith, the
Angel was sent to comfort Christ, that he should take no longer grief and
fear for his Disciples. Ibidem.
The Angel being sent to protect the Apostles, and the Lord receiving comfort
thereby Ne pro his tristis esset; iam sine tristit^ae m^tu ait, dormite and
requiessite: That he should no longer grieve for them, begins now to be
without grief and fear, and says to them, sleep now, and take your rest.
Ibidem.
Nam quinobis tristis est, e^ est propter nos tristis est, necesse est vt
proptennos sit comfortatus, and nobis; for he that was sorrowful for our
sakes, and in our behalf, must of force be comforted for us* and to our use.

His sorrow for our sin.
The desire and care Christ had to see his kept safe from the rage of Satan,
leads me to the fourth cause of Christ's agony* For if Christ were so sad for
our infirmity, how sorrowful then was he for our iniquity, whereby we ^dde
not one lie (...) our selves open to danger, but even wound our selves to death
and deseruetion and Well says Ambrose of this matter. Ambrose de fide lib, ^.
cap. 3.
Mihicompatitur, mihi trist is est, nahi dole^. E^go pro mo, and in me doluit,
qui pro sen^d habuir quod doleret. D^les^ igitur domine Jesus; non tu^, sed mea
vulnera, non tuam mortem, sed nost^am infirmitaetem* Christ is affected for
me, sad for me, and greened for m^e. He sorroweth for me, and in me, who
had nothing in himself to be sorowed for. Thou grieuest Lord Jesus, not at
thine own wounds, but at mine; not for thy death but for my weakness: Inward
sorrow for sin is preciselie requisite in all remission of sins. To sin and
not to be sorry for if, is first to displease, and then to despise God.
Wherefore it is not possible to appease Gods wrath once provoked* but with
earnest and hearty sorrow that ever we offended, Then as corruption is the
mother, and pleasure is the life of sin: so the inward affliction and
contrition of the soul in all the godly, is the death of sin. And since we
are neither willing, nor able to sorrow sufficiently for our sins, why might
not the son of God, when her took upon him* the purgation of our (...) in his
own person, take likewise unto him that inward and earnest sorrow for our sins,
which never creature before him, or besides him did, or could express 2. Cor.
^.
Godly sorrow causes (u^ us) repentance unto salvation; and a Psalm. 5. 1.
troubled spirit is a sacrifice unto God. Of this kind of sorrow to supply the
weakness and want of true repentance in us all, and to teach us heartily to
lament our sins, the more we attribute unto the soul of our Savior, the more
sufficient every way we make his satisfaction for sin, that did not only
render recompen^e by his life, and suffer vengeance by his death for our sins,
but for deeply sorrowed for them that in his agony, above nature, he sweat
blood after a strange and marvelous manner.

The fifth cause of Christ's agony, The depre^ation of Gods wrath.
might be the cup of gods wrath, tempered and made ready for the sins of
men. Psalm. 75
In the hand of the Lord is a cup (says David) it is mixed full, the wine
thereof is read, all the wicked of the earth shall wring and drink the
dregs thereof. In this cup are all manner of plagues and punishments for
sin, as well spiritual, as corporal* eternal, as t^mporall. The mixture of
which ^^ppe. Christ perfectly knowing; and carefully shunning the dregs
thereof, earnestly prayed this cup might pass from him. I know diverse men
have diuer^^i^ expounded these words of Christ, some thereby collecting two
wills showed in Christ, a divine and humane, the one submitting it self to
the other: some noting a difference betwixt the unwillingness of our flesh,
and readiness of the spirit, even in the manhood of Christ: some also
thinking that Christ corrected and revoked his petition, suddenly ^lipt from
him, by the vehemency of grief, which took from him the present remembrance
of gods heavenly decree. In this variety of judgments, to refuse none that
agrees any way with the rules of truth, Christ might behold three things in
the cup of Gods wrath, and by his prayer accordingly decline them; to wit,
eternal malediction, corporal castigation above his strength, and the
separation of his body by death from the fruition of God.

Christ might pray against the eternal malediction of our sins.
What was due to our sins Christ could not be ignorant; and as he became man
to quicken our souls that were dead, not to kill his own; and to bring us to
God, not to sever himself from God: so knowing what our sins deserved, he
might intentiuelie pray to have That cup pass from him, which was prepared for
us; and was heard in that he declined or feared; Heb. 5.
Christ (says Paul) in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and
supplications to him, that was able to save him from death, and was heard
(...), for the reverence had of him; for so Chrysostom, Theodorete, Oecumenius
and others not unlearned (as I think) in the Greek tongue do interpret the
word; or as others delight rather to say: He was heard in that he feared;
(...) signifying fear and care, as well as reverence. Theodoret in c. 5. epist.
ad Heb.
Paul means that prayer (says Theodorete) which CHRIST made before his
passion, when he said, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me. And
indeed but in the garden, Christ never prayed with strong cries and tears to
be saved from death, that we read in the scriptures: and He was heard (says
the Apostle) in that he feared or shunned. From the death of the cross he was
not saved, that therefore was not the effect of his prayer; for he was heard in
that he asked. He desired therefore to be saved from ETERNAL death, and that
the cup of Gods everlasting malediction might pass from him, and in that he
was heard.

[At least then (will they say) Christ feared everlasting death, against which
he instantly prayed with strong cries and tears.] The number of our sins,
and power of Gods wrath he could not choose but see, being ordained the
savior of the world, to hear the one, and appease the other; and therefore if
we grant that the sight of both, did for the time somewhat astonish the humane
nature of Christ, advisedly considering she weight of both, I (...) no great
incon^enience therein, so long as they impressed n^thing in the soul of
Christ, but a religious fear to Sorrow for the one, and to pray against the
other. But distrust of his own salvation, or doubt of Gods displeasure against
himself, we cannot so much as imagine in Christ, without evident want of
grace, and loss of Faith; which we may not attribute to Christ's person, no not
for an instant. It is weakness of ^aith in us to fear or forget the promises
of God, when the conscience of sin accuses us. What then will it be for the
soul of Christ, after so many promises and oaths made by God, to anoint and
send the Savior of the world, after so many clear and full assurances of
Gods love and favor toward his person, to stagger at the certainty of Gods
counsel, at the light of his own knowledge, and at the truth of his fathers
voice so often denounced, and confirmed with thunder from heaven? I refrain to
speak what wrong it is, to put either doubtfulnes, or forgetfulness of these
things in any part of Christ's humane nature.

[Why then did he pray that the cup might pass from him?] he had no need to
pray for himself, Christ prayed as the head of his body, and so one person
with his members.
but only for us; who then suffered with him, and in him. On us it might have
stayed being severed from him, as the just wages of our sin: against him it
could not prenaile, because nothing could befall him either against his will,
or unfit for the son of God. Wherefore the force and effect of his prayer
chiefly concerned us, Galath. 2. Romans 6. Colos. 3.
Being then comprised in his body, in which we were crucified, buried, and
raised, together with him. And touching himself, albeit the innocence of his
cause, the holiness of his life, the merit of his obedience, the abundance of
his spirit, the love of his father, and vnit^e of his person, did most
sufficiently guard him from all danger, and doubt of eternal death; yet to show
the perfection of his humility, he would not suffer his humane nature to
require it of right, but pro^ra^^ on the earth be sought his Father, That cup
might pass from him, and was heard in that he ^^unned, or an^^ded. For though
God were long before resolved to accept the death and blood of his son for
the sins of the world; yet by this means Christ did see how dearly God
loved him* that for his sake, and at his request released the last bengean^^ of
man's sin, and took the (...) of eternal malediction not from him only, but
from us all at his mediation: howbeit to show the confidence he had in his
father, and to bring his obedience to the highest degree that might be, he did
after his religious dislike of that cup, which we had deserved, simply and
who^^e submit himself to his fathers pleasure, without any condition or
exception, in saying to his father; Matthew. 26
Not as I will, but as thou will. Not (...) by striking any terror of hell into
the sense of his flesh, as some would have it; but fully resting on his fathers
will and goodness toward him, as in the surest haven of his hope, and ou^
help, against all the power of death and hell.

Christ might desire the punishment of our sins to be proportioned to the
strength of his humane flesh.
A second thing which Christ might justly fear, and earnestly pray against,
(though his soul were never so safe*) was the power of Gods wrath to be
executed on his body, unless it pleased God to lighten the burden of man's
sin. For God was armed with infinite vengeance to afflict and punish the
body, above that the humane flesh of Christ was able to endure. Since
therefore Christ was not only with meekness to bear, but with all
willingness to offer to abide the hand of God laid upon him, by what means
soever; he might pray that the cup of his passion might be proportioned to the
strength of his flesh, which was but weak in respect of Gods power; and
therein also he was heard. For the cup which his father gave him to drink by
the hands of the wicked, did pass from him, without oppressing his patience,
or shaking his obedience. Christ might pray against death, not as weaker but as
perfecter then others.


Thirdly Christ might fear his very passion; not as weaker in courage then
martyrs or malefactors, but as perfecter in nature then either of them. The
more we enioie the presence of God in soul or in body; the greater grief it
will be, and must be to lack the sense hereof, even for a short time. The
flesh of Christ then, which had not only a personal conjunction, but also a
wonderful fruition of God above all men living, might well he loath to leave
the same, and yield to death, not as timorous through infirmity, but as
desirous in piety to keep that sense and feeling of Gods presence, which not
only the souls, but also the bodies of his Saints shall hereafter enioie;
and which Christ had here on earth in greater measure, then we can express, as
being personally united to the divine nature, though as yet not glorified with
immortality.

And where some avouch, it had been in Christ a shameful niceness to be so
afflicted with the fear of his passion; albeit S. Augustine say well: August,
tract. 60. in Iohanneth. Christ cured our infirmitie^ in his own person.
Non est vllo modo dubit andum, non eum animi infirmitate, sed potestate
turbatum; We may by no means doubt that Christ was troubled not for any
weakness of heart, but through (his own) power: yet Cyril grants that Christ
as a man abhorred and feared death, and adds that except he had voluntarily
showed our fear in himself, and quenched it, we had never been freed from
it. Cyril thesaur^. lib. 10. cap. 3.
Omnia Christus perpessus est, vt nos ab omnibus liberaret. Sicut igitur nisi
mortuus esset, mors non extingueretur, sic nisi timuisset, non essemus nos a
metu liberati: nisi doluisset non cessassent dolores nostri. Christ suffered
all, that he might free us from al. As therefore except he had died, death had
not been conquered; so unless he ^ad feared, we had not been delivered from
fear; and if he had not sorrowed, our sorrows could not have ceased. And in
like manner shall thou find all the passions of (our) flesh, to have been
stirred in Christ, but without sin, that being stirred they might be
repressed, by the power of the godheade dwelling in him, and our nature by that
means reduced to a better temper. Ambrose in other words says as much.
Ambrosius in Lucam lib. 10. de tristitia dol^re and t^edio Christi.
Sequestrata deloctatione diuinitatis aeternae, taedio meae infirmitatis
afficitur. Suscepit enim tristitiam meam, vt mihi suam laetitiam largiretur,
and vestigijs nostris descendit vsque admortis aerumnam, vt nos suis vestigijs
reuocaret advitam. Debuit ergo and dolorem suscipere, vt vinceret tristitiam,
non excluderet; and nos disceremus in Christo, quemadmodum futurae mortis
maestitiam vinceremus. And so he concludes. Hic alto operatur effectu, vt quia
in carne sua peccata nostra perimebat maerorem quoque animae nostrae, suae
animae maerore aboleret. Laying aside the delight of his aeternall deity,
(Christ) is affected with the tediousness of my infirmity; and dejected
himself to feel the grief of death as we do, that by following his steps he
might reduce us to life: he was therefore to admit sorrow that he might
conquer sorrow, and not keep it off; and we to learn in Christ how we
should overcome the fear of death approaching. (In his agony) he wrought with
a deep effect, that because in his flesh he killed our sins, he might also
with the sorrow of his soul extinguish the sorrow of our souls. So the
sorrow and fear of death* which it pleased our savior to feel in our nature
came not for want of strength: but of purpose to quench and abolish those
affections and passions in us, that the faithful for ever might be freed from
them, through his grace working in their hearts. And therefore we have no cause
to excuse, much less to reproach Christ's weakness, but rather to admire his
power, and praise his mercy, that would submit himself to these infirmities
of our nature, thereby to cure them in us, and to strengthen us against them;
and to make us partakers of his wonderful courage, and patience, the steps
whereof we may daily find, not in martyrs only, but in all his members, when
they are tried with any kind of outward or inward affliction.

Howbeit, I may not omit, how great an oversight it is to conclude, We must
prefer Christ's suffering before all martyrs, not for his pains, but for his
patience.
that Christ, if he feared death in his agony, was far f^ebler then martyrs
which ioifullie die; yea, then malefactors which oftentimes go to their death
very resolutely. The desratenesse of the wicked which have neither fear nor
care of God, till they feel the force of his wrath in hell fire, is no fit
comparison for the son of God, no more then the sink of sin is to sweeten
the fountain of grace; I will therefore skippe that over with silence. But if
death be not fearful to the servants of Christ, as indeed it is not, they
are the more bound to their Lord and master, who in his own person to make the
way easy for them, with the loss of his life disarmed death for ever, and
brake the chains in sunder wherewith death and hell were coupled together. For
Christ was the first that by seuering death from the terror and power of hell,
made the stroke of death contemptible to all the godly; which otherwise was
and would have been the harbinger of hell. So that when death presented it
self to the sight of our savior purposing to redeem the world, it came so
fast clasped with hell; that none but the son of God could dissolve the band,
wherewith they were linked. And therefore Christ had far greater cause then any
of his members, to fear; and with earnest prayer to decline the ^aile of
death, which did wound both body and soul with everlasting destruction, if he
did not take away the sting thereof; and by his sundring the one from the
other, (which was the hope of all his saints, before he died, and faith of all the godly since) death was and is to all believers no cause of fear, but rest
from their labors, and passage to a better life. The fear then which Christ
had and showed of death, was either the curing of our infirmities in his flesh;
or the breaking the knot betwixt death and hell, which none but he was able to
do; or the mitigating of Gods anger, which might be executed on his body, or
lastly the desire he had to continue the feeling and enjoying of Gods
presence, and coherence with body and soul in the unity of his person: and
if in any of these we charge Christ with niceness, we know not what we
say, except we will be guilty in a worse issue, which I persuade my self
was no part of their meaning, that first broched this matter.

The last cause of Christ's agony might be the sanctifying of himself to pray
for trangressors, Christ might by his agony voluntarily dedicate his blood to
man's redemption.
and the voluntary dedicating of his blood to be shed for the redemption of
mankind: for where some conjecture Christ did sweat blood for fear, Hilarie
plain^lie denies it, and says, Hilar, lib. 10 de trin^^ate.
Sudoremnemo audebit infirmitati deputare; quia and contra naturam est sudare
sanguinem, nec infirmitas est, quod pot estas, non secundum naturae
consuetudinem, gessit. No man should dare attribute (Christ's bloody) sweat to
infirmity, because it is against nature to sweat blood, and can be no
weakness, which power did above the course of nature. Austen makes it a
signification of the martyrs blood, that should willingly be shed
throughout the church for the testimony of the truth. August. in Psalm. 93.
Ideo toto corpore sanguine^ suda^it, quia in corpore suo, id est Ecclesia,
Martyrum sanguinem ostendit. Christ sweat blood along all his body, to this
end, that he might show the blood of martyrs in his body, which is the
church. Prosper agrees with S. Augustine in judgment and says. Prosper
sentent. ex August. sent. 68.
Oranscum sudore sanguineo dominus Jesus* significabat de toto corpore, quod
est Ecclesia, emanaturas martyrum passiones. The Lord Jesus praying with a
bloody sweat, signified the sufferings of the martyrs that should be in his
whole body which is the church. Bid thereby notes that Christ's prayer made
for his Apostles was heard; and that by his blood he should not only
redress the frailty of his disciples, but quicken the whole earth being dead
in their sins. Read in Luc. cap. ^2.
Nemo sudorem hunc infirmitati deputet, sed intelligat per irrigatam
sacratamque eius sanguine terram, non sibi, qui nouerat sed nobis aperte
declaratum, quod effectum suae precis iam obtineret, vt fidem discipulorum,
quam terrena adhuc fragilitas arguebat, suo sanguine purgaret, and quicquidilla
scandali de eius morte pertulisset, hoc toru^ ipse moriendo deleret, immo
vniuer sum late terrarum orbem p^ccatis mortuum sua innoxia morte caelestem
resuscitaret ad vitam. Let no man attribute Christ's bloody sweat to
infirmity, but rather learn that by sprinkling and hallowing the earth with
his blood it was declared, not to him who knew it* but unto us, that he had
obtained the effect of his prayer, with his blood to purge the faith of his
Disciples, which earth lie frailty did weaken, and whatsoever offense (the
earth) had taken at his death, all that he dying should abolish, yea with his
innocent death he should raise unto an heavenly life the whole world then dead
in their sins. Bernard takes hold on S. Paul's words, where he calls
Christ's sweat by the name of tears: Bernard in ra^^s palmar^^^ sermon. 3.
and ^aith, Ventum est adorationem, and vsque tertio factus in Ago^ia orabat;
vbi quidem non solis oculis, sed quasi omnibus membris sleuisse videtur, vt
totu^ corpus eius, quod est ecclesia, totius corporis lachrymis purgaretur.
Christ came to prayer, and being in an agony he prayed thrice: where he seemed
to weep, not only with his cies, but with all the parts of his body; that
the whole body of his Church might be purged with the tears of his whole body.

S. Paul alleges the cries and tears of Christ in the garden as a proof of
his priesthood, and says, that not only Hebe. 5.
He offered prayers and supplications, which was one part of ye priests office,
wherein he was heard for the reverence had of him: But also (...), being
sanctified, to offer sacrifice, Or sanctify his person to offer the true
sacrifice for sin,
(for so the word does often signify,) or else consummated by the offering of
himself on the cross, (which was the other part of his priestlie function)
was made author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, being thus called
and allowed of God to be an high priest after the order of Melchizedec. Christ
ready to enter the garden says, John. 17
Pro^eis sanctifico meipsum; for their sakes I sanctify my self: and
sanctification properly belonged to the priests: person, before he might
appear in Gods presence to offer for the sins of the people; and by the rite
of Moses law, the priests, when they were sanctified unto God, had their
bodies Exodus 29
sprinkled with the blood of their sacrifice from top to toe. Christ then being
the truth of all their figures as well in the sanctification, as oblation of
himself, might miraculouslie sprinkle his whole body with his own blood; (for
it was above nature as Hilarie notes) and so conscera^e his person, as
approved of God, to be the true priest after the order of Melchizedec, and
voluntarily dedicate his blood to be shed for the remission of our sins,
which he did of his own accord yield, to be disposed of at his fathers
pleasure, before the Jews or Gentiles wounded his body, that his whole
passion which followed, might be a willing sacrifice, and no forced violence
by the hands or weapons of the wicked. Christ's agony then being alleged by
the Apostle to demonstrate Christ's priesthood, must not rise from the terror of
his own death, but rather from the vehemency of his prayer for us, that it
might be as well an intercession for sinners, as a sanctification of himself,
to offer the sacrifice available for the sins of the world. To which if any
will add the signification of the martyrs blood, which Austen speaks of, as
if Christ in the garden did not only present his own blood to be the true
propitiation of our sins, but also the blood of his martyrs, to make their
death acceptable to God, that willingly laid down their lives for the witness
of his truth; I can be well content to admit that exposition, considering
Christ must offer both the lives and deaths of all his saints to God his
father, before they can be holy or precious in his sight.

The suffering of hell pains not ye cause of Christ's agony.
But since Christ's fear(as they expound the Apostles words Hebre. 5.) is made
the groundworke of this conceit, let us see whether their own foundation will
not overthrow their own building. The pains of hell, did Christ when he
prayed in the garden, fear them or no? if he did not fear them, he did not
feel them; for they are fearful: yea the very Hebre. 10
expectation of them is very dreadful, as the Apostle says Hebre. 10; and if
he feared them not, how could they be the cause of his agony, which these
men so stiflie maintain? If he feared them, he was freed from them, as they
themselves interpret the word (...), for he was heard in that he feared. His
prayer was to have that cup pass from him, and God never denied whatsoever he
asked. Ioh. 11.
I know (says Christ to his father) that thou hear me always. Whence they
conclude, he feared hell pains, thence I infer he suffered them not. for
being delivered from the fear of hell approaching, he could not be left under
the burden of hell abiding. Again, if the suffering of hell were the cause of
Christ's agony, the cause continuing, the effect could not cease. But his agony
ended in the garden; how then could the pains of hell endure on the cross,
and be lengthened almost to the end of his life? Jerome says upon these words
of Christ to his disciples, [Arise let us go:] Hieron. in Matthew. ca. ^^
least they find us, as though we were fearful, and drawing back, let us of
our own accord go toward them; vt considentiam, and gaudium passuri
videant; that they may see the confidence and gladness (of Christ) going to
his passion.

The continuance of Christ's agony they prove by his complaint on the cross,
where not long before he yielded up his spirit, he cried; Matthew. 2^.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and these words, they say, do
plainly convince, that Christ felt himself forsaken of God, What is mean by
Christ's complaint on the cross that he was forsaken.
and that this was the true cause of his agony, whatsoever pretenses are
invented by others to excuse, or color his fear. Indeed this place must
bear the burden of the whole frame; for the rest are only signs of sorrow
and zeal, the scriptures not expressing the cause; but here are manifest
words if we mistake not their reference. John. 14
My father is greater then I am, were words as clear as day light: but the
referring that to the divine which he spoke of his humane nature, bred the
Arrian heresy. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; are not so plain.
for the saints of God have often complained unto God that they were forsaken of
him, when he withdrew neither his favor, grace, nor spirit from them; but
only withhelde his help or comfort for the time, to make them more earnest
to seek and fly to him. But were they never so pregnant, if we apply them to
the wrong part, which God never forsook, we may incur as gross an error as
ever did Arrius. And yet if we strain them to the uttermost, they will never
prove that Christ on the cross suffered the pains of hell. For if we should
grant, which were devilish impiety to think, that God forsook Christ's soul
as verelie, as ever he did any of the wicked here on earth, Cain, Saul,
Judas not excepted; yet that does not conclude he suffered the true pains of
hell. For those in this life did not suffer as much, as their souls do now in
hell, make their case never so desperate. And therefore I marvel how wise
men were bewitched with the sound of these words, which hence resolved that
out of all question, Christ suffered the pains of the damned in hell, where as
the words infer no such thing* though we stretch them never so far. For in
spite of our hearts, before we can bring that conclusion to follow, this must
be the iointure of our reason. The wicked are here forsaken, and yet not in
hell.
All men any way forsaken of God in this life are in the true pains of hell:
Christ was forsaken of God, ergo he was in the true pains of hell. Now how
fond, false, and absurd the general assertion is, that all any way forsaken
of God, are in the true pains of hell, to men of learning and religion needs
no long discourse. Cain was a Genes. 4
runnagate and accursed by Gods mouth: Esau was a Hebre. 12
profane person, and Rom, 9.
hated of God; Saul was very desperate when he sought to the witch, for God
was 1 Samuel 28
departed from him, and become his enemy; Judas was the John. 17
son of perdition, and a John. 6
devil: yea many were stark mad, and possessed with devils; and yet none of
them in those very torments, which are reserved for the damned in hell. The
Ephesians. 4.18
Gentiles as Paul says, were strangers from the life of God, and had Ephesians. 2,
12.
no hope, and were without God in the world, yet were they not in the pains of
hell, here on earth. But I hope we be not so far drowned in the depth of hell,
that we will for our fancy range the son of God, and savior of the world,
in this rabble of wicked and desperate castawaies; and yet though men could be
so dangerously devoted to their dreams, this proves not their purpose.
Desperation they may stumble at, if they will press the words without any
difference between the dereliction of Gods saints and his enemies; but
toleration of hell pains these words will never conclude, unless we make hell
to be no judgment, nor punishment after this life, but only a terror and
horror of conscience, such as pursues the wicked here in revenge of their
sins.

When the godly complain, How the godly are forsaken.
as often they do in the scriptures, that they were forsaken of God, it is not
only a plain absurdity, but a gross impiety to conclude of their words,
that they then suffered the very pains of the damned in hell. For example,
Sion, which is the whole church of God, says in the prophet Esaias, Esaias 49.
the Lord has forsaken me: and God himself assures her words to be true,
Esaias. 54
For a while I forsook thee, for a moment in mine anger, I hid my face from
thee: Was the whole church for that time in the true pains of hell? David
says of himself, Psalm. 89
Thou have rejected and abhorred, thou have been angry with thine anointed.
Was David then in the very pains of the damned? of his whole realm he says;
Psalm. 60
O God thou have cast us off, and been angry with us. Did all the people then
suffer the torments of hell? rejecting and abhorring are words of greater
dislike, and more detestation, then forsaking; and yet they infer not the
pains of hell. Why then do we so fondly misconster the one, when we well
enough understand the other? why stumble we at a straw, when we can step
over a block? To be forsaken of God as the wicked are, is to be deprived of
his favor, grace, and spirit: and yet they are not forthwith in hell. To be
forsaken, as the godly complain they are, is to be void of comfort, or
destitute of help, when their enemies assault or afflict them, which is
nothing near the state of the damned. For as God is said to be present by his
gifts and graces: so he hides his face, or forsakes us, when he refraineth
his eye from watching, his ear from hearing, or his hand from helping us in
the miseries and adversities of this life.

If I be thought partial, let us hear what the ancient and learned fathers
purposelie write of our saviors complaint on the cross; in whom I find
sundry, and all godly expositions, according with the truth of the
scriptures, and no way bending or inclining to this late devise of hell pains.

Diverse expositions of the fathers, how Christ was forsaken on the cross.
that he suffers in us, and we in him; so were we not only crucified and
buried, but also raised, and glorified in him, and with him; and therefore he
showed and uttered many things in his passion, which ought to be referred
directly to us, and not to him* but as bearing our person, and speaking in our
names. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? August. epistola. ^20.
Hanc in se vocem transfigurauit Jesus, vocem corporis fui, hoc est ecclesiae.
This speech Christ transferred to himself, (says Austen) being the speech of
his body, which is the church. The church suffered then in him, when he
suffered for the church, even as he suffered in the church, when the church
suffered for him. And as we heard the voice of the church suffering in Christ,
when he said; my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: so have we heard the
voice of Christ suffering in his church, when he said; Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And again; Idem in Psal^^^ 21.
quid voluit dicere dominus? non enim dereliquerat illu^ deus, cum ipse esset
deus, atque filius dei. Quare dicitur, nisiquia nos ibi eramus, nisi quia
corpus Christi ecclesia? Why would the Lord say, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? God had not forsaken him, for so much as he was God, and the son
of God. Why then was it said, but because we were there in him, and the church
which was his body? Leo de passio. sermon. 16.
Sub redemptorum suorum voce clamabat, deus deus meus, quare me dereliquisti,
In the name of his redeemed Christ said, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me: Athanasius de incarna^. Christi.
Ex nostra persona verba illa proloquitur, non enim ipse a deo destitutus fuit
sednos. In our person Christ speaks these words, for he was not forsaken of
God, but we.

The second exposition of these words is, that Christ's humane nature was not
protected from the rage of the Jews, but left without help in the power of
his enemies, to be used at their pleasures, which he calls a kind of
forsaking. For God then seems to leave us, when he does not defend us from
the fury of our foes, which seek our overthrow. August epist. 120.
Erat aliqua causa, eaque non parua, quare Christum de manibus Iudaeorum non
liberaret deus, cumque in potestate saeuientium, vsque ad mortis exitum
derelinqueret. There was a cause, says Augustine, and that no small cause,
why God did not deliver Christ out of the hands of the Jews, but let him
alone in the power of his pursuers, until he died. Ambros. de fide lib. 2. cap
3.
Vt homo loquitur meos circumferens metus, quod in periculis positi a domino
deseri nos putamus. Christ speaks as a man (says Ambrose) bearing about him
my fears, for yt we, when we are in danger, think our selves forsaken of God.
Hieron in ca. 27 Matthae.
Ne mireris querimonias derelicti, cum scandalum crucis videas. Marvel not at
Christ's complaint that he was forsaken, when as thou see how he was used on
the cross. Ide^ in Psalm. 21
Derelictus est Christus pro part carnis. Christ was forsaken in his passion
as touching his flesh.

A third is, that Christ's godhead together with his humane Tertullian, (Deus)
Filium Tertul. aduersus Praxeam.
dereliquit, cum hominem eius tradidit in morte^. Ita relinqui a patre, fuit
mori filio. God forsook his son, in that he delivered his humanity unto
death. So for the son to die, was to be forsaken of his father. Hilarie,
Hilar. lib. x^ de Trinitate
Habes conquerentem se esse relictum ad mortem, quia homo est: vt intelligentia
nostra sit, and homo mortuus, and deus regnans. Thou heardest Christ complain
that he was left unto death, that we should conceive he died as a man, he
reigned as a God. And again; Idem in Matthew. Can. 33.
Clamor ad deum, corporis vox est, recedentis a se verbi dei contestata
dissidium: relinquitur, quia erat homo etiam morte peragendus. Christ's
complaint unto God, that he was forsaken, is the voice of his body, testifying
the separation of the divine nature from it for a time. He is forsaken, because
he was a man to be consummated by his death. Epiphanius says, he spoke these
words, Epiph. lib. ^. ^. 2. con^ra. Ariomanita^
When he saw his deity with his soul ready to depart from the person of his
humanity and to forsake his body.

A fourth is, that where God for sin had refused and forsaken Adam, Christ now
exalted on the tree, reconciled mankind unto God, and slew hatred, making peace
by his prayer betwixt God and man. Cyril: Cyril de recta ^ide ad^eginas.
when Adam transgressed the divine commandment, man's nature was after a sort
forsaken of God, and thereby subjected to a curse and death. These words of
Christ therefore, Erant soluentis manifest derelictionem quae nobis acciderat,
and quasi placantis in hoc patre^, etc. Were the manifest removing of that
derelictio^, which fell on us, and as it were an appeasing his father, and
procuring his favor toward us, as toward himself, Basil: Basil. in Psalm. 32.
Dicit haec dominus, primitiae humanae naturae pro vniuersa. The lord speaks
these words for all mankind, as being the first fruits of ma^s nature.
Otherwise of his own person it is true that Athanasius says. Athan. contra
Arrianos sermon. 4.
Neque enim a patre derelinqui potuit, quia semper est in patre and antequam
hanc vocem ederet and post quam edidisset. Ecce enim dicente, cur me
dereliquisti: ostendit pater sevt semper antea, ita tum quoque in filio fuisse.
He could not be forsaken of his father, who was always in his father, both
before and after he spoke these words. Behold as he uttered these words (why
have thou forsaken me) the father showed himself to be even then in his son,
as he was at all times before. For the earth feeling the weight of her Lord,
straight ways trembled, the veil rent, the Sun darkened, the stones claue,
the dead rose.

Leo de Pass. sermon. 16.
Vox ista, quare me dereliquisti, doctrina est, no^ querela. Nam cum in Christo
dei and hominis vna sit persona, nec ab eopotuerit relinqui, a quo non poterat
separari, pro nabis trepidis and infirmis interrogat, curcaro pati metuens
exaudita non fuerit. This speech (says Leo) My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, is an instruction, and no complaint: For where in Christ there is
but one person of God and man, and he could not be forsaken of God, from whom
he could not be separated, he asks the question for us that are fearful
and weak, why flesh fearing to suffer is not heard. Ibidem.
Vnde ipsa vox non exanditi, magni est expositio sacramenti: quod nihil humano
generi conferret redemptoris potostas, si quod petebat nostra obtineret
infirmitas. The very words of him, that was not heard, open to us a great
mystery, to wit, that the power of the redeemer could do mankind no good,
if our infirmity might obtain what it would ask. Origin says: Origin in
Mat. cap. ^^.
In respect of that, in which consisted the invisible form of God, Christ was
forsaken of his father, where he took the shape of a servant, and came to the
death of the Cross, which amongst men was most shameful. So that for Christ
to become man, and to suffer on the Cross, was to be forsaken of God, in
comparison of that glory, which he had with his Father before all worlds.

The last exposition is, that when the Jews reproched David foreshewed, that
the true Messiah and savior of the world should suffer all those wrongs, and
shames, which they had heaped on him: and thereby taught them, that they had
Act. 4.
gathered themselves together to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God
had determined before to be done. Hieron in Psa. 12.
The Lord (says Ierom) hanging on the Cross, uses this verse, My God my God,
why have thou forsaken me; by which we perceive, that in the Cross he sang
the whole Psalm, as directly pertaining to his passion. Chrysostom. hom^ in Mat.
^9.
Christ spoke these words (says Chrysostom) that the Jews might know he
honored his father to the last breath, and that God was not his enemy (as
they objected:) for which cause he used the Prophet David's words, to verify or
fulfill the scripture of the old testament.

All these interpretations are sound, and stand well with the rules of
christian piety, without dishonouring the person, or disturbing the faith of
Christ; and therefore I cannot but marvel what reason our late writers had to
refuse them all, and devise another exposition of their own which imploieth
not only desperation in Christ's soul, If Christ's soul were forsaken, he had
neither faith, hope, nor love.
if we press the words, and the dissolution of Christ's person, but an
evident contradiction to all that Christ did, or said on the cross, or in
judgment after the Jews had once laid hands on him. For if these words be
referred to the soul of Christ, and unport a general and true dereliction,
which must be supposed, before the pains of hell can thence be concluded;
Christ feeling and confessing himself to be forsaken of God, could have
neither faith, nor hope. For he that believes, and hops in God, cannot
truly say, that God has forsaken his soul; he may complain that God does
not deliver him from dangers and troubles assaulting him; which the weakness
of man thinks a kind of forsaking. Psalm. ^1.
Mine enemies (says David) take counsel, saying, God has forsaken him,
pursue him, there is none to deliver him. But this is no forsaking of the
soul, so long as that part of man trusts in God, which is created chiefelie
to enioie God. Now by faith, hope, and love, the soul of man enioieth God in
this life; and he that enioieth God is not forsaken of God. Yea whosoever
hops in him, neither is nor ever shall be forsaken. Romans 5.
For hope does not confound, Ecclesi^ ^
was there ever any confounded, that put his trust in the Lord? or who has
continued in his fear, and has been forsaken? or whom did he ever despise
that called upon him? Then if out of these words we will infer, that Christ's
soul was truly forsaken of God, it cannot be avoided, but this inward
persuasion in Christ (that his soul was forsaken) during from the time of his
agony in the garden, till his complaint on the cross (which was above 18.
hours) was manifest desperation: unless we say Christ was deceived in so
thinking, which is as great an error on the other side. For if his faith,
hope, and love were still fixed on God, and no way decayed, he could with no
truth say, that his soul was utterly forsaken.

Again, the soul that is forsaken of God must needs be separated from God.
1. Cor. 6. If Christ's soul were forsaken the union of his two natures was
dissolved.
For he that cleaves unto the Lord, is one spirit with him, and so not
forsaken of him. If then Christ's soul were severed from God, it could have no
mutual congruence, much less natural coherence with God. There must be a
spiritual communion in grace, or else there can be no personal union in
nature. As the soul does communicate her effects to the body, with which she
is coupled: so must the deity make the humane nature of Christ partaker of
those graces and gifts, which may come from the godhead, before we can truly
say, that the one is personally joined with the other. The participation and
fruition of God is not in words or thoughts, but in deeds and effects. In
whom then the spirit of God dwells not, with his force and fruits, let him
never deceive his heart, that he has any fellowship with God. Now in Christ
was the fullness of Gods spirit and grace. God John. ^^
measured not his spirit to him, but of his fullness we all have received. So
that if the fullness of grace failed in the soul of Christ, the unity of his
person was utterly dissolved. For without a communion, there can be no
coniunctio^ of two natures in Christ. If there were an effectual and full
communion, there could be no real nor general dereliction. Insomuch that the
very flesh of Christ, though it were left unto death; yet was it not utterly
forsaken of the deity, but preserved even in the grave from corruption, and
raised again with greater perfection then before; besides the wonderful
conquest it had over death. Which plainly prove the Godheade was never
separated from the body of Christ, though the soul for a time departed, that
death and hell might be destroyed. If the deity did never forsake the body,
no not in death* much less did it ever forsake the soul, which always had an
inseperable conjunction, and vnceaseable communion with the godhead of Christ.

Lastly, no sense could be devised, more repugnant and opposite to all that
Christ said or did after his agony, Christ's words and deeds prove his soul
was not forsaken of God.
then this last found exposition, or rather deprauation of his words. To the
high priest asking him whether he were Christ the son of ye blessed (God,) he
answered Mark. 14.
I am: and ye shall see the son of man sit at the right hand of the power of
God, and come in the clouds of heaven. Christ was and must be far from
distrusting or doubting that, which he resolutelie affirms shall come to pass
even in the eyes of his enemies. When they fastened him to the cross he said,
Luke. 25
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Could he entreat and
obtain pardon for others, that found himself to be forsaken of God? To the
thief that hung by him, and desired to be remembered when he came to his
kingdom, he answered, Luke. 23.
Verily, I say to thee, thou shall this day be with me in paradise. Could
he give paradise to others, with so great confidence, that could not then
assure himself of Gods favor, yea, as these men will have it, that was
abandoned and forsaken of God? The Centurion that had the charge to see him put
to death, and heard him speak these words, never conceived that he was
rejected or estranged from God, but contrariwise confessed; Matthew, 27.
Truly this man was the son of God. Christ himself John. 18
Knowing all things that should come unto him, said to his disciples; John. 16
Behold the hour is come, that ye shall be scattered, and leave me alone, but
I am not alone, for the father is with me. Now if God were with him, when his
disciples left him, as he himself witnesses, how could his soul be forsaken
of God? of Christ crucified David says (as Peter expounds his words) Acts.
2.
I always beheld the Lord before me, even at my right hand, that I should not
be shaken. If Christ had all the time of his passion the favor of God so
constant, and the power of God so present, that he could not be so much as
moved or swaied to and fro, for so the words (...) do signify, that I
should not wave up and down, but st^nd fired and assured; how could that part
of Christ, which enioied so manifestly the sight of Gods countenance, and
strength of Gods assistance, be forsaken or refused of God: And out of this
complaint, that he was forsaken, if we infer the pains of hell, we conclude
directly against Christ's words in the 16. psalm. Non derelinques animam
meam in inferno, Thou will not forsake my soul in hell. Christ's soul was not
forsaken in hell; if then it were forsaken on the cross, it is evident that
there it suffered not hell, for in hell it was never forsaken. And therefore
turn and wind the words of Christ which way they will or can, this
exposition^punc; which they fasten unto them, is a manifest contradiction to
all that Christ did or said on the cross, and namely to that assertion of
David, in the person of Christ, Thou will not forsake my soul in hell.

Then are there in the sacred scriptures neither any predictions that Christ
should suffer the pains of hell in his soul here on earth; nor causes why he
must suffer them; nor Signs that he did suffer them; and consequently,
whatsoever is pretended, no proof that these sufferings must be added to the
cross of Christ, before the work of our salvation can be perfect. And for my
part, which moderation I wish in you all, What I read in the word of God that
I believe, what I do not read that I do not believe. In Gods causes we may
not easily leave Gods words, and with a new kind of speech make way for a new
kind of faith. We must learn from God what to believe, and not by correcting
or inuerting his words teach him how to speak. Since therefore redemption and
remission of sins are every where in the scriptures referred to the death
and blood of Christ, I dare not so much as think the words of the holy ghost
in one of the greatest mysteries of our christian faith to be improper, or
imperfect. And that you may the better perceive how plainly and fully this
doctrine is delivered in the prophetical and apostolical scriptures, I think
it good to go forwards with the effects of Christ's cross, by which it shall
appear how sufficient the price of our redemption is, in the blood of Christ,
without any supply of hell pains to be suffered in ye soul of Christ.

The effects of Christ's cross though I might reckon many, yet to keep my
self within some compass, I restrain to five chief branches: The effects of
Christ's cross.
the MERIT of his suffering, which was INFINITE; the MANNER of his offering,
which was BLOODY; The POWER of his DEATH, which was mighty; the COMFORT of his
CROSS which was NECESSARY, and the GLORY of his RESVRRECTION which was
heavenly. These five will direct us not only what to believe, but what to
refuse in the person and passion of our Savior. I will therefore take them as
they lie in order.

The merit of Christ's passion must be infinite in two respects
The merit of Christ's suffering must be simply infinite, that it may work two
things for us; to wit, redeem us from Satan, and reconcile us unto God:
clear us from hell, and bring us to heaven; and in either respect it must be
infinite. The wages of sin is death, both of body and soul, here and for
ever. With the Judge of the world is no unrighteousness. He therefore
punishes no man, without cause, or above desert. Since the revenge of each
man's sin is eternal, yt is infinite in time; the weight of each man's sin
must needs be infinite, as being rewarded with everlasting death. It may seem
much to carnal men, that God should requite sin with ever during revenge; but
if we seriously bethink our selves what it is for earth and ashes to wax
proud against God, and after so manifold and abundant blessings to cast off his
yoke, and readily, yea greedily to prefer every vanity and fancy before his
heavenly truth, and glory; we shall presently perceive how just cause God has
infinitely to hate our uncleanness, and eternally to pursue the pride, contempt,
and rebellion of wicked and wilful men against his divine majesty; howsoever
we digest it, it is a thing determined with God, and no doubt bala^ced in his
upright and sincere judgment. E^ech. 18.
The soul that sins, that soul shall die. Death and life are both eternal,
yt is, infinite in length, though not in weight; in durance, though not in
degree and sense of joy, or pain. Then in either respect to counteruaile our
deliverance from hell, and our inheritance in heaven, she merit of Christ's
suffering must be infinite. An infinite purchase cannot be made, but with an
infinite price.

For this infinite price whither shall we seek? Hell is not infinite, but
only in time.
to the pains of hell, or to the powers of heauen^ ye pains of hell are
neither meritorious nor infinite. What thanks with God to be separated from
God? and the soul being alienated from God, what other part of man can merit
his favor? Hebre. 10.
If any man fall away, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Hell pains
therefore are accursed, not accepted of God; and he that suffers them is
hated, and no way beloved. Matthew ^^.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. As they are not meritorious,
no more are they infinite, I mean in weight; but they must everlastingly be
suffered, before they can be infinite. For not only devils, but men of all
sorts shall suffer them, who cannot endure any infinite sense of pain. All
creatures are finite both in force to do, Nothing infinite but only God.
and strength to suffer. Infinite is as much as God himself has, and therefore
God alone is infinite. So that neither hell fire is of infinite force to punish,
nor men nor angels of infinite strength to suffer, but the vengeance of sin
continues for ever, by reason no creature is able to bear an infinite weight
of punishment. Since then the pains of hell have neither worth nor weight
sufficient in themselves to satisfy the anger, and procure the favor of God,
we must seek to heaven, even to God himself, for the true ransom for our
sins, The merit of Christ is infinite in respect of his person.
and redemption of our souls, which we no where find, but in the person of
Christ Jesus, who being true God took our nature unto him, and by the infinite
price of his blood bought us from ye power of hell, and brought us unto God. For
neither ye virtues of Christ's humane soul, though they were many; nor the
sufferings of his flesh, though they were painful, are simply infinite, til we
look to his person, and then shall we find that Acts. 20
God vouchsafed with his own blood to purchase his Church, and that Roman. ^.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son when we were his enemies.
Bernarde expressing the infinite merit of Christ's death and passion says.
Bernard de passione cap. 17
Incomprehensibilis (deus voluit) comprehendi, summus humiliari, potentissimus
despici* pulcherrimus deformari* sapientissimus vt iumentu^ fieri, immortalis
mori, vt compendio absoluam, deus fieri (voluit) vermiculus* quid excelsius
deo? quid inferius vermiculo? The incomprehensible (God would) be
comprehended, the highest humbled, the most mighty despised, the most
beautiful deformed, the most wise be like a beast, the immortal (would)
suffer death; to speak all in few words, God would become a Worm: what is
higher then God? what is baser then a Worm? If between the Creator and the
best of his creatures there be an infinite distance; what think ye then was
there betwixt the throne of God in heaven, and the cross of Christ on earth?
not an infinite distance? and so infinite that neither men nor Angels can
comprehend it? The ground of our salvation then is the obedience, humility and
charity of the son of God, yielding himself not only to serve in our
steed, but to die for our sins. For when he was equal with God in nature,
power, and glory, he refused not to take the shape of a servant upon him, and
to humble himself to the death of the cross, not only obeying his fathers
will, which we had despised; but abiding his hand for the chastisement of our
peace. The Apostle notes these three virtues in the person of Christ; Philip. 2
Let the SAME AFFECTION (of love) be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, who
being in the form of God, emptied and humbled himself and became obedient to
the death, even to the death of the cross. By his humility, obedience, and
charity, he purged the pride, rebellion, and self-love, which our first
father showed when he fell, and we all express in our sins; and therefore as
we all died in Adams transgression, so we are all justified, that is absolved
from our sins, and received into favor, by the obedience of Christ.

Yea the obedience of Christ did in far higher degree please God the Father,
then the rebellion of Adam did displease him. Christ's obedience does more then
counteruaile Adams disobedience.
For there the vassal rebelled, here the equal obeyed: there earth presumed
to be like unto God, here God vouchsafed to be the lowest amongst men: there
the creature neglected his maker, here the creator so loved his enemies, even
his persecutors, that he took the burden from their shoulders, and laid it
on his own, contentedly giving his life for them, who cruelly took his life
from him: to conclude, those were the sins of men, these are the virtues of
God, which do infinitely counteruaile the other, and for that cause the
justice of God is far better satisfied with the obedience of Christ, then
with the vengeance it might justly have executed on the sins of men. For God
has no Ezech. ^^
pleasure in the death of the wicked, neither does he delight in man's
destruction; but with the obedience of his son he is well pleased, and
therein even his soul delights. Matt ^^
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. Esaias. 4^.
Lo my chosen, my soul takes pleasure in him. In which words God does not
only note the natural love betwixt his son and himself; but he gives full
approbation of his obedience, as being thereby thoroughly satisfied for the
sin of man. By Christ's obedience I do not mean the holiness of his life,
or performance of the law, but the obedience of the person unto death, even
the death of the Cross; which was voluntarily offered by him, not necessarily
imposed on him, above and besides the law, and no way required in the law.
For it could be no duty to God or man, but only mercy and pity toward
us, that caused the son of God to take our mortal and weak flesh unto him,
and therein, and thereby to pay the ransom of our sins, and to purchase
eternal life for us. He must be a Savior, no debtor; a redeemer, no prisoner;
Lord of all, even when he humbled himself to be the servant of all; his
divine glory, power and majesty make his sufferings to be of infinite force
and value. And from this dignity, and unity of his person, which is the maine
pillar of our redemption, if we cast our eyes on any other cause, or devise any
new help to strengthen the merits of Christ, we dishonor and disable his
divinity, as if the son of God were not a full and sufficient price, to
ransom the bodies and souls of all mankind.

On this foundation do the scriptures build the whole frame of man's
redemption. Acts. 20 The scriptures ground our salvation on the dignity of
Christ's person
GOD purchased his church (says Paul) WITH HIS OWN BLOOD; GOD, noting the
dignity; HIS OWN, the unity of his person, and both importing a price far
worthier then the thing purchased. Romans 8.
God spared not his own son, but gave him for us all. In that he was the
son of God, al nations are counted unto him (or in balance with him) Esaias.
40.
less the^ nothing, and vanity; in that he was given for us, the ransom
excels the prisoner, as much as God does man Romans 5.
. We are reconciled to God by the death of his son. Marvel we to see Christ's
death of that power and price with God, that it appeased his wrath, when he was
angry with us, as with his enemies; when as his own son being equal with him
in the form of God, humbled himself to the death of the cross for our sakes?
Fairer or fuller causes of our redemption we need not ask, the holy Ghost
does not express, God cannot have. If the son of God be not able with his
blood to redeem us, we must give over all hope; and despair. For heaven
cannot yield us a greater value, and the earth has none like. Wherefore if any
man be disposed to seal his own condemnation, with his own heart, let him
distrust the merits of Christ's death: but all that will be saved must
acknowledge the infinite price of his death, and blood above our worth, and we
must learn being sinful and wretched creatures, not to amend the words of
God, in the mystery of our redemption, but suffer him that is truth to be the
guider of our faith, and not by figures to frustrate all that is written in the
word of God touching our salvation, purchased by the death and blood of Christ
Jesus.

And so do the fathers.
I am not the first that observed or urged this doctrine, it is ancient and
Catholic. Athanasius de incarnatione citatura Theodoreto dialogo 3.
Cum super omnes esset Dei verbum, merito suum ipsius templum and corporale
instrumentum pro omniu^ ammis pretium offerens, id quod morti debebatur
persoluit. Where as the word (or son) of God, (says Athanasius) was above
al, worthily then by offering his own temple and bodily instrument, as a price
for the souls of all men, did he pay that was due unto death. Cyril. Cyril de
recta fide ad reginas in 1. Timothei. 2. dedit semetips^ pretium pro nobis.
Si non esset deus quomodo ipse and solus sufficeret ad hoc, vt sit pretiu^?
Sed sufficit solus pro omnibus mortuus, quia super omnes est; deus igitur est,
morte suae carnis a mundo morte^ depellens. If Christ were not God, how could
he alone suffice to be the ransom (for all?) but he alone dead suffices for
all, because he is above all; he is therefore God, by the death of his flesh,
driving away death from the world. And again; Cyril ibidem in 1. Petri. 1.
pretios^ sanguine Christi redempti estis.
Redempti sumus Christo proprium corpus dante pro nobis. Sed si vt communis
homo intelligeretur Christus, quomodo corpus eius ad rependendum omnium vitam
sufficeret? At si deus fuit in carne, qui dignissimus, sufficiens ad
redemptionem totius mundi per suum sanguine^ merito fuit. We are redeemed,
Christ giving his own body for us. But if Christ be taken to be no more then a
man, how should his body be sufficient to restore life to al men? but if he
were God in our flesh, worthily the^ did he suffice to redeem the whole world
with his blood. Austen. August in psa. 148.
Si propter homine^ mortuus est deus, no^ est victurus homo cum deo? quomodo
mortuus est deus? accepit ex te vnde moreretur pro te; no^posset mori nisi caro
no^posset mori nisi mortale corpus. If god died for man shall not man live with
god? but how died god? he took of thine wherein to die for thee. There could
nothing die but flesh, there could die nothing but a mortal body. And elsewhere
an ancient writer under his name, if not himself. Indubitanter credamus quod
totum mundum redemit, August. de tempore. 114.
qui plus dedit qua^ totus mundus valeret: inter redimente^ and redemptum
dispensatio, non compensatio fuit. Let us undoubtedly believe that he redeemed
the whole world, which gave more then the whole world was worth. Between the
redeemer and the redeemed there was a dispensation (of humility) no
compensation (of equality.) And to show the truth of his speech he adds;
Ibidem.
Innocence was arraigned for the guilty, mercy was buffeted for the cruel,
piety was whipped for the ungodly, wisdom was mocked for the foolish,
righteousness was condemned for the unrighteous, truth was slain for the liar,
life died for him that was dead. And do we yet, remembering who he was, and
what we were, stagger to confess with these Christian and Catholic Fathers,
that his blood was a most sufficient price for all the world? or wonder we to
see death overthrown by his death, who was the fountain of life, and could no
more be swallowed up of death, then God himself could be conquered by the
power of darkness.

[The mightier Christ's person, the more able he was (some will say) to suffer
death and hell. The mightier Christ's person the fitter to conquer, but not to
suffer hell.
] he would be partaker of our mortal infirmity, that by suffering death for
the time he might conquer the force thereof for ever; but the gates of hell
could not prevail against him, because the Prince of this world had nothing in
him. The inward man may be strongest when the outward man is weakest; and when
the flesh is nearest unto death, the spirit may clean fastest unto God. Christ
therefore in dying for our sakes showed a most evident, and eminent example of
his obedience, love, and patience; but in suffering hell there is no sign of
grace, nor show of virtue. Uoluntarilie to forsake God, or willingly to be
forsaken of God, is the greatest impiety that can be committed. And against
his will Christ never did, nor might suffer any thing: for that had been
violence, not obedience; vengeance, not patience; force, not love. But all
constraint was far from Christ, that his sufferings might be a voluntary
sacrifice to witness his love, and declare his merits, which in compulsion
could be none. Since then the son of God neither willingly would, nor
forciblie could be forsaken of his Father; it is a dangerous devise to subject
his soul to hell, which is the total and final separation of the wicked from
God, and his kingdom.

Eight things in hell pains, which by no means Christ's soul might suffer.
And that we may a little the better be think our selves, before we grow too
resolute in this assertion, that Christ's soul suffered the very pains of
hell; I will observe some things, which the scriptures affirm of hell; and may
not be applied to Christ without apparent injury. First hell is outward and
inward darkness; now Christ was light, and in him of the soul. John. 9.
As long as I am in the world I am (says he) the light of the world. Then
as the 2. Cor 6.
light has no fellowshippe with darkness, no more had Christ with hell,
which is the Colos. 1.
power of darkness, from whence he has delivered us. Secondly, hell is
destruction both Mat. 10.
Fear not them (says Christ) which kill the body, but cannot kill the soul;
fear him rather which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. In the
Savior of both, we may not admit the destruction of both: how shall he
save us, that could hardly, and as some write, MAXIMA CVM DIFFICVLTATE^punc;
with much a do save himself? But 1 John. ^^
God sent his son to be the Savior of the world. We must not therefore
wrappe him within the destruction of body and soul; no not for an hour, or
an instant. Thirdly, hell is the second death. The first is of the body for a
time, the second is of the soul for ever. Apoc. 20.
The lake (says Saint John.) Of this death Austen says, An (...) ciui^ de^.
lib 13 cap. ^
De prima corporis morte dicipotest quod bonis bona sit and malis mala; secunda
vero sine dubio sicut nullorum est bonorum, ita nulli bona. Ideo vero secunda,
quia post illam primamest. The first death of the body is good to the good,
and evil to the evil; but the second death without doubt, as no good man
suffers it, so is it good to none: and therefore it is called the second
death, because it follows after the first. Before the first death, no man
suffers hell, which is the second death, and before we may avouch it of
Christ, we must take all goodness from him; for doubtless (says Austen) no
good man does suffer it. And indeed how pernicious it is to make the soul
of Christ liable to the death of the soul, I shall afterward have occasion to
speak. In the mean time S. John affirms, that hell goes not before death,
but follows after death. Apoc. 6.
I looked (says he) and beheld a pale horse, and his name that sat on him,
was death, and HELL FOLLOVVED AFTER HIM: and therefore it cannot stand with
truth to subject the soul of Christ yet living on earth, to Ma^k 9.
WORM in hell never dies, for so much as the remembrance of their sins
committed against God everlasting lie biteth and afflicts the conscience. Now
in Christ as there was no taint of sin, so could there be no touch of
conscience accusing, nor remorse of any transgression against God. With
compassion of our sins he might be moved and troubled; but worm of
conscience he could have none, who was privy to his own heart, that he was,
Hebr. 7.
holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from sinners, and therefore needed
no sacrifice for his own sins, but as Hebr. 2.
a faithful and merciful high Priest by the offering of him self once, made
an atonement for the sins of the people.

But what the pains of the damned are, the sentence of the Judge will best
declare, Mat. 25.
Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternum, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. In which words there
are four things, which by no means can agree unto Christ; REIECTION,
MALEDICTION, VENGEANCE OF FIRE, and CONTINVANCE THEREIN FOR EVER. As sin is a
voluntary separation of man from god, so hell is a total and final exclusion*
of the sinful from enjoying the presence or patience of God any longer. The
time of this life is the respite of Gods patience toward all the wicked; with
the end thereof, begins his eternal vengeance, which wholly and for ever
debarreth the workers of wickedness from the kingdom of God. This reiection
the soul of Christ persuasion thereof in the soul of our Savior, which is
all one with Desperation, and shows the condition rather of the Reprobate,
then of the children of God, much less of him that was God and man. As the
Son of God could not be REJECTED; no more could he be ACCVRSED. He that
is joined with God, must needs Genesis 22.
al nations of the earth be blessed in him; if he himself were accursed? but
God Acts 3^
sent him to bless us: he must therefore be stored with fulness of blessing,
first for himself, then for us all.

And could we frame our tongues, which I hope all Christians with heart detest,
so much to dishonor the person of Christ as to avouch him to be truly
rejected and accursed of his Father, for the time be it never so short; yet we
must not show our selves so void of al sense, as to say that Christ's soul
suffered HELL FIRE; which is the perpetual and essential pretended? The fire
of hell, they will say is metaphorical; they that go thither shall find it no
metaphore. It is no good dallying with Gods eternal, and terrible judgments.
The Scriptures are so plain, and so full of the parts and effects of fire in
hell, that I dare not allegorize them. Christ makes the rich man's soul in
hell to say, Luke 16.
I am tormented in this flame. Saint John says it is a Revel. 21.
lake burning with fire and brimstone. Daniel says, Dan. 7.
a fiery stream issued from before Christ sitting in judgment. Paul says, it
is Heb. 10.
a violent fire which shall devour the adversaries. God himself says, a
Deuteronomy. 32.
fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn to the bottom of hell, and shall
inflame the foundations of the hills. If therefore the pains of the damned
come in question, it is not safe to measure them by our imaginations, but to
give ear to the holy ghost, who can best express them; and by him we
learn, that if any man worship the beast and his image, he shall Revel. 1^.
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and shall be tormented in fire and
Brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the lamb. And the smoke of their
torment shall ascend evermore; and they shall have no rest night nor day.
Into this fire if we cast Christ's soul, we must take heed our proofs be
sound and sure; least our presumption exclude us from the place where Christ
is; and leave us in the lake where he never was: there to learn what it is
rashly to conclude the things that are not confirmed by the word of God. But
I persuade my self, few men of learning or religion, will venture on this
desperate resolution, that Christ's soul here on earth suffered hell fire, and
therefore to propose it, is enough to confute it.

The last thing in hell fire, is that it is eternal. For as there is no
remission of pain, so thence is no redemption; but once adjudged thither is
everlastingly fastened to that place of torment. And this is cause enough to
stay all men, that be soberlie minded, from defending that Christ's soul
suffered the pains of hell, which the holy Ghost says are endless. 2. These. 1.
They which know not God, and obey not the gospel shall suffer pains, even
everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, says the Apostle to the
Thessalonians. And so Peter, 2. Peter. 2.
to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. And Jude, Iud. epist.
Sodom and Gomorrhe are set for an example, which suffer the punishment of
everlasting fire. Yea Christ himself pronounced that fire to be Mark. 9.
unquenchable. Wherefore unless we can show a later and better warrant then I
yet see, we shall do well not to enterprise to quench hell fire; but to let it
burn eternally, and to confess with Peter that God raised Christ breaking
the pains of death and hell, of which it was Acts. 2.
impossible he should be held. For since he was and is the Ephesians 5.
Savior of his body, the pains of hell, which are eternal, could not take
hold on him. He was mightier then hell, that saved us from hell; he could not
free us from the chains of darkness, but he must first break them in
sunder. His delivering us from the power of Satan, proves him to be stronger
then Satan; and the stronger could never be bound by the weaker; but
contrariwise he entered into Satan's Matthew 12.
house, where his chief strength was, and bound him and so spoiled him. This
comparison Christ makes betwixt Satan and himself; by which he concludes
that he was stronger then Satan; and consequently could not himself be bound
by death or hell, but Luke. 11
overcame satan, and took all his armor from him wherein he trusted, and
divided the spoils.

And where some men begin to doubt, The pains of hell are eternal
whether eternal continuance be of the nature and substance of hell or no, they
shall do well to leave these dangerous and fruitelesse speculations. For
whether they look to the persons for whom; or the crimes for which, or the
Judge, by whom it was prepared; they shall every way find it must be
eternal. It was Matthew. 25.
prepared for the devil and his Angels, and to them could no punishment be
allotted but everlasting, except we will give possibility of grace, and hope
of repentance unto devils. It is the wages of sin; which being an infinite
contempt of the divine majesty, must by the balance of justice have infinite
vengeance in weight, or in length. And since no creature is able to bear an
infinite burden and sense of pain, of force all sinful creatures must be
condemned to an infinite length of punishment; which is hell fire. Lastly, as
God is eternal and cannot change; no more can his justice, or judgment alter
with time; but as his truth abides for ever, so his judgment being just and
good is irreuocable; and consequently the vengeance of sin can never cease,
as proceeding from the righteous judge of the world, in whom is James. 1.
no shadowing, nor varying. And therefore Paul calls the judgment Heb. 6.
aeternal, whereby God shall reward every man according to his works; and our
savior for warns us not in vain, that hell f^er is Mark. 9.
VNQVENCHABLE, and EVERLASTING. Since then neither the remorse, reiection,
malediction, nor desperation of the damned; nor the darkness, destruction,
death, and fire of hell can without evident impiety be attributed to the soul
of Christ; I am far from admitting into any part of the Creed this
ambiguous, if not dangerous assertion, that Christ in his soul on the cross
felt the very pains, and torments of the damned: but I prefer the simple
and plain doctrine of the holy Ghost, which teaches us that Christ 1. Corinthians. 15
died for our sins according to the scriptures, and that he was buried, and
that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures, and by
Christ's so doing, death was Ibidem.
swallowed up into victory; and we may ioifully say, Ibidem.
O death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory? thanking God which
has given this victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, as it was forespoken
by the prophet Esaias. The Lord will Esaias. 25.
destroy death for ever; and by Osee, Ose. 13.
O death I will be thy death, O hell I will be thy destruction.

The sacrifice for sin must be bloody, before it could be propitiatory.
The manner of Christ's offering is the second effect of Christ's cross which
must be bloody, before it can be propitiatory. In this part I will deliver
you three things worthy to be observed; with what Sacrifice God was pleased
for our sins, with what price the Devil was concluded for our ransom, with
what Seal the new covenant of grace and mercy was confirmed unto us for our
safety. These three depend each on other. God, as the Judge offended, was to
have a sacrifice for our sin, that might content him; the Devil as the
Iailour, was to have a ransom for us, that were by Gods Justice delivered into
his hands; Our selves as prisoners were to be restored by GODS pardon, and to
be assured of his protection, that the like misery might not the second time
prevail against us; which is performed by the new Testament of mercy
forgiving, and grace repressing sin, that we relapse not into the pit of
perdition whence we were delivered.

What was the true propitiatory sacrifice which God accepted for the sins of
the world, The true sacrifice for sin was shadowed in the figures and
sacrifices of the former testament.
if the new testament did not plainly declare, the old testament would
sufficiently witness unto us. For as well Patriarks as Prophets, yea all the
godly from Abel to Christ did by their sacrifices and service of God profess
and confirm their faith to be this, that they looked for the Seed of the
woman, who by his death and blood should purge their sins, and make peace
between God and them. This was the promise of grace which God made in Paradise
to our first parents, threatening the serpent with the seed of the woman in
these words; Genes. 32
He shall crush thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. As the heel of
man is the basest part of his body, and nearest the earth; so the Serpent
should bruise the weakest and earthliest part of Christ; but even that bruized
heel should be of force enough to crush the Serpents head. For by the flesh
of Christ wounded, and blood shed, the power and pride of satan should be
conquered and confounded. This sense of Gods promise made to his parents, Abell
the first martyr by faith accepted, by sacrifice adored; and in that respect
his bodily and bloody offering was preferred before his brothers. This faith
did all the Patriarchs testify by their bloody sacrifices, that they expected
the body of the Messiah to be bruized, and his blood to be shed for the
remission of their sins. And as they received it from their fathers, so they
delivered it to their children for the shoot anchor of all their hope. This God
did ratify by his law written, suffering his people to have no sacrifices for
sin, but such as represented the bloody offering of Christ on the cross. So
that all the sacrifices and sacraments of Moses law were nothing else but
figures and Hebre 9
examples of better things, as the Apostle calls them, namely of Christ's
body once to be offered, and his blood once to be shed for the abolishing of
sin. The FIGVRES of Christ before and under the law, what else do they
point, but to the death, blood, and cross of Christ to be the redemption and
salvation of all mankind? Abraham's readiness to offer up Isaac, for which the
blessing was annexed to him with an oath, what does it import but the love of
God Romans 8
Not sparing his own son, but giving him for us all? The bl^^d of the
passover sprinkled on the posts of the Israelites f^^uert the destroier; does
it not represent the blood of that immaculate lamb, which saves us from the
fierceness of Gods wrath? The lifting up the brazen serpent to cure the people
that were stung with fiery Serpents, does it not foreshewe. Christ hanging on
the cross to cure our souls from the poison of sin, which is the sting of
that deadly serpent? The strength of Sampson pulling the house on his own and
his enemies heads, does it not declare the voluntary death of Christ, to be
the destruction of death and hell, which insulted at him on the cross?

When the truth came expressed by all these sacrifices, and resembled in all
these figures, The Patriarks and prophets did not mistake the true sacrifice
for sin.
what offering made he on the altar of the cross? Did he yield his soul to
the pains of hell, or his body to be crucified of the Jews? both they will
say; for so they must say, except they will have their supposall of hell
pains clean excluded from the sacrifice for sin. But which of these two was
believed of the Patriarks, witnessed by the sacrifices, shadowed in the figures
of the law, expected of the faithful from the foundation of the world? The
bloody sacrifice of Christ's body is so plainly proclaimed by them all,
that there can be no question of their faith and expectation. And were they
deceived in the object of their faith, and hope? Did they all mistake the true
sacrifice for their sins? and did God by his law confirm them in that
error? And does the Apostle falselie conclude from the sacrifices of the
law, that Christ's offering before it could take away sin, must of force
be bloody? These were very strange positions in Christian religion, and yet
I see not how we shall avoid them, if we strictly maintain the suffering
of hell pains to be the chiefer and principaller part of our redemption,
without which the rest is nothing. If their faith fastened on the death and
blood of Christ for the remission of their sins did save them, then was the
death of Christ of force enough, without the pains of Hell to release them
from their sins; and bring them unto God. And if it wrought that effect in
them, it is still of the same power and strength to work the like in us. If it
were insufficient to release them from the rigor of GODS wrath, then are the
Patriarchs perished in their sins, by mistaking the true price of their
redemption. For that they knew any thing of Christ's suffering Hell pains, I
think will hardly be proved. But out of question their faith was right
which was settled on the blood of Christ to be shed for the redeeming of
their sins; and themselves are Saints in Gods kingdom: We must therefore
take heed that we do not rashly vary from the foundation of their faith
and hope; which must likewise be ours, with this only difference, that they
believed in him, which should take away the sins of the world by his death and
cross, and we in him that has taken them away. The time does differ; but the
means are still the same. The Revel. 13
lamb was slain from the beginning of the world; not actually, but in the
counsel of God, which did purpose it; and in the truth of God, which did
promise it; as likewise in the faith of al his saints, which did rest and
rejoice in it; from whose steps if we swerve, we may not look to be Abraha^s
children, yt refuse Abraha^s faith as erroneous, and challenge our father for
misbeliefe

Three properties of the true sacrifice for sin, urged by the Apostle.
If the offerings and faith of the Patriarks were not pregnant enough to lead us
to the true sacrifice for sin; the Apostle to the Hebrews does so purposelie
and positiuely handle it, that I much muse how any man of judgment or learning
can mistake it. For if we mark but three conclusions, which the Apostle
makes; we cannot err from the truth in ONE, and ONCE OFFERED, not often, nor
iterated, by reason it is perfect and able to cleanse us from all sin. It must
be BLOODY, for so were all the offeringes of the law, and Hebre. 9
without shedding of blood is no remission. It must be CONFIRMED that
redemption purchased might never be revoked, nor altered. These three
positions are mainelie and mightily urged by the holy ghost, the 9. and 10.
to the Hebrews; and for this faith, are all the fathers of the old Testament
from Abel to Samuel praised in the 11. chapter of that Epistle. This Hebre. 10.
man (says Paul meaning Christ) after he had offered ONE SACRIFICE FOR SIN,
sits for ever at the right hand of God. For with ONE OFFERING had he made
perfect for ever those which are sanctified. Now where remission (of sin) is,
there is no more offering for sin. Christ then making but one offering for
sin, we must not make two; but rather learn what that one was, which we may
do without any difficulty, since the Apostle so plainly teaches us, that we
are sanctified by THE OFFERING OF THE BODY OF JESUS ONCE; that Hebre. 9
BY HIS OWN BLOOD CHRIST ENTERED in Once into the holy place, and FOUND
ETERNAL REDEMPTION. Almost all things are by the law purged with blood, and
without shedding of blood is no remission. It was then necessary that the
similitudes of heavenly things (in the law) should be purified with such
things (as the blood of bulls and goats) but heavenly things themselves with
better sacrifices then these; even with the blood of Christ. For Hebre. 9
if the blood of bulls and goats sanctifies as touching the purifying of the
flesh; how much more shall THE BLOOD OF CHRIST, who through the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God, PVRGE YOUR CONSCIENCES FROM DEAD
WORKS to serve the living God? And Ibidem.
for this cause is he the Mediator of the new Testament, that THROVGH DEATH
which was for THE REDEMPTION OF THE TRANSGRESSIONS IN THE FORMER TESTAMENT,
they which were called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For
where a testament is, there must be THE DEATH OF HIM THAT MADE THE TESTAMENT.
For it is of no force, so long as he that made it, is alive; wherefore neither
was the first testament ordained without blood. Hebre. 13
Jesus then suffered without the gate, that he might SANCTIFY the people WITH
HIS OWN BLOOD, and this is the blood of the everlasting Testament, through
which God brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus. Christ confirms the
same when he says. This is Matthew. 26,
MY BLOOD of the new testament WHICH IS SHED for many for THE REMISSION OF
SINS.

The words be plainer then that they need any commentary. There was but ONE
sacrifice that could abolish sin; The sacrifice for sin was bodily,
bloody, and deadly.
even THE OBLATION OF THE BODY OF JESUS ONCE, whose BLOOD purged our
consciences from dead works, and purchased eternal inheritance, by the
TESTATORS DEATH, FOR THE REDEMPTION of those sins, which we committed against
the former Testament. What shift have we to shun the force of these words, or
to bring in the pains of hell in Christ's soul, as a part of the propitiatory
sacrifice for sin? Christ made but one oblation of himself for sin, and
that was the suffering of death in his body for the redemption of our
transgressions, and shedding of his blood for the remission of our sins. More
then one, he needed not make; for that one obtained eternal redemption: and
other then this, he did not make, for his offering was both BODILY and BLOVDIE.
Luke. 22
This is my body, which is given, (and) 1. Corinthians. 11
broken for you; this is Mark. 14
my blood, which is shed for many. THE OBLATION OF THE BODY of Jesus once and
THE SHEDDING OF HIS BLOOD are of strength and force enough to cleanse us from
our sins, and to procure us the promise of everlasting inheritance, which
being confirmed by the death of the testator stands irreuocable. How can
we then bring in another sacrifice of Christ's soul suffering the pains of
hell, which could be neither bodily nor bloody, but we must increase the
number, and confound the differences of Christ's offerings; and weaken the
force of his external and corporal sacrifice, which was the truth that
answered and accomplished all the signs of the law? For the invisible pains of
hell are no where prefigured in the sacrifices of the law, that I find; nor so
much as once mentioned in the Apostles discourse, of Christ's sacrifice for
sin, that I read; and therefore if we add them as a necessary part of our
redemption, we derogate from the blood of Christ, as insufficient without those
torments to cleanse us from our sins, and pacify the wrath of God, that was
kindled against us.

What danger it is to depart from ye manifest words of the holy ghost in so
high a point of faith, The force of Christ's blood expressed in the scriptures.
and by things unwritten to discredit things written, I need not admonish such
as be learned, let the simple take heed, that they suffer not reason to
ouerrule religion, and obscure and doubtful places in the scriptures to wrest
from them the perspicuous and perpetual doctrine of the holy ghost. How full
and perfect the redemption is, which we have by the blood of Christ, if you
search the Scriptures you shall easily see; if you do but hearken you shall
presently learn. The blood of Christ does REDEEM, CLEANSE, VVASH, IVSTIFIE,
and SANCTIFY the elect; It does PACIFY and PROPITIATE the Judge; It does SEAL
THE COVENANT of mercy, grace and glory, betwixt God and man; It does CONCLVDE
and bind the devil; what more can be required I verily cannot conjecture. If
the blood of Christ perform al these things for us, and more we can not ask
or expect; why shrink we from it as unable to save us, except it be supplied
with the pains of hell? Whether I affirm any thing of mine own, or deliver
you that which is plainly taught in ye scriptures, judge you. 1 Pet. 1.
Ye were REDEEMED (says Peter by the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb
vnspotred, and undefiled. Hebr. 9.
Christ by his own blood (says Paul) entered once into the holy place
OBTAINING eternal REDEMPTION. 1 John 1.
The blood of Jesus Christ CLEANSES US from all our sins. Revel. x
He WASHED us from our sins in his blood. Romans 5.
Being now IVSTIFIED by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.
Heb. 13.
Jesus suffered that he might sanctify the people with his blood. By Christ
then Ephesians. 1.
we have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins* and
Ephesians. 2.
now in Christ Jesus ye which once were far off, are made near by the
blood of Christ. Colos. 1.
For it has pleased (the Father) by him to reconcile all things unto
himself. And to pacify through the blood of his Cross both things in earth,
and things in heaven: Romans 3.
Whom God has purposed to be a Reconciliation through faith in his blood.

And therefore the new testament is sealed with Christ's blood. This is (says
he) my blood of the Mat. 26.
new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Heb. 12.
Ye are come to Jesus the mediator of the new Testament (says Paul) and to
the blood of sprinkling which speaks better things then that of Abell. For
Abels blood cried for vengeance: but Christ's blood speaks for mercy and
grace. And for that cause Paul calls it, Heb. 13.
The blood of the everlasting Testament; For Heb. 8.
this is the Testament, that I will make with the house of Israel; after those
days says the Lord, I will put my laws in their mind, and in their heart
I will write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people; I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, Heb. 8.
and I will remember their sins and iniquities no more. This testament of
mercy, grace and glory is confirmed by the death of Christ, and sealed with
his blood, which if we weaken or frustrate with our inventions, or additions,
we must look for that fearful judgment which the Apostle threatens. Heb.
10.
He that despises Moses law dies without mercy under two or three
witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be worthy, which
treads under foot the son of God, and counts unholy the blood of the
Testament, wherewith he was sanctified, and reprocheth the spirit of grace?
The wrong that is offered to the blood of the new Testament, treads under
foot the son of God, and reprocheth the spirit of grace. Now how can we
more vnsanctifie the blood of the Testament, then to make it so vnprecious,
that it cannot redeem us without the pains of hell, or to set up another
price, for which we have no express record, against, or above the blood of
Christ, by which we are cleansed from our sins, and reconciled to God?

I know they will and must answer, the pains of hell are contained in the
blood of Christ; for so much as he suffered the one in their imagination,
Whether the pains of hell be comprised in the blood of Christ.
when he shed the other. Could they prove by express and infallible
testimonies (which they cannot do) that Christ suffered in soul the pains of
the damned, they had some reason to comprise the one within the other; but no
such thing being warranted, or witnessed in the scriptures, they must take
heed, that they do not elude, rather then expound the words of the holy ghost
with a perpetual Synecdoche, which shall frustrate the very force of all those
evident and vehement speeches. For it is strange to me, first, that without
just proof any such thing should be joined to the blood of Christ, to help
the price thereof. Next that the holy ghost should always urge the one, and
as if were continually forget the other. Thirdly, the things which are named
in the Scriptures, as they were the last, so are they the chiefest parts of
Christ's sufferings, the rest being understood as antecedent to them, and not
eminent above them. Now the CROSS, BLOOD, and DEATH o^ Christ are every
where mentioned in the scriptures, as the very ground work and pillars of our
redemption. Lastly the body of Christ wounded, and his blood shed for the
remission of sins, are the seals that confirm and ratify the new
testament; and therefore they give chiefest power and strength to the whole
covenant; as appears by the Sacraments: which import unto us not the pains
of hell, but the death and blood of Christ, as the right and true means of our
redemption. Romans ^
Know ye not (says Paul) that all we which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by
baptism into his death. And speaking of the Lords Supper he says: 1. Cor. 11.
As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death until he come. 1. Cor. 10.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of Christ's
blood? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of Christ's body? By
these we are grafted into Christ, by these we are quickened, and nourished into
life everlasting: And these propose unto us no invisible pains of hell, but
the body of Christ wounded, and his blood shed for the remitting of our
sins, ^ow uniting us unto Christ, that we may be Ephesians* 5.
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

Yea what an unthankful part were it for the captives that are enlarged,
Christ's blood the very price of our redemption.
to challenge the ransom, which was paid for their freedom, as defective;
when the adversary from whom we were bought, received it by the rule of Gods
justice, as a price most sufficient for us all that were delivered? F I will
redeem them from the power of hell, I will ransom them from death (says God
by his Prophet:)g you were bought with a PRICE (says Paul,) The price then
which Christ paid must be fully worth the thing redeemed. For since it pleased
God, not by force to take us from Satan, but with a price to buie us out of his
hands, it were dishonor to God, and a kind of reproach to give less for us,
then might counteruaile us. And therefore let us rest assured that the price
which Christ paid for us, was of far greater value then we were, not only
in the upright judgment of God, but even in the malicious and furious desire
of Satan, who thirsted after the blood of the son of God, with greedier
^awes, then after all the world besides, and tryumphed more in bringing him to
a shameful death, then in the destruction of all the faithful. Wherefore the
wisdom and justice of God, suffered him to show his rage on the flesh of
Christ, and as it were to trample in his blood, which he spilt like water on
the earth; and left him that, which he so eagerly pursued, and in his malice
against Gods glory preferred before all the world, as a full payment for all
those that should be delivered by the death of Christ. And for this cause the
blood of Christ is called by ye holy ghost the PRICE of our REDEMPTION. 1.
Pet. 1.
Ye were REDEEMED (says Peter) WITH THE PRECIOVS BLOOD of Christ as of a lamb
unspotted and undefiled. Yea the song which the Saints in heaven do sing unto
the lamb is this, Thou wast killed, and Revel. 5.
HAVE REDEEMED US TO GOD BY THY BLOOD.

How the price of our redemption was paid.
When I say the blood of Christ was ^he price, wherewith God redeemed us out of
Satan's power, I do not mean that God made any contract with Satan, or took
his consent to exchange; much less, that Christ did profer his blood to the
devil, to set us free: it were an injury to Christ for us to think his blood
was shed to Nezianzen. ^ras. 42. in Pas^ha^^. 2.
satisfy the devil as Gregory Nazianzene well observes in his oration de
Paschate; but Christ offered his blood as a sacrifice to god his father to
verify the judgment pronounced against us, Gene. 2.
Thou shall die the death, and to satisfy the justice of God provoked with our
sins; yet in coming to his death, since his life might not be ended, neither
with his own hand, nor by the hand of his Father, the wisdom of God Mark. 14.
delivered him into the hands of sinners, by whose blind zeal and bloody
rage the devil, that works in the children of disobedience, conspired and
compassed his death, and with all manner of contumely and cruelty abused his
body, and spilt his blood, insulting at him by the mouths of the wicked, and
rejoicing in the conquest he gate over Christ in bringing him to a reproachful
death. But this extreme rage of Satan against the person of Christ, turned to
the utter ruin of his own kingdom. For God did not only raise again the
Lord Jesus from death, as dying an innocent without all desert, but in
recompense of the wrong, which he received at Satan's hands, to the which he
willingly submitted himself, God gave him power to spoil the kingdom of the
devil; and to deliver all that ever did or should believe in his death and
passion. And in this sort Christ bought us with his precious blood from the
danger of sin and hell; not offering, but suffering Satan by the hands of
the Jews to take his life from him; neither compounding with his adversary,
but repressing him in the midst of his malice, who assaulting Christ Jesus
our head, as he had done all the members was overthrown by him, and vanquished
with an everlasting victory.

Basil^ oration, in sine epist^ larum.
Mortuus est volens, vt inuoluntarie mortuos exuscitaret. Deuorauit ipsum mors
ignorans, vbi deuorasset, cognouit quem non deuorauit. Deuorauit vnum cum
omnibus; perdidit omnes propter vnum. Rapuit vt leo; confracti sunt dentes
ipsius. Christ died willingly (says Basil) that he might raise those which
died against their wills. Death ignorantly devoured him, which when he had
done, he knew whom he had not devoured* He swallowed up one as he did all;
and for that one, he lost all. He seized on him as a Lion, but his teeth were
therewith broken. The creed extant under the name of Ruffinus; Symbolum Ruffini
tomo Hicronymi. 4.
Sacramentum carnis susceptae hanc habet causam, vt diuina filij dei virtus
velut hamus quidam, habitu humanae carnis obtectus principem mundi inuitare
posset ad Agonem, cui ipse carnem suam velut escam tradens, hamo eum
diuinitatis intrinsecus teneret insertus ex profusione immaculati sanguinis.
The mystery of Christ's taking flesh was to this end, that the divine power of
the Son of GOD covered as a hook under the show of man's flesh, might
provoke the Prince of this world to assault him; to WHOM (CHRIST) DELIVERING
HIS FLESH AS A BAIT held fast (the devil) with the hook of his divinity
sticking in him, through the shedding of his immaculate blood. Gregor.
Moralium. lib. 3. ca. 11
Conditorem omnium Satanae manui traditum, quis vel desipiens credat? sed tamen
edoctus veritate quis nesciat; -- cum se pro nostra redemptione Dominus
membrorum Satanae manibus tradidit, (quod) eiusdem Satanae manum in se saeuire
permittit, vt vnde ipse exterius occumberet, inde nos exterius interiusque
liberaret? That the maker of all was delivered into the hand of Satan, who is
so foolish as to believe? And yet who taught by the truth is ignorant, that
when the Lord for our redemption yielded himself into their hands that were
the members of Satan, he suffered the hand of Satan to rage against him, that
whence he outwardly dyed (in body) thence he might both outwardly and
inwardly deliver us? And therefore he concludes, Ibidem.
Cum corpus eius ad passionem accipit; electos eius a iure suae potestatis
amittit. When (Satan) received the body (of Christ) to crucify it; he lost
the elect of Christ from subjection to his power.

Saint Austen showing how Christ conquered the Devil first by justice, and
then by power, says; August. de trinitate li. 13 cap. 13.
Placuit Deo, vt propter eruendum hominem de Diabol^ potestate, non potentia
Diabolus sed iustitia vinceretur. It pleased God for the delivering of man out
of the Devils power, that the devil should be conquered by justice, and not by
might. Ibidem.
Qua est igitur iustitia, qua victus est Diabolus? Quae nisi iustitia Jesus
Christi? Et quomodo victus est? Quia cum in eo nihil morte dignum inuenit,
occidit eum tamen: and utique iustum est, vt debitores quos tenebat, liberi
dimittantur, in eum credentes, quem sine vllo debito occidit, Hoc est quod
iustificari dicimur in sanguine Christi. What then is the justice whereby the
Devil was conquered? What but the justice of Jesus Christ? And how? Because
that when the Devil found in Christ nothing worthy of death, he killed him
notwithstanding: and surely justice requires that the debtours, which Satan
held should be set free, believing in him whom Satan slew without any
debt. This is it that we are said to be justified in the blood of Christ.
Ibidem. cap. ^^
Sanguis enim ille quoniam eius erat qui nullum habuit omnino peccatum, ad
remissionem nostrorum fusus est peccatorum; vt quia eos Diabolus merito
tenebat, quos peccatireos condition mortis obstrinxit, hos per eum merito
dimitteret, quem nullius peccati reum immerito poena mortis affecit: hac
iustitia victus, and hoc vinculo vinctus est fortis, vt vasa eius eriperentur.
For that blood because it was his, who was utterly void of sin, was shed
for the remission of our sins; that whom the Devil justly held as guilty
of sin, and obnoxious to death, those he might woorthilie loose through him,
whom he wrongfullie slew being guilty of no sin: with this justice the
Devil was conquered, and with this band was he bound, that his goods might
be spoiled. And so Saint Austen concludes in express words, that THE BLOOD
OF CHRIST, which the Devil was permitted to shed by the hands of the
wicked, WAS GIVEN AS A PRICE IN OUR REDEMPTION, Which when the Devil had
spilt, it was reckoned to him as a ransom for us since Christ owed none for
himself; and so were we dismissed out of his power. Ibidem. cap. 15
In hac rede^ptione tanqua^ pretiu^ pro nobis datus est Christi sanguis, quo
accepto diabolus non ditatus, sed ligatus est, vt nos ab eius nexibus
solueremur. In this redemption the blood of Christ was given as a ransom for
us, which being received, the devil was not enriched, but concluded that we
might be loosed from his snares. Ambros lib. 9 Epist. 77.
S. Ambrose affirms as much. Si redempti sumus non corruptibilibus argento,
and auro, sed precioso sanguine domini nostri Jesus Christi (quo vtique vendente
NISI EO qui nostru^ iam peccatricis successionis are quaesitum seruitium
possidedat) Sine dubio IPSE flagitabat pretium vt seruitio exueret quos tenebat
obstrictos: Pretiu^ autem nostrae liberationis erat sanguis domini Jesus, quod
necessario soluendum erat EI, CVI peccatis nostris venditi eramus. If we be
redeemed not with corruptible things as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ (who selling us, BUT HE that possessed us as
his servants by reason of our sinful succession) doubtless even HE required a
ransom to dismiss us from the servitude which he had over us. Now the price
of our deliverance was the blood of the Lord Jesus, which (price) was
necessarily to be paid to HIM, TO WHOM we were sold through our sins. They
which traduce this doctrine, as inclining to Manicheisme, had more need of
Elleborus to furge their brains, then of authorities to persuade their hearts.
For since Christ paid no ransom for himsel^e, but for us, and his innocent
blood could not be shed but by the hands of the wicked, what touch of untruth
can it have, that God accounted the blood of Christ to be of more value then
all the sons of men; and consequently, that, which the devil eagerly
thirsted, and wrongfullie shed, to be reputed as man's ransom, and a price most
sufficient for all the world? Yea the scripture, which is the word of truth,
does not only teach us, who redeemed us, and with what price, as, Acts. 20.
God bought his Church with his own blood: but in manifest words from whom we
were redeemed, even from the power of Colos. 1.
DARKNESS, Osee. 13.
DEATH and HELL; that being Luke 1.
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we should serve God without fear
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

Whether therefore we resemble the body and blood of Christ to a PRAY that
brake the teeth of the deuourer; to a BAIT that held fast the swallower; to a
PRICE that concluded the challenger; to a RANSOM that freed the prisoner; or
to a CONQVEST that overthrew the infulter; in effect it is all one: Satan by
killing him, that was the author of life, lost both him and all his members;
the Lord rising again by his own power, and raising them all, that could not
be severed from him, by the might and merit of his death and suffering. And
so the godly, which now live on the earth, are not their 1. Corinthians. 6.
OWN, but his that bought them with a price; being before Rom 7.
sold under sin, whose Rom 6
servants they were till Christ with his blood Reuelat. 5.
redeemed them Reuelat. 5.
unto GOD, and made them kings and priests to God his father. August in Psalm.
95.
Venit redemptor and dedit pretium, fudit sanguinem suum, emit orbem terrarum.
Videte quid dederit, and inuenite quid emerit. Sanguis Christi pretium est,
tanti quid valet? quid nisi totus orbis? quid nisi omnes gentes? The redeemer
came (says Austen) and paid the price: he shed his blood, and purchased the
world. Consider what he gave, and mark what he bought. The blood of Christ
was ye price: what was valued at so great a price? What but the whole world?
what but all the nations of the earth? Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioch homil. 61.
Hic sanguis effusus omnem terrarum orben^ abluit, hic sanguis antea semper
praesignabatur in sacrificijs, in iustorum caedibus* Hic orbis terrarum est
pretiu^. Hoc Christus emit ecclesiam. Hoc eam om^em adornauit. This blood
(says Chrysostom) being shed washed the whole world. This blood was ever
before figured in the sacrifices, and martyrdomes of the righteous. This blood
is the price of the world; with this Christ bought his Church, with this he
wholly adorned it. Cyril dialog. de trinitat. lib. 4.
Christus non esset condignum pretiu^ totius creaturae redimendae, neque
sufficeret ad been redimendam mundi vitam, etiamsi suam deponeret animam vt
pretium pro nobis, ac etiam pretiosum sanguinem, nisi vere esset filius, and
tanquam ex deo deus. Christ had not been a just price (says Cyril) to redeem
all creatures, nor sufficient to purchase the life of the world, though he
would have laid down his life and his precious blood as a ransom for us, if he
had not been the true son of God, and as it were, God of God. Where as now
Cyril tom. 2 epistola. 1.
Vnus dignitate vniuersos superans, pro omnibus mortuus est, and quaecunque sub
co^lo sunt sanguine suo redemit, deoque and patrivniuersae terrae habitatores
acquisiuit. He alone exceeding al other in worth and value died for all, and by
his blood redeemed all things under heaven, and purchased to God his father the
inhabitants of the whole earth.

[But our savior says the son of man came Matthew. 20.
dare anima^ sua^ redemptionem pro multis, to give his soul a ransom for
many. And Esaias foretold as much, that he should Esaias. 53. How Christ gave his
soul a ransom for many.
make his soul an offering for sin] It is no great masterie to cite places of
scripture in show repugnant one to the other; howbeit in truth these are not
contrarieties, but co^sequents to the former authorities. For where the soul
of man is the life of his body; Christ could not die for our sins, but he
must lay down his soul to death, that it might be separated from his body
and so give HIS SOVLE, that is, his LIFE a ransom for many, and an offering
for sin. And so she very tra^slators, yt otherwise favor this opinion of hell
pains, do interpret those words: Matthew. 20.
The son of man came not to be served but to serve, and to give HIS LIFE a
ransom for many. And the like elsewhere: John. 10
Bonus pastor dat anima^ pro ouibus, The good shepherd gives HIS LIFE for his
sheep John. 10
Anima^ mea^ pono pro ouibus meis; I lay down my LIFE for my sheep. John. 10
Diligit me pater quia pono anima^ mea^, vt iteru^ suma^ eam. My father loves
me because I lay down my life to take it again. And indeed that phrase PONTRE
ANIMAM in the Scriptures does always note a voluntary yielding of the life,
which is A LAYING ASIDE OF THE SOVLE, for ye love of others; as where Peter
says, John. 13.
Ponam animam mea^ pro te; he did not mean he would go to hell for his master,
there was no cause nor need thereof; but I will lay down MY LIFE for thee. And
when S. John tells us, 1. John. 3.
Quoniam ille; anima^ sua^ posuit pro nobis, and nos debemus animas ponere pro
fratribus; he does not charge us to hazard our souls by sin or hell for
others; but insomuch as Christ gave HIS LIFE for us, we ought to GIVE OUR
LIVES for our brethren. So that for Christ to LAY ASIDE HIS SOVLE, or to POOR
IT OVT UNTO DEATH; was not to suffer hell pains for our sakes, but to die for
our sins; and al those places are rather coherent, the^ dissident to the rest
of ye scriptures, which I alleged.

And yet because the ancient fathers some times say that Christ gave his soul
for our souls, as he did his flesh for our flesh, and the scriptures often
affirm he gave himself; I will come to the third effect of Christ's cross,
which is the MIGHTY POWER OF HIS DEATH; The power of Christ's death.
and there examine what part of Christ died for our sins, and how by his
death the guilt of sin, the curse of the law, the sting of death, and the
strength of Satan are not only weakened, and wasted, but extinguished and
abolished, that they shall never prevail against him or his elect.

That the Son of God loved us and gave Galat. 2
himself for us making the purgatio^ of our sins in his Hebre. 1
own person, by the Hebre. 9 By Christ's death the scriptures mean the death
of his body.
sacrifice of himself to put away sin; is a case so clear, that it need not
to be proved, much less may be doubted without apparent subversion of the
christian faith: but whether Christ suffered the death of the whole man, his
soul tasting for the time an inward and spiritual death in satisfaction of
our sins; as his flesh did an external and corporal dissolution of nature,
this by some men is questioned in our days. That for our sakes he humbled
himself, and was obedient unto death even the death of ye cross, is out of al
doubt; the Evangelists describe the manner of his death, the apostles the cause;
to wit the REDEMPTION of our sins, the CONFIRMATION of the new testament, the
RECONCILIATION of man to God, the DESTRVCTION of him that was ruler of death,
and the IMITATION of his obedience, who suffered for us leaving an example 1.
Peter. 2.
yt we should follow his steps. All this he performed with ye death of his
flesh, the Scriptures no where mentioning any other kind of death, that I can
read. Where a testament is, there must be the death of him that made the
testament. r For the testament is confirmed when men are dead* Christ is the
mediator of the new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption
of the trespasses in the former Testament, they which are called might receive
the promise of eternal inheritance. This plainly expresses the death of the
body. For God forbid men's Testaments should be frustrate, till their souls
have tasted the second death: but from the death of the body all testaments
take their force. Wherefore the new testament is confirmed by the bodily death
of Christ, and there need no pains of hell before it can be good. Colos. 1
You y^ in times past were strangers and enemies in mind by evil works, has
he now reconciled in the body of his flesh through death to make you holy,
undefiled, and faultlesse before him. Paul thought it not enough to say, We
were reconciled unto God by the death of his son; but that death, he adds,
was IN THE BODY OF HIS FLESH, to exclude all supposals of the death of the
soul; since THE BLOOD OF CHRIST'S CROSS did PACIFY things in earth and in
heaven. Hebre. 2
For so much as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also did
therein partake with them, that through death he might destroy him that had
power of death even the devil. The death of the spirit may be without f^esh
and blood; as we see in the Devils who are dead in spirit. But Christ took
flesh and blood, that by the death of his flesh he might destroy the devil,
that insulted and reigned over the weakness of man's flesh. Romans 6
We are buried (with Christ) by baptism into his death, and if we be grafted
with him into the similitude of his death, we shall be likewise into his
resurrection: knowing this that our old man is crucified with him that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, for
he that is dead is freed from sin. So many words, so many reasons to
prove that Christ died not for us the death of the soul, but only of the
body. We are buried with him by Baptism; his body not his soul was buried.
We are grafted into the similitude of his death; not the soul but sin dies
in us, when we are grafted into Christ, for he quickens our spirits. Our
old man was crucified with him; his soul was not crucified but his flesh:
that the body of sin might be destroyed; by the death of the soul the body
of sin is strengthened and increased. That henceforth we should not serve
sin; they must needs serve sin, whose souls are dead with sin. He that
is dead is freed from sin; but he that is dead in spirit, is subjected to
the force and fury of sin. The death of Christ then is mentioned no where in
the Scriptures, but the very words or circumstances, do clearly confirm
that they speak of the death which he suffered for us on the cross, IN THE
BODY OF HIS FLESH.

That Christ did or could suffer the death of the soul, Christ could not die
the death of the soul.
is a position far from the words, but farther from the grounds of the sacred
scriptures. For in God there is no death, and without God there is no life of
the soul. So that it is neither possible for the soul joined with God to die,
nor for the soul separated from God to live. Then if Christ's soul were at
any time dead, it lost all conjunction and communion with God; and
consequently the personal union of God and man in Christ was for that time
dissolved, and the grace and presence of Gods spirit were utterly taken from
him; and so during that space, there could be in Christ neither obedience,
humility, patience, holiness nor love, which are the fruits of Gods spirit; yea
the soul of Christ, if it were but for an hour deprived of Gods grace and
spirit, must needs for that time be subjected to all sin and wickedness;
which the devil himself dare not avouch of the soul of Christ. Men may do
well therefore to beware how they venture unadvisedly to say, that Christ
suffered the death of the soul, for howsoever they may frame unto themselves a
new kind of death in the soul of Christ, as they think far from these
absurdities and blasphemies; yet both scriptures and fathers mightily
contradict that loose, if not lewd assertion. Psalm. 36.
With thee is the fountain of life, says David to God. Then if the soul of
Christ were always joined with God, or so much as in Gods favor, it must needs
have life; for Psalm 30. John. 6
in (Gods) favor there is life. Yea the presence of Gods spirit gives life.
^. Corinth. 3.
Spiritus est qui viui^icat; it is the spirit yt quickneth, says our Savior;
and Paul cites the same words. Where then THE SPIRIT OF GOD is, there is LIFE;
and consequently the soul yt is dead is deprived of Gods spirit. Now from whom
the spirit of God is departed; in him must needs want all the fruits of Gods
spirit; and so the soul, that is dead, is excluded from all godliness and
virtue. For these are not only signs, but effects of Gods spirit working in
the soul of man. And since between righteousness and unrighteousness there is no
middle, the soul of man wanting light, truth, and sanctity, of force must be
filled with darkness, error, and iniquity; which to surmise in the soul of
Christ, is the hight of all impiety. Romans ^
As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. If
Christ's soul wanted at any time the spirit of God he was not the son of
God. If he ever and always had the spirit of life dwelling in him, his soul
could at no time be dead. For the Romans 8.
spirit is life through righteousness. But why seek we proofs that
Christ's soul could not die, since he himself is the AVTHOR and GIVER OF
LIFE? John. 14
I am the way, the truth, and THE LIFE says our Savior. John. 6.
He that believes in me has everlasting life. John. 11
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, he shall live. And he that lives, and believes in me, shall never die.
If the soul of him that believes in Christ shall never die how could Christ
himself at any time die in soul? Colos. 3.
Christ is our life; how then shall we be sure never to die, if the fountain
of our life in Christ's person might for the time be dried up with death?
shall we have fuller or perfiter fruition of life then Christ Jesus our head,
who John. 1^
gives life to all his sheep? but he had so plentiful, perpetual, and
personal possession of life, not only for himself, but for us all, that the
Apostle says, the first Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a
1. Corinthians. 15
quickening spirit; that is not only to have life in himself, but to give life
to others. Could he then at any time be a dead soul, whom the holy ghost
affirms to be made a QVICKENING SPIRIT? could he give that to others, which
himself did lack? or loose that which he once had? I know to give life is
proper to God, and for that cause the soul of Christ could not have that power
by creation, but by conjunction with his godhead; and in that respect was the
receptacle whereby the life and grace of his divine nature was derived into his
humane, with such abundance, and assurance, that of his John. ^
fulness we al have received; insomuch that the John. 6
words which he spoke, were spirit and life; and the John. 6
flesh which he took, was the bread of life; yea the body of Christ dying did
not only resist and repress the force of death; but rising again destroyed
death, and restored life to the world. If the temple of his body were stronger
then death, what was the sanctuary of his soul?

I wish therefore all men, that profess themselves christians, to be soberlie
minded; The death of the soul is either sin, o^ damnation.
and with the learned and ancient, fathers to acknowledge, that there is not
mentioned in the scriptures any death of the soul, besides SIN, and
eternal DAMNATION; neither of the which with any moderation or mitigation can
be attributed to Christ without shameful blasphemy. Ezech. 1^^
Anima peccans ipsa morietur. The soul that sins, that soul shall die. In
these words are both deaths of the soul expressed; the first voluntary when
for the delights of sin we refuse the precepts of God: the other
necessary, when God by his justice withdraws his presence from us, and
executes his VENGEANCE on us, that never shall have end. That sin is a death
of the soul, cannot be denied. Let the Matthew. ^
dead bury their dead, says Christ to one of his disciples, follow thou me.
Which must needs be meant of such as are living in body, and dead in soul, as
Paul speaks of wanton widows, she which lives in pleasure, is 1. Timoth. ^.
dead whiles she lives. These the scripture calls DEAD IN SIN. When we
were Ephesians. 2
dead by sins, God quickened us together with Christ. And again, You, which
Coloss. 2
were dead in sins, has he quickened together with Christ, forgiving you all
your trespasses. From this death I make no doubt but all christian men with
heart and voice will cleerelie discharge the 1. Pet. 1.
UNSPOTTED and UNDEFILED Lamb of God, who did 1. Peter. 2.
no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth.

The other kind of the death of the soul, which is damnation, must be farther
from Christ then ever was sin. For not only Christ's innocence should be
unjustly condemned, which were altogether repugnant to Gods righteousness;
but the son of God wronged, and man's salvation wholly subverted. Nothing might
befall the humane nature of Christ, which was unfitting for his divine; both
being joined in one person. And if our Savior were condemned to hell; which
way shall we think to escape the just and fearful judgment of God for our
manifold and grievous sins? he was indeed condemned by man, that gave
wrongful sentence of death against him; but he was acquitted of God. And
because he humbled himself to the death of the cross, God highly Philip. ^
exalted him, and gave him a name above all names, as well in witness of his
innocence, as in reward of his humility. Yea the holy ghost, which evidently
Psalm. 1^.
records Christ's assurance, confidence, and reioicing in God, as he hung on
the cross, clean excludes all suspicion that he suffered the death of the
soul. For the soul in this life can have no fuller, nor faster coherence with
God, then Christ had. And since God is the true life of the soul; the
inseparable conjunction of Christ's soul with God proves a continual
persuasion, and fruition of eternal life; which by no means admits any
danger or doubt, much less any sense or sufferance of the second death being
the just wages of sin, whereby the wicked are everlastingly punished.
August. epi. 66.
Certe a^ima Christi non solum immortalis secundum caeteraru^ naturam, sed
etiam nullo mortificata peccato, vel damnatione punita est: quibus duabus
causis mors animae intelligi potest. Surely the soul of Christ (says Austen)
was not only immortal in nature as the rest; but was NEITHER DEAD WITH ANY
SIN, nor PVNISHED WITH DAMNATION: which two ways the death of the soul may be
understood. If then neither transgression, nor damnation may be ascribed to the
soul of Christ, it is evident he suffered not the death of the soul; yea to
subject the soul of Christ to either of these two deaths, which only are the
deaths of the soul, were more horrible blasphemy, then I hope any Christian
man means to incur.

[But I mistake the death of the soul. The death of the soul is a separation
from God.
] I must confess I therein follow the sacred Scriptures, and ancient fathers;
other kind of death of the soul I know none, because I read none justly
proved. These two are manifest in the scriptures. That sin kills the
soul, besides many other places before cited, Saint Paul shortly shows in
these words. Romans 7.
SIN REVIVED, BUT I DIED: for sin deceived me, and slew me. And likewise our
savior, except you believe, you shall John. 8.
die in your sins. That everlasting death is the wages of sin, I take it to
be as clear a case, as the former. These shall go into Mat. 25.
everlasting punishment, says Christ to the wicked. They shall be 2. These. 1.
punished with everlasting perdition, says Paul of the ignorant and
disobedient. The smoke of their torments shall ascend Revel. 14.
evermore, says John in his Revelation. The Revel. 20.
lake burning with fire and brimstone, this is the second death. How the
ancient fathers define the death of the soul, is soon seen by their
writings. Dicam audacter fratres sed tamem verum. Duae vitae sunt; vna
corporis, altera animae, sicut vita corporis anima, sic vita animae deus.
Quomodo si anima deserat, moritur corpus; sic moritur anima si deserat Deus.
August. in Psalm. 70.
I will speak boldly (says Austen) but truly. There are two sorts of life,
one of the body, another of the soul. As the soul is the life of the body,
so God is the life of the soul; and as if the soul depart the body dies; so
dies the soul, if God forsake it. C^^il. homil. (...).
Mors proprie non est ^a, quae animam a corpore, sed quae animam a Deo separat
^ Deus vita est, quia Deo separatur, mortuus est. That is not properly death
(says Cyrill) which seuereth the soul from the body, but that which
seuereth the soul from God. God is life; and therefore he that is separated
from God, is dead. Ambros. de ho^o mortis ca 9
Anima quae peccat moritur, non vtique aliqua sui dissolutione, sed merito
moritur Deo, quia viuit peccato. Ergo quae non peccat, non moritur. The soul
which sins dies, (says Ambrose) not by any dissolution of her
substance, but worthily dies she unto God, because she lives unto sin.
The soul then which sins not, dies not. Gregor. in Ezech. homil. 17.
Anima in corpore vita est carnis; Deus vero qui viuificat omnia, vita est
animarum. Idem mora^^ lib. 9. Cap. 38.
Sicut mors exterior ab anima diuidit carnem, ita mors interior a Deo separat
animam. The soul in the body (says Gregory) is the life of the flesh, but
God that quickens all things is the life of the soul; as the outward death
divides the body from the soul, so the inward death divides the soul from
God. Bernard sermon. paru. 3. and aliis ser. paru. number. 7
Sicut anima vita est corporis, ita Deus vita est animae. Luc. 18.
Mors animae separatio a Deo; mors corporis separatio animae a corpore. As the
soul is the life of the body, so God is the life of the soul, says Bernard.
The death of the soul is to be separated from God; the death of the body is
the departure of the soul from the body. Neither do I see how this
definition of the death of the soul can be avoided or amended. For can there
be life from any other, but only from God? If it be good, it must come from
the fountain of all goodness; and^ none is good but only God. Then the
soul which is partaker of God, is partaker of life; and to be severed from
God, is to be severed from life which is the true description of death.

The fathers mainely teach that christ died the death of ye flesh ONLY.
Rightly therefore do the ancient Fathers teach, that Christ dying for our
sins, suffered ONLY THE DEATH OF THE BODY, but not of the soul: and the
scriptures wheresoever they mention the death of Christ, must have the like
construction. For the soul of Christ could not die, so long as it had the
presence and assistance of Gods spirit; yea we leave him neither faith nor
hope, love nor joy, obedience nor patience, nor any other merits or virtues,
if we subject him to the death of the soul; for these are the buds and fruits
of life. From which if we cannot exclude the soul of Christ, no not for a
moment, without sacrilegious impiety, it remains that Christ neither
suffered nor tasted the death of the soul, but only the death of the body.
1 Pet. ^.
In his body he bare our sins on the tree; and Colos. 1.
reconciled us unto God, in the BODY OF HIS FLESH THROVGH DEATH, when we were
strangers and enemies in heart, by reason of our evil works. August. epist.
99.
Quid est enim quod vini^icatus est spiritu, nisi quod eudem caro QVA SOLA
FVERAT MORTIFICATVS viuificante spiritu resurrexit? Nam QVOD ANIMA FVERAT
MORTIFICATVS JESUS, hoc est eo spiritu qui hominis est, QVIS AVDEAT DICERE, cum
mors animae non sit nisi peccatum, a quo ille omnino immunis fuit? Mortificatus
ergo carne dictus est, quia secundum SOLAM CARNEM mortuus est. What is meant by
this, that Christ was quickened in spirit, but that the same flesh, IN WHICH
ONLY HE DIED, rose again quickened by the spirit? For that Jesus was DEAD
IN SPIRIT WHO DARE AVOVCH, I mean in his humane spirit, since as the death of
the soul is nothing but sin, from which he was altogether free? And least
we should think this slipte his pen, elsewhere he largely and learnedlie
handles the same matter. ( Diabolus) Idem de trinitate. lib. 4 ca. 1^.
per impietatem MORTVVS EST IN SPIRITV, carne vtique mortuus non est: nobis
autem and impietatem persuasit, and per hanc vt in mortem carnis venire
mereremur effecit. Quo ergo nos Mediator mortis transmisit, and ipse NON VENIT,
hoc est ad MORTEM CARNIS: ibi nobis Dominus Deus noster medicinam emendationis
inseruit quam ille non meruit. By sin the Devil DIED IN SPIRIT; in flesh he
died not: but to us he persuaded sin, and thereby brought us to deserve the
death of the flesh. Whither then the mediator of death cast us, and came not
himself, that is to the death of the body; even there the Lord our God
appointed a medicine to cure us which the Devil never obtained. And noting the
remedy provided for us in the bodily death of Christ, he says, Ibidem.
Vitae mediator ostendens, quam non sit mors timenda, quae per humanam
conditionem iam euadi non potest, sed potius impietas quae per fidem cauer^
potest occurrit nobis AD FINEM QVO venimus, sed NON QVA VENIMVS. Nos enim ad
mortem per peccatum venimus, ille per iustitiam; and ideo cum sit mors nostra
poena peccati, mors illius facta est hostia pro peccato. The Mediator of life
(Christ Jesus) to show us that death is not to be feared, which by humane
condition can now not be escaped, but rather impiety, which by faith may be
avoided; met us in the end whither we were come, but not in the way by
which we came. For we came by sin to death; but he by righteousness: and so
where our death is the punishment of sin; his death is the sacrifice for
sin. And therefore the death which Christ suffered in his body on the
Cross, did purge, abolish, and extinguish all our sins, whereby the power of
satan justly detained us to abide the punishment of our transgressions. Ibidem.
cap. 13
Quia viuum spiritu mortuus spiritu non inuasit, quoquo modo auidus mortis
humanae conuertit se ad faciendam mortem qua^ potuit; and PERMISSVS EST IN
ILLVD, QVOD EX NOBIS MORTALE vinus mediator acceperat: Et vbi potuit aliquid
facere, ibi omni ex part deuictus est, and vnde accepit exterius potestatem
dominicae carnis occidend^e, inde interior eius potestas, qua nos tenebat,
occisa est. Factum est enim, vt vincula peccatorum multorum IN MVLTIS MORTIBVS
PER VNIVS VNAM MORTEM, quam peccatum nullum praecesserat, soluerentur. Ita
Diabolus hominem in ipsa morte CARNIS amisit. Because (the Devil) dead in
spirit could not invade (Christ) living in spirit; as most desirous to kill
man, he fastened on that death which he could compass and was suffered to
kill that mortal (body) which the living Mediator took from mankind; and
where he could do any thing, even there was he every way conquered; and
whence he received outwardly power to kill the Lords body, thence was his
inward power, whereby he held us, overthrown. By which it came to pass,
that the chains of many sins deserving many deaths were loosed by the one
death of one, in whom was no sin. So the Devil lost man BY THE VERY DEATH
OF (Christ's) FLESH. Yea the death of Christ should lead us patiently to
suffer the same death for him which he suffered for us. August^ de Trinitate
lib. 1^ cap. 15.
Hactenus morerentur ad Christi gratiam pertinentes, quatenus pro illis ipse
mortuus est Christus, CARNIS TANTVM MORTE NON SPIRITVS. So far should they,
which belong to the grace of Christ, die as Christ died for them; that is, the
DEATH OF THE BODY ONLY, AND NOT OF THE SPIRIT. And by that death of his
body he freed us from both. Idem de tempore. Sermon. 16.
SOLIVS CORPORIS MORTEM Dei silius pro nobis accepit, per quam a nobis and
dominationem peccati, and poenam aeternae punitionis exclusit. The death OF THE
BODY ONLY THE SON OF GOD SVFFERED FOR US, by which he delivered us both
from the dominion of sin, and from eternal damnation.

Cyrillus teaches the same doctrine. Cyril^ de rect^ fide ad regina^ lib. 2.
Si intelligatur Deus incarnatus, and propria carne passus, parua est erga
ipsum omnis creatura, and sufficit ad redemptionem mund^ VNIVS CARNIS MORS. If
we understand (Christ) to be God incarnate, and to have suffered in his own
flesh; of small value in respect of him are all creatures, and sufficient to
redeem the world is the DEATH OF HIS ONLY FLESH. And likewise Gregory,
Greg. mora^ lib. 9. cap. 15.
Nos quia mente a Deo recessimus, and carne ad puluerem redimus, poena duplae
mortis astringimur. Sed venit ad nos qui SOLA CARNE PRO NOBIS MORERETVR, ET
SIMPLAM SVAM DVPLAE NOSTRAE iungeret and nos AB VTRAQVE MORTE liberaret.
Because in heart we were departed from God, and in flesh returning to dust,
we are tied to the punishment OF A DOUBLE DEATH. But (Christ) came unto us,
which DIED IN THE FLESH ONLY FOR US. and joining HIS ONE KIND OF DEATH TO BOTH
OURS, DELIVERED US FROM BOTH. And more at large, the same father debating the
same matter; Idem moralium lib. 4. cap. 17.
Vmbra mortis mors carnis accipitur quia sicut vera mors est, qua anima
separatur a Deo, ita vmbra mortis est, qua caro separatur ab anima. Quos enim
constat NON SPIRITV SED SOLA CARNE MORI, nequaquam se vera morte, sed vmbra
mortis dicunt operiri. Quid est ergo quod beatus Job postulat vmbram mortis
nisi quod ad delenda peccata ante Dei oculos, Dei and hominum Mediatorem
requirit, qui SOLAM PRO NOBIS MORTEM CARNIS susciperet, and veram mortem
delinquentium, per vmbram suae mortis deleret? Ad nos quippe venit qui IN MORTE
SPIRITVS CARNISQVE TENEBAMVR VNAM ad nos sua^ morte^ detulit, and DVAS NOSTRAS,
quas reperit sol^it. SI ENIM IPSE VTRAMQVE SVSCIPERET NOS A NVLLA LIBERARET:
sed VNAM misericorditer accepit, and IVSTE VTRAM QVE damnauit SIMPLAM SVAM
DVPLAE NOSTRAE co^tulit and DVPLAM NOSTRAM MORIENS SVBEGIT. Qui ergo SOLAM PRO
NOBIS MORTEM CARNIS SVSCEPIT vmbra^ mortis pertulit, and a dei oculis culpam
quam fecimus, abscondit. The shadow of death is taken for the death of the
body, for that as it is the true death, whereby the soul is separated from
God; so it is but the shadow of death, whereby the body is separated from the
soul. For they which assuredly die NOT THE DEATH OF THE SPIRIT, BUT ONLY OF
THE FLESH, they do not say they are covered with the true death, but with the
shadow of death. To what end then does blessed Job ask for the shadow of
death, but that to wipe away sin out of Gods sight, he seeks for the
Mediator of God and man, who should undertake FOR US THE DEATH OF THE BODY
ONLY, and by the shadow of his death might extinguish the true death of
sinners? He came to v that WERE SVBIECT BOTH TO THE DEATH OF THE SPIRIT AND OF
THE FLESH, and by HIS SINGLE DEATH HE LOOSED BOTH OUR DEATHS. If he should have
SVFFERED BOTH, HE COVLD HAVE DELIVERED US FROM NEITHER. But he mercifully
UNDERTOOK ONE OF THEM and justly CONDEMNED BOTH. He joined HIS SINGLE DEATH
TO OUR DOUBLE DEATH, and dying CONQVERED BOTH OUR DEATHS. He then which for us
TOOK UPON HIM ONLY THE DEATH OF THE BODY suffered the shadow of death, and hid
from Gods eyes, the sin which we had committed. Bernard likewise. Bernard. ad
mili^. (...) cap. 1^.
Cum gemina morte secundum vtramque naturam homo damnatus fuisset, altera
quidem spiritali and voluntaria, altera corporali and necessaria; vtrique deus
homo, VNA SVA CORPORALI ac voluntaria benign and potenter occurrit, ILLAQVE
SVA VNA NOSTRAM VTRAMQVE DAMNAVIT. Where man was condemned unto a double death,
to wit, in either part of his nature; the one death spiritual and
voluntary, the other corporal and necessary; God being made man did
mightily and mercifully release both our Deaths, with his ONE CORPORAL and
voluntary Death, and with THAT ONE DEATH OF HIS DESTROYED BOTH OURS. And so
concludes; Dum sponte, and tantum in corpore moritur, and vitam nobis and
iustitiam promeretur. VVhiles Christ dyed willingly and ONLY in his BODY he
merited for us both righteousness and life.

I hope to all men learned, How Christ gave himself wholly for us.
or well advised it will seem no Jesuitical frenzy, but rather christian
and catholic doctrine, that the son of God dying for our sins, suffered NOT
THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE, but ONLY OF THE BODY by the hands of the Jews: and
by the bodily and bloody sacrifice of himself, did not only redeem and cleanse
both our souls and bodies, but destroyed sin and death, purging our
transgressions by the merit of his obedience, and swalowing up death by power
yt of his life And howsoever the scriptures sometimes affirm that he gave 1.
Tim 2
himself a ransom for all men, and the Fathers likewise teach, that he gave
his flesh for our flesh, and his soul for our souls: yet neither Scriptures
nor Fathers have any meaning either to subject Christ to the death of the
soul, which assertion they abhor as wicked; or to diminish the force or
fruit of his bodily death, which they extol as most sufficient; but to
express that in the death of his flesh on the cross his soul did suffer the
sense of pain, and smart of death which parted the body and soul in sunder;
and so jointly with the body, and severally by it self, the soul of Christ
had not only temptations, afflictions and passions, but even endured the
natural sting and sharpness of death, to which he submitted his soul, that
he might have the Heb. 4.
feeling of our infirmities, and in all things be tempted as we are: but
still without sin. How Christ gave himself wholly for us, we may learn out
of Bernard. Bernard in ramis palmarum Sermon. 3.
Sicut TOTVM HOMINEM salu^m fecit, sic DE TOTO SE HOSTIAM fecit salutarem;
corpus exponens tantis supplicijs and iniurijs, animam vero geminae cuiusdam
humanissimae compassionis affectui, inde super moerore inconsolabili sanctarum
foeminarum, inde super desperatione and dispersione discipulorum. In his
quatuor crux domi^ mea fuit. As Christ saved the WHOLE MAN, so of HIMSELF
WHOLLY he made a wholesome sacrifice: yielding his body to so great torments
and wrongs, and his soul to the feeling of a double most tender compassion, on
the one side for the uncomfortable grief of the holy women; on the other side
for the desperation and dispersion of his disciples. In these four consisted
the cross of Christ. Since then the death of Christ did both affect and
afflict his soul and his body; justly might Irenaeus say, Irenaeus. lib. 5.
^ap. ^.
The Lord bought us with his own blood, and gave his soul for our souls, and
his flesh for our flesh. For in dying he laid down his soul not only to
sorrow, grief and pain, but even to the bitter divorce of death, that brake
the communion of body and soul. Fulgentius ad Trasimundum lib. 3.
Sicut TOTVS SEMETIPSVM tradidit, and TOTVS HOMO SEMETIPSVM OBTVLIT, ita totus
homo ANIMAM SVAM POSVIT, cu^ anima, in cruce moriente carne, discessit. As
WHOLE Christ gave HIM SELF (says Fulgentius) and the WHOLE MAN OFFERED
HIMSELF, so the whole man LAID DOWN HIS SOVLE, when, the flesh dying on the
cross, the soul departed. So that Christ yielded his soul for our souls to
the susception of sorrow, prepossion of pain, and dissolution of nature; but
unto the death of the soul he did neither offer, nor yield himself: since
that is a separation from God, and exclusion from grace, from which it was
utterly impossible the soul of Christ could either willingly, or forcibly
for an hour be removed: yea where you find the suffering of his soul
witnessed, there shall you see the DEATH OF HIS FLESH ONLY to be avouched.
Fulgentius ad Trasimundum lib. 3.
Quia TOTVM HOMINEM deus ille suscepit, ideo TOTIVS HOMINIS in se passiones in
veritate monstrauit, and ammam quidem rationalem habens, quicquid fuit
infirmitatis animae sine peccato suscepit and pertulit, vt dum humanae animae
passiones, in anima quam accepit vinceret, nostras quoque animas ab
infirmitatibus liberaret. Carnem quoque humanam accipiens, in eiusdem veritate
carnis, veritatem voluntariae habuit passionis, vt IN CARNE MORTVVS TOTAM in se
HOMINIS OCCIDERET MORTEM. Because (the son of God) took unto him the WHOLE
NATVRE of man, therefore he showed in himself the sufferings OF THE WHOLE
MAN; and having a reasonable soul, he took upon him and endured all the
infirmities of the soul, but without sin; that whiles in the soul, which he
took, he conquered the passions of man's soul, he might free our souls also
from infirmities. Taking likewise man's flesh, in the truth of the same flesh he
suffered a true and voluntary passion, that DYING IN THE FLESH, he might kill
in his person the WHOLE DEATH dew to man. Christ endured the passions of the
whole man; having neither body nor soul free from suffering; but yet he died
ONLY in the FLESH, and thereby he killed the WHOLE DEATH inflicted on the body
and soul of man. Ibidem.
Quis ignorant Christum IN SOLO CORPORE MORTVVM and sepultu^? Who is ignorant
that Christ in BODY ONLY DIED, and was buried? And again, Ibidem.
Sicut in MORTE SOLIVS CARNIS immortalis fuit, sic in passionibus totius
hominis impassibilis omnino permansit. The godheade of Christ was immortal
when ONLY HIS BODY DIED, and impassible, when the whole man suffered. Ibidem.
Moriente carne, non solum deitas sed NEC ANIMA CHRISTI POTEST OSTENDI
COMMORTVA. When Christ's body died, not only his deity, but his SOVLE CANNOT
BE SHOWED TO HAVE BEEN PARTAKER OF DEATH. Wherefore I easily admit the
words of Nazianzene to be true, that every part in man is Nazianzen. in
tract. 49. ad Cledonium.
sanctified by the like in Christ, our condemned flesh by his flesh, our soul
by his soul, our understanding by his understanding; yea I dislike not the
words of Cyrill; Cyril. de recta fide ad Theodosium.
Carnem suam in redemptionis pretium pro omnium carne dependit; and animam suam
similiter pro omnium anima redemptionis pretium constituit, quamuis iterum
reuixerit, vita secundum naturam existens. Christ yielded his flesh, as a
ransom for the flesh of all men, and made his soul likewise a price to
redeem the souls of all, though he were restored again to life, as being
life by nature: so long as we abuse not his words to maintain our fancies
impugning his general and settled doctrine; that Cyril de recta fide ad reginas
lib. 2.
sufficient for the redemption of the world, is the DEATH OF HIS FLESH ONLY:
nor thereby take occasion to defend that his blood is not able to justify, or
sanctify the believers. Idem de recta fide ad reginas lib. 1
Sanguine suo, hoc est SVAE CARNIS SANGVINE iustificat omnes in se credentes.
With his blood, that is with THE BLOOD OF HIS FLESH he justifies all that
believe in him. Ibidem.
SI NON ALIO MODO SALVANDVS ERAT mundus nisi in SANGVINE ET CORPORE morti
VTILITER derelicto, quo pacto non necessarius verbo incarnationis modus vt
iustificet in sa^guine suo crede^tes in se, and conciliet patri per morte^ sui
corporis? If the world MIGHT NONE OTHER WAY BE SAVED but by Christ's leaving
his BODY AND BLOOD UNTO DEATH for our good, how was not the taking of flesh
necessary for the son of God, that by his blood he might justify such as
believed in him, and BY THE DEATH OF HIS BODY reconcile them to God his
father? Ibidem.
Quomodo sanguis communis hominis nos sanctos efficeret? sed sanctificauit
sanguis Christi. Deus igitur and non simpliciter homo; deus enim erat in carne,
SVO SANGVINE nos purificans. How could the blood of a common man make us holy?
BUT THE BLOOD OF CHRIST DID SANCTIFY US. He was therefore God and not simply
a man. For he was God in FLESH THAT CLEANSED US WITH HIS BLOOD.

When the ancient fathers affirm, The death of Christ's flesh redeemeth as well
soul as body.
that Christ died for us THE DEATH OF THE BODY ONLY, and that the BLOOD OF HIS
FLESH does save and sanctify the believers; we must not like children imagine
they speak of insensible flesh, or that in those words they exclude the
union, operation or passion of the soul, whiles Christ's body suffered and
died: that were to make Christ a stock, not a man, and to give him carrion,
and not humane flesh quickened and coupled with life and soul; but in the
death of his body and shedding of his blood, they include all those
afflictions and passions of the soul, which naturally and necessarily follow
pain and accompany death. For these sufferings of Christ's soul confirm his
obedience, and witness his patience; only their intent is by all means to free
Christ from THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE, and then to propose the death which he
suffered in the body of his flesh on the cross, with all painful, but no
sinful c^^comitants and consequents, as the propitiation for our sins,
redemption of our souls, and reconciliation unto God; by which al ye
adversaries of our salvation the law, sin, death and Satan are utterly
conquered and abolished. And thus far forth they have the scriptures
expresselie concurring with them. 1. John. 1
The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. It must cleanse
then our souls, as well as our bodies; for they are the chief agents in sin.
Hebre. 9
Much more shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences from dead works.
Conscience is a part of the soul; not of the body. Reuelat. 5.
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, say the saints in heaven, whose
bodies lie in the dust of the earth. Redemption, remission of sins,
justification, sanctification, and such like effects of the blood of Christ
are PRINCIPALLY and PRIMARILY in the soul; and by consequent in the body. And
therefore there can be no question, but the bodily death of Christ is the
redemption of our souls, as well as of our bodies, in as much as the whole man
in Christ died the death of the cross, to redeem the whole man in us; both
parts in him jointly feeling; but with admirable patience enduring, the
bitter and sharp pains antecedent, and annexed to the death of his body.
August. epist. 120.
Cum caro in doloribus est, and in poenis, profecto anima tunc habet maximum
agonem patientiae. When the flesh is in anguish and pain, (says Austen) then
the soul certainly has the greatest trial of patience. For the soul is so
created and ordained that she feels the pleasure and pain of her body; and
howsoever the flesh be subjected to violence, the sense and grieuance thereof
is in the soul, both in this life, and in the next.

The bodily death of christ overthrew all the enemies of our salvation,
As the bodily death of Christ paieth the price of our redemption: so it
remoueth all the impediments of our salvation, which are many and mightily
linked together. For by the CORRVPTION of nature descending from our parents,
and dwelling within us, we are Romans 7.
sold under sin, Ephesians 2.
fulfilling the will of the flesh, and loving 2. Timoth* 3
pleasures more then God: whereby we neglect and break the LAW of God, and so
incur the CVRSE pronounced against the transgressors of the law; and by that
obligation are liable to ETERNAL DEATH. This is the chain of original
infection, actual transgression, legal malediction, and eternal damnation,
which draws us from God, and binds us as prisoners and captives to death,
and hell. If then the DEATH of Christ suffered Colos. ^
IN THE BODY OF HIS FLESH loosed every link of this chain, and not only
cleared us from all these enemies and exactors, but reconciled us to God, and
made peace for us Ibidem.
by the blood of his cross; it is a wrong to the death and blood of Christ
either to disable the^ as not sufficient to redeem us; or to supply them with
any better or other addition, which the holy ghost does not mention. Examine
these particularly, and see whether the power of Christ's death do not
perfectly dissolve them all. Romans 6.
Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Let not sin reign
therefore in your mortal body, (says the Apostle) that you should obey it
in the lusts thereof. The force and strength of original sin and corruption
in all the faithful is crucified and dead with Christ, except they revive it
by voluntary obeying the lusts thereof. Galat. 5
For they which are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts; by reason not only the guilt, but also the life and power of sin
died in Christ's flesh, when it was crucified. So that Romans 6.
sin now has no dominion over them, because they are not under the law,
but under grace. And likewise for actual sin, (by Christ) Ephesians. 1. Colos. 1.
we have redemption, through his blood, that is the forgiveness of sins. For
God has Romans 3.
proposed him to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood by the
forgiveness of the sins that are passed, through the patience of God. 1.
John. 1
The blood (therefore) of Christ Jesus his son cleanses us from all sin,
since he is the Hebre. 9
mediator of the new Testament, (whose) death was for the redemption of the
transgressions, that were in the former testament.

If the death of Christ on the cross, The death of Christ on the cross
quenches ye curse of the law.
and the shedding of his blood were the just and full redemption of all our
sins, then apparentlie it eased and ended the curse which the law inflicted^
for sin. For where he is Galat 3.
accursed, that continues not in all things written in the book OF THE LAW, to
do the^; the remitting of sin, is the releasing of the curse that is
consequent to sin. The curse imports vengeance due to sin. Then where
sin is pardoned the curse is determined. But Ephesians. 1
we have redemption, even remission of sins through his blood. Ergo the
blood of Christ does quench the curse of the law. The manner, how the curse of
the law lighted and seized on the person of Christ, is thus expressed by S.
Paul. Galat. 3
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. For
it is written, accursed is every one that hangs on the tree. As by his
stripes we are healed: so by his curse we are blessed. In as much as he
submitted himself to the curse of the law for our sins, not only our
transgressions are pardoned, for which Christ suffered; but the law stinging
him to death, lost his force for ever. For the vengeance of the law once
executed on our suertie, can no more in Gods justice be exacted of us. But
Christ received the sentence of the law in himself, when he bare our sins
in his body on the tree; we therefore are quited for ever from the power of
the law. Since then by his receiving and suffering the curse of the law in
his own person, we are freed and blessed; it remains we search how far
the curse prevailed against him. Wherein we must take heed that we slep not
an hayres breadth from the Apostles words. For if we stretch the curse farther
on Christ, then in truth it did, or could take place, we arrogantlie and
impiouslie pronounce that cursed, which indeed was blessed; and falsify the
promise of God, made to Abraham, that in his seed, which was Christ, Genes. 22
All the nations of the earth should be blessed. For how could the blessing of
Abraham be derived from Christ to us, if every part of his humane nature were
accursed? Wherefore Christ must receive the curse of the law in one part of
himself, which was his flesh, and in the other which was his soul, retain
the blessing of God, as well for his flesh to be raised again, as for his
members to be united unto him. If this be not the doctrine of the holy
Ghost, I urge no man to believe it; if it be, let such as will want GODS
curse, beware how they refuse it. It is no small adventure to extend the
curse of God upon the soul of Christ Jesus, without clear, sound, and sure
testimony of the holy scriptures.

To show that Christ sustained the curse of the law; How Christ was made a
curse for us.
and by his enduring it, acquitted us; Saint Paul in effect uses this reason.
Deuter. 21
CVRSED says Moses is every one that is hanged on the tree. But Christ was
content for our sins to be hanged on the tree of the cross. He therefore
submitted himself to the curse of the law to redeem us from it. That this is
Saint Paul's argument, the third to the Galathians, to prove Christ under the
curse of the law, I hope the simplest amongst you, will soon perceive, the
learnedest dare not deny. By which it is evident, that part of Christ which
hung on the cross was subjected to the curse: but the soul of Christ was not
crucified: Ergo the soul of Christ was not made a curse; but only his body.
And by suffering this curse, that is by hanging on the tree, he redeemed us
from the curse of the law, which we had deserved both in body and soul.
Which of these things can we contradict? Shall we say the Apostle mist his
mark, in that he clears us from the spiritual and perpetual curse of the
law, by Christ's suffering a corporal and temporal part thereof? or shall
we challenge him to be so simple that he knew not the difference betwixt the
one and the other? I am far from any such thought; I love to follow and not to
lead the holy ghost. In matters of so great depth I dare not wade, without,
or before my guide. That Christ died hanging on a tree, the Matthew 27 Mark 15
Luke 23.
Evangelists are plain. That hanging on a tree is a cursed kind of death in
the Deutero. ^^
law of Moses, is as manifest. That by hanging on the tree he was made a
curse for us, and thereby redeemed us from the curse of the law, the Galat. 3.
Apostle is resolute. If any man will offer farther, I must leave him. To
fasten the internal or eternal curse of the law, Christ was not accursed in
soul.
on the soul of Christ, is to my understanding very desperate divinity. For
men might nail his body to the tr^e, as did the Jews; but none could
inflict the curse on his soul, but only God. Since then the innocence,
obedience, patience, humility, and sanctity of his soul were so perfect even
in the sight of God, that it could not ^ustlie be but blessed, how should the
righteousness of God immediately, and unjustly lay the curse, which
brings inward and everlasting death, on the soul of Christ? Again, God
spirituallie curses none, but whom he first deservedly hates; as all
unclean and wicked persons. If then the soul of Christ could not worthily be
hated of God, it could not truly be cursed of God; for the hatred and curse
of God cannot be severed.

This doctrine is ancient and catholic. Saint Austen ripping this matter to
the quick, says. August. contra ^austum Man^^h^u^. lib. 14. ca 4
Securus Apostolus ait de Christo, factus est pro nobis maledictum, sicut non
timuit dic^re, pro omnibus mortuus est; hoc est enim mortuus, quod maledictus;
quoniam mors ipsa ex maledicto est: Christ was in that part accursed in which
he died.
and maledictum est omne peccatum, sieve ipsum quod fit, vt sequatur supplicium,
sieve ipsum supplicium, quod alio modo vocatur peccatum, quia fit ex^ peccato.
Suscepit autem^ Christus sine reatu supplicium nostrum, vt inde solueret reatum
nostrum, and finiret etiam supplicium nostrum. Securely the Apostle says of
Christ that he was made a curse for us, even as he feared not to say, Christ
DIED FOR ALL. For, HE DIED, IS ALL ONE WITH HE WAS ACCVRSED, BECAUSE DEATH
CAME FROM THE CVRSE; and all sin is accursed, as well that which is committed
and deserves punishment, as THE PUNISHMENT IT SELF, which in a sort is called
sin, because it is consequent to sin. Now Christ bare our punishment
without any desert, that thereby he might acquit our guiltiness, and end
our punishment. And again. Ibid, in cap 6
Maledictus omnis qui pendet in ligno, non hic aut ille* sed omnis omnino.
Etiamne and filius dei? etiam prorsus. DISPLICET VOBIS MALEDICTVS PRO NOBIS,
QVIA DISPLICET MORTVVS PRO NOBIS. Tune extra maledictum illius Adam, si extra
illius mortem. Cum vero ex homine, and pro homine mortem suscepit, ex illo and
pro illo etiam maledictum quod mortem comitatur suscipere non dedignatus est
etiam ille, prorsus etiam ille filius Dei, semper vi^^s in sua iustitia,
mortuus autem propter delicta nostra in carne suscepta ex poena nostra. Sic and
semper benedi^tus in sua iustitia, maledictus autem propter delicta nostra, in
morte suscepta ex poena nostra; ac per hoc additum est, OMNIS: ne Christus ad
veram mortem non pertinere diceretur, si a maledi^to, quod morti coniunctum
est, insipienti honorisicentia separaretur. Cursed is every one that hangs
on the wood^ not this or that man, but every man without exception. What the
son of God himself? yea in any case. You (Manichees) mislike Christ should
be accursed for us; because you believe not he died for us. Then is Christ
without the curse of Adam, when he is without the death of Adam. But for so
much as from man, and for man he did admit death; even from man, and for man he
vouchsafed to admit the curse, which acco^panieth death; I mean even that
very son of God, always living in his own righteousness, but dying for our
sins in the flesh which he took from our punishment. So always blessed in
his own righteousness, he was accursed for our sins in the death which he
suffered by reason of our punishment; and therefore the Scripture says, EVERY
ONE; least Christ should be thought not truly to have died, if by an intent of
foolish honor he should be excepted from the curse, which is united unto
death. And answering Faustus objection; if a king command any Christian to
worship the Sun and Moon, or to be hanged on a tree; he must either way of
necessity be accursed: Austen says. Ibid. cap. 1^.
Christianus videt vnum maledictum pertinere ad corpus mortale, quod ligno
suspenditur; alterum ad ammum, quo sol adoratur: sicut mors est corporis in
ligno pendere, it a mors est animi solemn adorare. Eligendum est ig^tur
maledictum in corporis morte, quo maledicto and ipsum corpus in resurrectione
liberabitur: deuitandum autem maledictum in animi morte, ne cum suo corpore in
aeterno igne damnetur. Nolite timere maledictum corporalis mortis, quod
temporaliter soluitur; sed timete maledictum mortis spiritualis, per quod anima
in aeternum cum suo corpore cruciatur. A Christian perceives the one curse to
belong to the mortal body, that hangs on the woodde; the other whereby the
Son is worshipped, to pertain to the soul. He must therefore choose the
curse of the corporal death, from which curse even his very body shall be
delivered in the resurrection; and shun the curse of the spiritual death,
least together with the body the soul be damned in everlasting fire. Fear
not the curse of the corporal death, which is dissolved with time; but fear
the curse of the spiritual death, by which the soul is everlastingly
tormented with her body. This doctrine is so sound, it cannot be confuted;
and so clear, it need not be explained. The temporal death of the body
came first from sin, as a part of the curse and punishment of sin; and so
to this day does it continue. Christ therefore in that he yielded his body
to die on the Cross, subjected himself to the curse of our sin, and by
suffering a part of the curse, abolished the whole: but the curse of the soul,
which is the spiritual death, Christ could not taste; because that damneth
body and soul for ever.

The rest of the ancient fathers tredd the same path. Chrysostom. in cap. 3 epit.
ad Galato^.

The kind of Christ's death was acc^^sed, and so the force of the law
dissolved.


The people (says Chrysostom) were subject to the curse, which says,
accursed is every one yt abides not in those things which are written in the
book of the law. For none of them had continued therein, neither had any man
fulfilled the whole law, but Christ exchanged the curse with another, which
says, accursed is every one that hangs on the tree. Where then he that
hangs on the tree is accursed, and he that transgresses the law is likewise
accursed, he that shall dissolve this curse, must not be subject to the same;
but must admit an other in steed of that; which Christ did, and so by the one
loosed the other. Ibidem.
The cross therefore took away the curse. Can we wish plainer words, then
that Christ by suffering the CVRSE OF SVSPENSION on the cross, took away THE
CVRSE OF TRANSGRESSION, to which the people were subject? Theodorete:
Theodoret. in cap. 3. epist. ad Galat.
When all were subject to the curse of the law, Christ suffered that kind of
death, which is accursed in the law, that he might deliver all men from the
curse. Cyril. Cyril. de rec^^^ fide ad regina^. lib. 1.
Factus est pro nobis maledictum, crucem ferens and pendens in ligno ut soluat
peccatum mundi. Christ was made a curse for us; when he endured the Cross,
and hung on the tree, that he might release the sin of the world. Ambrose.
Ambros. epist. lib. 5. oration. in Auxentium de (...).
Quare maledictum dicatur Apostolus te docet dicens, quia scriptum est:
malediclus omnis qui pendet in ligno. Hoc est qui in carne sua nostram carnem,
in suo corpore nostras infirmitates, and nostra maledicta suscepit, vt cruci
sigeret. Why Christ is called a curse, the Apostle teaches thee, when he
says, because it is written; accursed is every one that hangs on the tree,
that is, which in his flesh bare our flesh, AND IN HIS BODY TOOK OUR
INFIRMITIES, AND OUR CVRSES that he might fasten them to his Cross. Hierom.
Hierom. la. cap. 3. epist. ad Gala.
It ought to trouble no man that Christ was made a curse for us; because God,
who is said to make him a curse, did also make him sin for us, though he
knew no sin; yea, being life he died, and being the wisdom of God, he is
called foolishnes: but he died, that we might live; he was made foolishnes that
we should be made wisdom; he hung on the tree, that being fastened to the
tree, he might wipe out the sin, which we had committed in ye tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. Oe^umenius. Oe^umeni^^^ in cap. 3. ^pist^ ad ^al^^
We were under the curse, because we had not kept the law; Christ was free
from that because he had fulfilled the law; and yet he suffered a curse not
due to him, when he was hanged on the tree, that he might dissolve the curse
pronounced against us.

Other expositions if any man seek, he shall find even in the learned and
ancient writers. Cyril, desens. in Anathematism^^ ^^imum.
Non maledictum, vel peccatum factum, est (verbum) sed cum iniquis reputatus
est iustus existens, vt aboleat peccatum: and appellatus est maledictus, qui
benedixit creaturam, vt soluat nostrum maledictum, and liberet a poena
credentes in ipsum. Igitur non est factus secundum veritatem maledictum and
peccatum, appellatus autem illorum nominibus, vt aboleat maledictum and
peccatum. Christ was not made indeed a curse, or sin (says Cyrill) but he
was reputed amongst the wicked, being just, that he might put away sin;
and he who did bles^e the creature, was called a curse, that he might dissolve
our curse, and free from vengeance such as believed in him. Therefore he was
not in truth made a curse and sin; but he was called by those names, that he
might abolish b^th the curse and sin. Christ was no more a curse, then he
was sin; who indeed, and with God was neither; but with men he was reputed
both wicked and accursed, by reason God suffered him to endure that vilde and
shameful kind of death, which he did to save us from the curse of sin.
Epiphanius says he was A CVRSE UNTO THE CVRSE, that is, a dissoluer and
finisher of the curse. Epiphanius contra Ma^ci^^ ^itas here is. 42.
Ignorant omnino miser ille, quod neque Christus maledictio factus sit; absit:
sed maledictionem, quae propter peccat a nostra fuit, abstulit seipsum cruci
dede^s; and factus est mors morti propter peccata nostra, and MALEDICTIO
MALEDICTIONI. Quapropter non est Christus maledictum, sed maledicti solutio;
benedictio autem omnibus vere in ipsum credentibus. That wretch (Marcion) is
utterly ignorant, that Christ was not accursed; God forbid: but he took away
the curse that lay on our sins, in yielding himself to the cross, and was
made death unto death for our sins, and A CVRSE UNTO THE CVRSE. Wherefore
Christ WAS NOT A CVRSE, but THE DISSOLVER OF THE CVRSE, and A BLESSING to all
that ^^ulie believe in him.

These, though they diversely apply the Apostles speech, Factus pro nobis
maledictum, Christ was made a curse for us, some to the toleration of death,
some to the opinion of men, These three ways Christ is said to be accursed for
us.
and some to the depulsion of the curse from us; yet in this they all agree,
that by giving his body to die on the Cross, Christ received, sustained, and
abolished the curse due to us for transgressing the law of God. And to justify
their assertion they have not only the plain text of Galat. 3.
Paul and Deuteronomy. 21.
Moses, Cursed is he that hangs on the tree; but the manifest words of
Peter, 1. Peter. 2.
He bare our sins in his body on the tree. To prove the death which Christ
suffered to be a cursed kind of death, the place of Moses is very pregnant;
to prove the person to be accursed in soul, it has neither cause, nor truth.
For innocents may suffer that wrong to be hanged on trees; and shall they
then be accursed in soul? And be they malefactors, they may repent as did the
thief on the cross; and shall they notwithstanding their repentance be
accursed? Shall we close both penitent and innocent within the true curse of
the soul, rather then we will suffer Paul's words to be referred to the death
of the body? For he says, Cursed is EVERY ONE that hangs on the tree;
excusing none; and if any might be excepted out of the general rule, Christ
Jesus most of all. But every one that hangs on the tree, has a cursed kind
of death, though a blessed soul. Paul therefore expresselie teaches, that
Christ subjected himself to a cursed kind of death; and in so dying, he
delivered us from the curse of the Law. August. in exposition. epist. ad Galat.
Ex part quippe mortali pependit in ligno, mortalitas autem vnde sit, notum
est credentibus. Ex poena quippe est, and maledictio peccati primi hominis,
quam Dominus suscepit, and peccata nostra pertulit in corpore suo super liguum.
That part (says Austen) which was mortal (in Christ) hung on the Cross; and
whence mortality came the faithful know. It came from the punishment of
sin, and is the malediction of the sin of the first man; which the Lord
took unto him and bare our sins in his body on the tree. Yea when Christ
took the curse, he took the sin of the old man into his flesh, and
fastened it together with his flesh unto the Cross. Ibidem
Quid pependit in ligno, nisi peccatum veteris hominis, quod Dominus pro nobis
in ipsa carnis mortalitate suscepit? Vnde nec erubuit nec tumuit Apos^olus
dicere, peccatum eum fecisse pro nobis; addens vt de peccato condemnaret
peccatum. Non enim and vetus homo noster simul crucifi^ cretur, sicut Apostolus
alibi dicit, nisi in illa morte Domini, peccati nostri figura penderet. What
hung on the tree but the sin of the old man, which (sin) the Lord took
upon him for us in the very mortality of his flesh? Wherefore the Apostle was
neither ashamed, nor afraied to say, that (God) made him sin for us, that by
sin he might condemn sin. For our old man could not be crucified together
with Christ, as the Apostle else where writes, except the figure of our sin
did hang on the Cross in that death which the Lord died. And if Peter's words
be true, (which can not be false) Christ bare our sins, that is, the
malediction and punishment of our sins, in his body on the tree, and thereby
saved us from the eternal malediction, which is, Go you cursed into
everlasting fire.

My resolution then is, which I hope will be received, because it is the
Apostles; Romans 7. We are dead to the law in the body of Christ.
WE ARE DEAD TO THE LAW BY THE BODY OF CHRIST, that we should be to another,
even to him that is raised from the dead. We are quit from the fear, from the
yoke, from the curse, from the vengeance of the law; in one word, WE ARE DEAD
to the law; which has no more challenge to us now, then a man has to his
wife that is long since dead. And if you ask when, and how we became dead to
the law, Saint Paul answers; BY THE BODY OF CHRIST, when he suffered on
the Cross for our sins. And as Romans 6.
he that is dead is freed from sin; so we dying in, and with the body of
Christ, are Romans 8.
LOOSED FROM THE LAW OF SIN, AND DEATH; Sin being condemned, and death
conquered in the flesh of Christ, WHICH IS OUR FLESH, not only because it
was taken of us, but also for that it is united unto us, as the head to the
members; and communicates with us both in life and death, as appears by that
we died and rose again in him; and to this day he suffers in us, then which
no conjunction can be surer, or nearer. Since then the corruption of our flesh,
the guilt of our sin, the curse of the law, the sting of death were all
closed and crucified in the body of Christ on the Cross, and his death has
discharged us from their dominion; justly does the Apostle say of Christ,
that he did Hebr. ^.
partake with flesh, and blood, that through death he might destroy him that
had power of death, even the devil. For in that we be freed from the curse
of the law, which brought and bound sinners by death to hell: the chains of
darkness are broken, and Satan's force wholly frustrate; and he himself now
left to behold the ruin of his kingdom, to grieve at the spoil of his
goods, and to fear the vengeance provided for him, howsoever for a season he
be suffered to pursue the members of Christ here on earth, to his own shame,
and their greater comfort, in trying the mighty power and steadfast favor of
God for their perpetual defense, and eternal recompense. So that in all
things Romans 8.
we are more then conquerours through him that loved us, Galat. 2.
and gave himself for us, Romans 16.
who will tread down Satan under our feet, 1. Cor. 15.
that God may be all in all. Uerie mighty then is the power of Christ's
death, by whose BLOOD the Saints Revel. 12.
OVER COME the great Dragon, that old Serpent called the Devil; and his
overthrow proves all the enemies of man's salvation to be vanquished, and
impediments removed; since he was the first perswader and procurer, and is the
Prince and ruler of them all.

We have seen the power of Christ's death in subduing sin and Satan, The
bodily death of christ does more express Gods mercies and Christ's m^^its,
then if the pains of hell were joined with it.
as likewise in ending and abolishing the curse of the law, which obliged man
for his uncleanness and unrighteousness to everlasting condemnation; and find
that he, which bare our sins in his body on the tree, did in that mortal
part which he took of us, crucify as well the flesh, and sin of man, as
the curse and death, that reigned over man: and so much he performed in the
body of his flesh through death, by which he reconciled us unto God, to make
us holy and blameless in his sight: let us now see whether the death of the
spirit, and the curse of the soul will any thing help the work of our
redemption, or whether the death of Christ's body, do not more fully
demonstrate the mercies of God, and merits of Christ, then if the pains of
hell had been joined with it. And where some men think it would much
commend the TRVTH, POWER, and JUSTICE of God, and more amply declare the
OBEDIENCE, PATIENCE, and LOVE of Christ, if he refused not the very torments
of hell for our sakes, shunning no part of the burden that pressed us, I must
confess I am rather of a contrary mind; that the bodily death of Christ on
the cross does more plainly express the virtues of God, and Christ his
son, then if the terror and horror of hell were therewith coupled.

TRVTH of god, his threatening Adam in this wise, Genesis 2.
Thou shall die the death, or thou shall certainly die, was truly performed
in the body of Christ; in the soul of Christ it could not without sin or
damnation; neither of which with any truth can be ascribed unto Christ. As
namely the truth of God
That the mouth of God lied, or the soul of Christ died, is a cho^se so hard,
that I wish all men that have any care of Christian religion to refrain
either. Next, touching the POWER of The power God.
the weaker the instrument which God uses to overthrow his enemies, the
greater is both his glory and their shame. Then, for flesh which was the
feeblest part of Christ, after it was dead, and void of all hope in show, to
rise again into a blessed and heavenly life, and to foil both death and
Satan by recovering it self into the full possession, and all his members into
the joyful expectation of everlasting glory, was far a mightier conquest,
then for his soul with much ado at length to escape, and resist the assaults
of hell. From the depth of hell here on earth many sinful souls have by
grace struggeled, and cleared themselves; from the grave never rose none into
an immortal, and incorruptible life, before the flesh of Christ. Deeper in
desperation, and al other temptations of hell have others been, that yet were
saved, then any man dare affirm of Christ: deeper in death without
corruption, then the body of Christ, never was, nor ever shall be any of the
sons of men. It was therefore an harder thing for the body of Christ, past
all sense, to rise from death, to immortality, then for his soul void of
sin, and full of grace to repel the force of Satan; and yet to repel it,
shows greater power then to suffer it; to conquer it, shows greatest of
all.

[But to bear the burden of Gods wrath due to our sins, and to free us from
it, needed greater strength, (they will say) then Christ's flesh could have.]
To support and auert Gods just indignation from us, the humane body or soul
of Christ of themselves were not able; To auert Gods wrath from us, the dignity
of Christ's person was nec^ssary.
but the DIGNITY and UNITY of his person must be placed in the gap to quench
the flame of Gods just vengeance against our sins, which was everlasting
destruction both of body and soul; yet for so much as the sincerity and
sanctity of Christ's soul, personally joined, quickened, and blessed with
the perpetual union, communion, and fruition of his deity, could feel no want
of grace, no lack of spirit, no loss of favor with God (in which things
consist the inward death, and curse of the soul:) the wrath of God was
executed on the flesh of his son, which he took of purpose from Adam, that
the rein he might bear the sin, and curse of Adam; and so by his death might
satisfy the sentence, and pacify the displeasure of God against our
unrighteousness.

And this is more agreeable to Gods justice, then if Christ's take life from the
soul, The justice of God.
must be Gods proper and peculiar action. No creature can give the grace or
spirit of God to the soul of man, which is the life of the soul, but only
God. Therefore no creature can take it from the soul, but God alone that
GIVES it, must TAKE IT AWAY. Since then Christ might suffer nothing justly,
but as the 1. Pet. 3
just for the unjust, that is willingly, but unjustly; his death must come by
the hands of the wicked, who might wrongfullie take his life from him, but not
touch his soul; and not by the immediate hand of GOD, who will do no wrong,
and can kill the soul. Matthew. 27
I have sinned, says Judas, in betraying the INNOCENT blood. Acts. 3.
You denied the HOLY AND JUST, and killed the Lord of life, says Peter to
the Jews, warning them how great a sin they had committed in putting Christ
to death. If he were an INNOCENT, and deserved no punishment; if he were
HOLY and JUST, and could not be persecuted or put to death without heinous
impiety and injury, we may do well to remember that the death of his soul
had been a far greater wrong, then the death of his body was. And therefore
if the justice of God would not farther interpose it self in killing his
body, then by delivering him into the hands of the wicked, permitting them to
shed his blond, which he would accept for the sins of the world; much
less would God with his own mouth accurse; The death of Christ's soul could
neither proceed from God, nor be acceptable unto God.
or with his own hand slay the soul of his son, whom he sent to restore
and quicken those that were accursed, and dead in their sins. Again,
corporally or temporallie God punishes one for another fault, because he can
recompense them eternally, that thereby repent and turn from their sins; but
eternally or spiritually he punishes no man, but for his own uncleanness,
either naturally sticking in him, or voluntarily committed by him. Christ then
being free from all sin, might not suffer the inward or everlasting death
of the soul, but corporal and temporal reproach, and pain, which God might
and did recompense with eternal joy, Ezechiel. 18
and glory. Thirdly that soul which sins, that soul shall die. This is
the settled rule of Gods justice; and therefore Christ's soul which sinned not,
could by no justice die the death of the soul. To lay down his life for us
was love and thanks with God: but willingly to separate himself from God for
us, was no way to reconcile God to us, or to bring us to God. He must
therefore cleave fast to God in soul, whose death shall be precious in Gods
sight, as was Christ's. If the soul be severed from God, the death of the
body is detestable in his eyes, as being the wages of sin; and therefore no
more acceptable to GOD then sin it self, but where the soul, hating the
infection of sin, and loathing the infirmity of the flesh, resigneth it unto
death for Gods glory, and the good of others. And in this respect the death of
the body may be a sacrifice unto God, but not except the soul do live, and
cleave to God, without separation. Then hateful to GOD was the death of
Christ, if his soul were first hated or accursed; if that were beloved and
blessed of God, it could not choose but live; for God is not the Matthew. 22.
God of the dead, but of the living. So that the death of Christ's body on
the Cross, was by no justice an acceptable sacrifice unto God, if his soul
were first dead. But his death was so precious in Gods sight, that in Colos. ^
the body of his flesh through death, he reconciled us unto God: his soul was
therefore alive and in favor with God, yea so abundantly blessed, and highly
accepted, for the holiness, humility, and obedience thereof, that God was
pacified, and pleased, and we all sanctified with THE OBLATION OF THE BODY of
Jesus on the altar of the cross.

Lastly, the flesh of Christ by Gods justice must be as able to purge us from
sin, as Adams was to poison us with sin. Christ's flesh must be as able to
quicken us, as Adams flesh was to kill us.
But the flesh of Adam infected all his posterity with sin, and death; ergo
the flesh of Christ must have as much force, to cleanse and quicken the
faithful both in this life, and the next. Of this justice Paul speaks, when
he says, since by man came death, by man must come the resurrection of the
dead: For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall al be made alive. The
first Adam WAS THE FIGVRE of the second Adam, that where 1. Corinthians. 15
sin abounded, there grace might abound much more. Romans 5.
As then by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience
of one shall many be made righteous. The obedience of Christ which here Paul
mentions, is his Philip. 2. Romans 3. verse
obedience unto death, even to the death of the cross; and the 25. and
righteousness of the faithful is the forgiveness of their sins, 24.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. I will not here dispute whether
the soul be created, and infunded; or else tradu^ed from Adam, as well as the
flesh: I mean not with curious or superfluous questions to busy men's heads;
that which the scriptures deliver touching the deriuation of sin and death
from our first parents, I may safely teach, and you must necessarily believe.
That we were Psalm. 51.
fashioned in iniquity, and conceived in sin, the words of David do
exactlie witness, and no marvel. For Job. 14.
who can make that to be clean, which comes from the unclean? yea sin
cleaves so fast unto our flesh, that when the Ephesians. 1.
eyes of our heart are lightened, and the Ephesians 4
spirit of our mind is renewed, so that the Rom 7.
inward man delights in the law of God; EVEN THEN have we an Romans 7
other law in our members rebelling against the law of our mind, and leading
us captive unto the law of sin; the Galat. 5
one so contrary to the other, that we cannot do the things which we would;
by reason the affection or Romans 8
liking of the flesh cannot be subject to the law of God. (...)
This fight betwixt the flesh and the spirit is so durable, that it cannot be
dissolved but only by death. Though Romans 1
Christ be in us, and the spirit live for righteousness sake; yet Romans 7
sin so dwells in us, (that is) in our Romans
^ mortal bodies, that whiles we live, Romans 7
in mind we serve the law of God, but in our flesh the law of sin. From
Adams flesh we derive this infection of sin, that sticks so fast unto us
after we are regenerate, and newborn again of water and the holy ghost, and
this is the root and nurse of all sin, and the cause of death to al men.
Romans 8.
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. From Christ's flesh
then we must receive the purgation of sin both inherent in us, and committed
by us; or else Adams flesh is stronger to wound us, then Christ's is to heal
us; which is repugnant to the justice of God; by which the grace of God must
be far mightier unto salvation in the body of Christ, then the force of
sin was unto condemnation in the body of Adam; unless we make sin of
more power to kill, then God is to quicken; which is to exalt the devil above
God, and his son. For 2. Corinthians. ^
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself; by whose blood the
Ephesians. 2
partition wall is broken down, and hatred abrogated Ephesians. 2
through his flesh; that we might be reconciled unto God in one body by his
cross.

[But the death of the body, they will say, has no proportion to the death
of the soul; why the death of Christ's body does counteruaile all the bodies
and soule^ of men.
and therefore the one cannot in justice excuse the other.] There is far
greater distance betwixt the son of God, and the sons of men, then betwixt
the bodies and souls of men. These differ as creatures, and both inferior
unto the angels; but there is the excellency of the Creator above the
creature, which is simply infinite. Whatsoever therefore it pleased the son
of God to suffer for our sakes, it was most sufficient for our redemption;
howbeit to demonstrate his love, he would be partaker of our infirmity and
mortality; least we should loath our condition, or grudge at the chastisement
of our sins; but if we set a side the dignity and unity of his person, then
is no way the death of the soul or the pains of hell, which they imagine
Christ suffered, proportionable in exact justice to the true wages of our
sin. For what equiualence has one soul with all the souls of the Saints?
or one days anguish which Christ felt in soul, as they suppose, with that
everlasting fire which we should have suffered in body and soul for ever?
set aside I say the respect of the person, which suffered for us; and in the
rest they shall never be able to prove any proportion of justice divine or
humane. But as I have fully showed before, the worthiness of the person is
the surest ground of our salvation, and chiefest weight of our redemption; and
therefore his death is of infinite force, and his blood of infinite price,
even as his person is. For since all men's actions are and ought to be esteemed
according to the gifts which they have, and place which they hold from GOD;
why should not the death and blood of Christ be valued in Gods justice
according to the height and worth of his person? and if in all things we
receive honor not due to our flesh wherein we partake with Beasts, but
fit for the soul wherein we communicate with Angels; how seems it
strange in our eyes, that the dooinges and sufferinges of Christ Jesus, which
has the natures of God and man in a surer and nearer conjunction, then we
have our souls and bodies, should not be reckned and accepted in GODS
justice, as the ACTIONS and PASSIONS of HIS OWN SON; and have their value
from the diuiner and worthier part of Christ?

The bodily death of christ does more commend the merits of Christ then if ye
pains of hell were joined with it.
As the death of Christ's flesh ONLY does more express the TRVETH, POWER,
AND JUSTICE of God, then if the death of the soul had been joined with it; so
the same sets forth Christ's merits, namely his OBEDIENCE, PATIENCE, and
LOVE in far better sort, then if we add unto it the death of the spirit,
which is the reward of all the reprobate and damned. For what a man
unwillingly suffers, that shows neither obedience, nor patience. Obedience
has readiness; and patience, if it be perfect, has gladness; both haus
willingness. If then we be forced against our wills to endure that which
we would gladly avoid, it is violence; In the death of the soul there
could neither be obedience nor patience.
it is neither obedience nor patience; and consequently it has neither merits
nor thanks with GOD. The death then of the soul, which is a separation from
the favor and grace of God, did Christ suffer it willingly, or unwillingly?
if willingly; there could be no greater neglect of GOD, then to be willing
to be separated from God. It were disobedience and insolence in the highest
degree, to be glad and forward to forsake God, or to be forsaken of him.
Christ therefore must not be willing to suffer the death of the soul, least
we wrap him within the compass of contemning and rejecting the grace and
favor of GOD, which are sinful enormities. Was he unwilling to suffer it?
then could he be neither obedient, nor patient in suffering it. All virtue
is voluntary, compulsion has no merit. 2. Corinthians. 9.
God loves a cheerful giver, and sufferer. He that murmureth, in heart
rebelleth, though he hold still his tongue. So likewise I must ask, if
Christ suffered the death of the soul, did he suffer it justly or unjustly?
if unjustly: God could not be the sole and immediate agent in imposing it; and
besides God, no creature can bereave the soul of life. Did he suffer it
justly? then must he be void of all virtue; for nothing but sin deserves
the death of the soul. Obedience and patience, merit thanks with God; and
cannot want the blessing of God: where the death of the soul is the greatest
curse, that God inflicteth here on earth.

And where they think it would greatly increase the love of Christ toward
us if he vouchsafed to taste the death of the soul for our sakes; It is no
love to renounces God for man's sake^
I reply, that supposition would make Christ a sinner, if not a liar; which
God forbid should once enter our thoughts. For first Christ says. John. 15
Greater love then this has no man, that one should lay down his life for
his friends. But Romans 5
God commends his love toward us; that whiles we were yet sinners Christ
died for us. If it be love for a man to loose his soul for his friend, then is
there found a greater love, then Christ ever knew: for he says, there is no
greater love the^ for a man to lay down his life. And the Apostle applying it
to Christ says, The height of Gods love was this, that Christ died for
sinners: that is, for his enemies, not for his friends; sin being enmity
to God, and sinners enemies to the holiness of his will, and glory of his
kingdom. This love of Christ by which he died for us, we reject as little
worth, unless he endured the loss of Gods favor for us; which I take to be
sin and not love. For love is due first and above all to God, then to men;
this order of love if we break, it is no charity, it is iniquity. What do
all wicked ones, but prefer the love of themselves, or of others, before the
love of God? to love men so well, that we wax willing to forsake the favor
and fellowship of God, is transgression against God, and not compassion toward
men; and therefore we may not bring the son of God within the listes of
this love, no not for an hour; by reason the love of God before all others may
not fail in the heart of Christ, not for a moment, be it never so short.

Christ's love toward us in dying for us.
For our love then he took flesh, when he was God; which was infinite
humility; and gave his life for his enemies, which was exceeding charity; and
in the course thereof referred himself wholly to the will and pleasure of God,
which was exact obedience; willingly, but wrongfullie suffering, whatsoever
the malice of Satan, and rage of the wicked contrived against him: the wise and
gracious counsel of God so turning the mischief of the devil and his members
to the general good of mankind, that Christ's innocent and righteous blood,
being furiously and unjustly shed by the hands of his enemies, became the true
sacrifice for sin, and the full price of man's redemption. Farther then this,
if we will force the son of God with our fancies, as namely to the death or
curse of the soul, we do not only diminish the strength of his love
toward God, but we debase the price of his blood; and make it rather
detestable, then acceptable in Gods sight. For nothing can please God, but that
which is RIGHTEOUS, INNOCENT, HOLY, and VNDEPILED. And in a dead or cursed
soul what place leave we for these gifts and graces of the holy Ghost? Since
then our high Priest must be Heb. 7.
holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, before his sacrifice
could be accepted; the soul of Christ must necessarily be replenished with
all goodness, and embraced with all favor, before the death of his body
could be an Ephesians. ^.
offering of a sweet savor unto God: and so the power of Christ's death is no
whitte increased, but altogether weakened, if we conioyne it with the death of
the soul.

The death of the soul then does not increase the obedience, patience, and
love of Christ toward us, but does rather decrease and endanger all the
virtues of our Savior. For if Christ suffered the death of the soul, which is
Gods immediate action; since God will offer his own son neither violence nor
wrong, we must confess that Christ deserved the death of the soul, and
admitted it as due unto him; to which absurdities if we come, we leave
nothing sound in our salvation. All Christ's sufferings were INIVRIOVS in
respect of the doers* and VOLVNTARIE in respect of him self.
Ca^^ we him just that deserves, or holy that desires to be forsaken of God?
I think not. Then all Christ's sufferings must be INIVRIOVS, before he can be
JUST; and VOLVNTARIE, before they can be a SACRIFICE unto God. Both which are
witnessed by the word of God, as likewise by the ancient fathers. THIS IS 1.
Peter. 2.
THANK-VVORTHIE (says Peter) if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
SVFFERING VVRONGFVLLY. For what praise is it, if when ye be BVFFETED for your
FAVLTS, ye take it PATIENTLY? But if, when ye do well, ye suffer patiently,
this is acceptable unto God. For hereunto are ye called: for so CHRIST SVFFERED
FOR US, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. Christ
therefore suffered as well VVRONGFVLLY as PATIENTLY. Malefactors may be patient,
but that is no merit with God. He must be both innocent and patient that will
have thanks from God. So was Christ 1. Pet. ^.
He did no sin, and so was innocent; 1. Pet. ^.
when he was reviled, he reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened
not, which proves his patience. This very testimony, the thief on the
cross gives him. Luke 23.
We receive punishment worthy of that we have done; but this man has done
nothing amiss. Augusti. de tempore. sermon. 101.
Quod just debebat Adam, Christus unjust mortem suscipiendo persoluit. What
Adam justly owed (says Austen) that Christ unjustly paid by suffering death.
Idem de trinitate li. 13. ca. 14
Pergit ad passionem, vt pro debitoribus nobis quod ipse no^ debebat,
exsolueret. Christ goes to his passion to pay that for us debtors, which he
did not owe. Ibid. cap. 1^
De humanitate suscepta tantum beneficij collatum est hominibus, vt a dei
sempiterno filio, eodemque hominis filio mors temporalis indebita redderetur,
qua eos a sempiterna morte debita liberaret. Peccata nostra Diabolus tenebat,
and per illanos merito figebat in morte. Demisit ea ille, qui sua non habebat,
and ab illo immerito est perductus ad mortem. Tantum valuit sanguis ille, vt
neminem Christo indutum in aeterna morte debita detinere debuerit, qui Christum
morte indebita vel ad tempus occidit. By Christ taking man's nature, this
benefit men get, that the eternal Son of God, and the same also the son
of man, suffered a temporal death not due, to deliver them from an everlasting
death due. The Devil laid sure hold on our sins, and by them held us
deservedly in death. Those he remitted, that had no sins of his own, and
was without any desert brought by the Devil unto death. But such was the
force of Christ's blood, that the Devil had no right to detain any man (that
put on Christ) in eternal death due, for so much as he slew Christ with death
for the time, which was no way due. Greg. (...). 3. ca. 11.
Mediator noster punir^ pro se ipso non debuit: quia nullum culpae contagium
perpetrauit. Sed si ipse indebitam mortem non susciperet, nunquam nos a debita
morte liberaret. Our Mediator for himself ought not to be punished, because
he never sinned. But if he had not suffered a death not due, he could never
have freed us from the death that was due. If the temporal death of the body
were not due to our Savior, much less was the death of the soul due unto
him. And if no death were due; that which he suffered was wrongful. Then
might God be the permitter, directer, orderer, and accepter of Christ's death
on the Cross; but he could not be the immediate inflicter of it, because it
was wrongful and undeserved: much less might GOD in justice forsake his
soul, that with so great obedience, patience and innocence humbled himself
to the will of his heavenly father.

That likewise he suffered nothing against his own liking, his own mouth
testified when he said. John. 10.
Nemo tollit animam meam a me, sed pono eam a meipso. No man takes my life
from me, but I lay it down of my self. And else where. Galat. 2*
The son of God loved me, and gave himself for me. Ephesians. 5.
Love your wives as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. If it
were love, then was it no constraint, nor violence, that forced him thereto. If
he gave himself for us; it must needs be voluntary whatsoever he
suffered. August. de trinitat, li. 4. ca. 13
Demonstrauit spiritus mediatoris quam nulla poena peccati vsque ad mortem
carnis accessorit, quia non eam deseruit inuitus, sed QVIA VOLVIT, QVANDO
VOLVIT, QVOMODO VOLVIT. The spirit of the Mediator showed that without any
punishment of sin it came even to the death of the flesh, which he did not
leave against his will, but BECAUSE HE VVOVLDE, WHEN HE VVOVLDE, AND HOW HE
VVOVLDE. Et August. de (...) contra Manichaeos. cap. 26.
natus, and passus, and mortuus est, nulla sua necessitate, sed voluntate, and
potestate. Christ was borne, and suffered and died, not for any necessity
that urged him, but of his own will, and having it in his own power. If
Christ might suffer nothing but what he would, and as he would; the death of
the soul he did never suffer; for thereto he could not be willing without
sin, by reason it is a separation from God, and a loss both of his heavenly
favor, and holy spirit, from which Christ willingly would never be excluded.

The sum is, since the TRVTH and JUSTICE of God might not release the sin of
man, The recapitulation of ye manner and merit of Christ's death.
without fulfilling the sentence of the Judge, Genesis 2.
THOU SHALL DIE THE DEATH, and that by man; for so much as man was the
trespasser: John. 3.
God so loved the world, when none of the sons of Adam was able to restore
his own soul, much less to ransom others; that he sent his own son to
become man; and as by the dignity and purity of his person to counteruaile
and ouerweigh the souls of all men; so by his pains and death on the Cross,
to verify and satisfy the judgment of God pronounced against man, and to
quit him from all danger following death. And to try the obedience, show the
patience, and augment the merits of the Redeemer, the wisdom of God decreed,
that his son in our substance should violently and wrongfullie be put to
death even by their hands, for whose sakes he laid down his life; that his
love might so much the more exceed in praying for his persecutours, and dying
for his tormentors. The shame and sharpness of the cross, so injuriously
imposed on the holiness, and worthiness of Christ's person, and yet so
obedientlie and patiently endured by him, God so highly esteemed, and
recompensed, that he made his death the ransom of all mankind, and his blood
to be the purgation and propitiation of our sins: his obedience wyping away
our disobedience; his favor quenching the displeasure; his blessedness
al^ering the curse; his death finishing the vengeance that was due to our
iniquities. This is the manner and merit of Christ's suffering death on the
cross, to save us from the wrath of God, that was kindled against our
transgressions. And since the scriptures mention none other means of our
redemption but the DEATH and BLOOD of the SON of God, I hold them wisest,
that leave devising any better or other help for our salvation then God
himself has revealed. And as for the death of the soul, I take that to be
the greatest hinderance that maybe to the work of our redemption, and to shake
the very foundation of our faith and hope in the cross of Christ. Which least
I should seem to say, and no way to prove: let us view the COMFORT of Christ's
cross, and thereby see how his soul was affected toward God, even whiles
his body suffered that grievous, and opprobrious death of the cross.

I have often mused what made men of great learning and judgment otherwise,
The comfort of Christ's cross taken out of the 22. Psalm.
to swerve so much from the plain tenor of the scriptures; and to imagine in
the soul of our savior, such doubt and fear of Gods favor, such hor^ors and
torments of hell, that they stick not to match them with the pains of the
damned; considering there is no manifest ground, nor evident proof of so
dangerous doctrine in the word of God: but contrariwise, when the scriptures
describe Christ on the cross, they propose his body martyred with all kind of
cruelty, but his soul cleaning to God, with all perfection of constancy.
Read the xvi. and xxii. Psalm. who will, which purposelie treat of Christ's
passion; and tell me whether there be so much as a word importing any
distrust of Gods favor, or any suspicion of the pains of hell suffered in
the soul of Christ? [The first entrance of the xxii. Psalm, you will say is,
Psalm. 2^.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?] This is that Helen, that has
bewitched the world; I mean the misconstring of these words. Of which though I
have spoken before, as much as may content any man that is not fastened to his
fancies, more then to the truth; yet let us shortly see whether the rest of
the Psalm admit their new found exposition, or no. It follows in the same
place. Verse. 9.
Thou did bring me out of my mothers womb; thou gave me confidence at my
mothers breasts. 10
On thee was I cast from my birth. THOU ART MY GOD FROM MY MOTHERS BELLY. 11
Be not far from me, for trouble is near, and there is none to help. 19
Be not far, O Lord my strength: hasten to help me. 12
I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation, I
will praise thee, ^4
for HE HAS NOT DESPISED, nor abhorred the weakness, or baseness of the
poor: neither HAS HE HID HIS FACE FROM HIM; but when he called unto him HE
HEARD HIM. Is this the prayer of a man whose soul is forsaken of God? Did he
doubt of Gods favor, that with such confidence pronounced, Thou gave me
assurance at my mothers breasts, thou art my God from my mothers belly? Was he
persuaded that god had refused and left him when as he says, God has not
DESPISED ye weakness of the poor: he has not hid his face from him; when he
called, God heard him? If these be flat contradictions to their imaginations,
why wrest they the first verse to euert all the rest? Christ therefore in the
beginning of the Psalm might well complain that god had for the time of his
passion withheld his PROTECTION, or diminished his CONSOLATION; but in no wise
that God had decreased his love, or shut up his favor toward the humane soul
of his son. Yea the next words are an explication of the former. Why have
thou forsaken me, Verse. 1.
and art so far from mine help? Not to help in trouble is to forsake,
though God be not angry with the souls of such as suffer affliction. The
very words agree, to GO FAR OFF from a man, is to FORSAKE HIM; and so he that
desires God not to be far off, prays not to be forsaken; but rather to
receive help in time of need. Uerilie S. Ambroses judgment and reason does
satisfy me, whatsoever it does others. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. ser. 1.
Ille nunquam derelictus est a patre, cum quo pater semper erat. Sed secundum
corpus, in quo traditus est passioni vox ista processit; quoniam derelinqui
nobis videmur, quando sumus in periculis constituti. Christ was never forsaken
of his Father, with whom the father always was; but this complaint came from
his body, which was left to suffer death, for so much as we think our selves
forsaken when we are oppressed with any troubles*

If the xxii. Psalm content us not, let us examine the sixteenth, The same o^^
of the 16. Psalm.
and there mark what the holy Ghost does attribute to the soul of Christ in
the mids of his sufferings on the Cross; and then judge which opinion
draws nearest to the truth of the sacred Scriptures. Psalm. 16.
I have always SET the Lord BEFORE ME; for he IS AT MY RIGHT HAND THAT I
SHOULD NOT BE SHAKEN, therefore my heart is glad, and my tongue reioiceth; my
flesh also shall REST IN HOPE. Because thou will not leave my soul in hell,
nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Thou will SHOW ME THE WAY OF
LIFE; THE FVLNES OF JOY IS IN THY PRESENCE, and delectation at thy right hand
for ever. Three plentiful and wonderful graces of the holy Ghost are here
described in our Savior, as he hung on the cross, in the midst of his
miseries; abundance of FAITH, assurance of HOPE, persistance in JOY. The ground
of our faith is the truth of Gods word, The ground of Christ's faith.
sealed in our hearts, by the working of his spirit. The faith of Christ had a
far stronger foundation, and clearer revelation, then ours can possible have.
He was hoped for by the Patriarks, searched after by the Prophets, he was the
end of all the law, and truth of all the former testament. He was served by
Angels, acknowledged by stars, seas, winds, beasts, fishes, and trees; he
was obeyed by diseases, death and devils, the holy Ghost visiblie descended on
him when he was baptized, the father by thunder from heaven often proclaimed
him to be his well-beloved son, and commanded all men to hear him; he knew
the thoughts of men's hearts, yea the secrets of heaven; he was transfigured in
the Mount, and tasted of that heavenly glory prepared for him. The confessing
him to be the son of God, opens heaven, prevails against hell,
supporteth his Church, and obtains blessedness. This he heard with his ears,
saw with his eyes, and wrought with his hands: yea, he spoke with his mouth,
and knew in his heart that God had sanctified him, and sent him to save the
world. I ask now a mean divine; was it possible that Christ Jesus after all
this intelligence, evidence and experience both of his own person who he was,
and of his fathers love and purpose, how settled, determined, and everlasting it
was, should fear or doubt, least he should be forsaken, or want the favor and
help of god in those afflictions, which he willingly suffered for our safety?
For us to distrust or doubt Gods promise confirmed by his word, and persuaded
to our spirits by his spirit, is diffide^ce and incredulity. What heinous and
horrible sin then were it for the soul of Christ, after so clear
perspicuitie, so full certainty, so fi^^e stabilitie of Gods COUNSEL and
PROMISE, OATH and PERFORMANCE, that in him all nations of the earth should be
blessed: to have so much as a fear, doubt, or thought, that God would fail
him, or forsake him? Let me fatherly advise, and brotherly entreat you all in
the bowels of Christ Jesus, that you take good heed how you venture on any such
doctrine. Join rather with S. Peter, and steadfastly believe, that David spoke
concerning Christ, when he said: Act. 1.
I saw the Lord always before me, for he is at my right hand, that I should
not be moved. If ALVVAIES, then was there no intermission: If BEFORE HIS FACE,
then was there no obscuration: If A HIS RIGHT HAND, then God was never absent:
If he COVLD NOT BE MOVED, then could he not be forsaken.

[But Christ himself says, he was forsaken?] he does not say he was
forsaken, either in soul, or else of Gods favor and grace, as some in our
days would feign make him speak: but he says, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? And his words stand true, if any kind of dereliction be confessed.
Bernard de verb^^ I saiae sermon. 5.
Quasi quaedam ibi derelictio fuit, vbi nulla fuit in tanta necessitate
virtutis exhibitio, nulla maiestatis ostensio. There was on the cross a kind
of forsaking, in as much as there was in so great necessity, no declaring of
his power; no showing of his majesty. Diverse other kinds of forsaking may be
very well allowed and believed in the sufferings of our Savior; but that he
should be destitute of FAITH, HOPE, LOVE, or JOY, or forsaken of Gods. FAVOR,
GRACE, or SPIRIT, that is so dangerous to the office, and pernicious to the
person of Christ, that it may in no wise be admitted.

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14
Then how much we decrease faith in Christ, so much we increase sin in
Christ. VVAVERING, Doubting of Gods favor is sin in Christ
STICKING, DOVBTING are all rebatements of faith, and degrees of diffidence,
and greater sins in Christ, then in any other man, because of his infallible
REVELATION FROM GOD, unspeakable FRVITION OF GOD, and inseparable COMMUNION
WITH GOD. Matthew. 14.
Modicae fidei, quare dubitasti? O thou of LITTLE says, why did thou
DOUBT? says Christ to Peter. Then doubting is the diminishing of faith. Romans 4.
Abraham (says the Apostle) did not DVBT of the promise of God THROVGH
UNBELIEF; but was strengthened in faith, and gave the glory unto God; being
fully assured, that he which had promised, was able to perform it, Then
doubting, by the express ^^le of the holy ghost, is UNBELIEF, and a DISHONOR
UNTO GOD, as if he were not able to make good his promise. So that we must in
spite of our hearts either CLEAR CHRIST FROM DOVBTING, or CHARGE HIM WITH
UNBELIEVING, and DISHONOVRING GOD. Jacob. 1.
If any man lack wisdom (says James) let him ask of God, and it shall be
given him: but let him ask in faith, and not doubt, (or dispute with
himself;) for he that doubts, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed with the
wind; neither let that man think he shall receive anything of the Lord.
Doubtfulnesse differs from incrodulitie in this, that the incredulous as yet
believes not: the doubtful wauereth betwixt faith and infidelity; as a wave
of the sea does, that is tossed with the wind, enclining sometimes one way,
sometimes another way. But this man for his inconstancy, shall obtain nothing
at Gods hands, whose truth when we but DOUBT we DENY; and whose promise when
we DISPVTE we DISBELEEVE. The soul of Christ then may not be touched WITH
ANY DOUBT, much less distrust of Gods favor and love toward him, and to
imagine or affirm so much of Christ's person, is to draw him within the
compass of inconstancy, infidelity, and Apostasy from GOD; which I assure
my self, no Christian Divine will attempt or endure.

Fear is more intolerable in Christ then doubting.
If the humane soul of Christ must be so settled and resolved in faith, that it
might not doubt of Gods favor; much less might it be perplexed or amazed with
the fear, terror, or sense of Gods displeasure against himself, as our
surety. For to that end did it please the son of God to take our nature into
the unity of his person, that it should utterly be impossible for sin,
death, or hell to separate us from him, or him from God. Whereof because he
was infalliblie assured, he must needs be thoroughly persuaded; and in that
perfect persuasion, knowledge, and assurance of Gods everlasting purpose,
favor, and love toward him, that he should be the Savior of the world, if
doubting be not tolerable, how inexcuseable is fear and terror, as if he
were forsaken of God? which could not be, except God would break his promise,
and oath given to Abraham and David, and falsify his truth expressed with his
own voice from heaven; yea, and reuerse his eternal counsel and decree,
forspoken by the mouths of so many Prophets, confirmed with so many miracles,
and executed and accomplished so evidently in the birth of our Savior. The
soul of Christ must therefore be far from fearing or doubting, least God
would change his mind, recall his word, frustrate his promise, and violate
his oath; for these are blasphemies against God in the higest degree; we must
rather receive Saint Peter's assertion out of David, that Christ did Acts. 2.
ALVVAIES see God on HIS RIGHT HAND that he should NOT BE MOVED; And
therefore his heart was glad, and his tongue joyful: yea, we must not
only leave him faith, but so perpetual, constant, and strong, that nothing
might shake it, or abate it. For if we give unto men faith that shall
withstand, and conquer al temptations, much more must we allow the Savior of
the world faith, as far above ours, in validity, stability, and certainty,
as the rest of his virtues and graces exceed the measure of our gifts. As
therefore in wisdom and holiness, power and prudence, counsel and strength,
righteousness and faithfulness, no creature might exceed the humane soul of
Christ; so in patience and assurance, hope and love, courage and confidence no
earthly wight might come near him. For he had the John. 1.
fullness of Gods spirit, as much as the creature was capable of; we have but
a portion according to the Ephesians. 4
measure of the gift of Christ. Since then John 3.
God did not give him the spirit by measure, it is an evident absurdity, if
not impiety, to diminish his faith with doubting, his love with fear, his
hope with horror of reiection, alienation, or separation from GOD; but as
constant faith STAGGERETH NOT, perfect love FEARS NOT, assured hope TREMBLES
NOT; so the faith, hope, and love of Christ must not stumble at any of these
stones, much less make such a shipwreck of faith and hope, as if he DID
ALMOST PERSUADE HIMSELF that he was DROWNED, and PERISHED in the gulf of
perdition.

[But the vehemency of pain (some think) might for the time wrest from
Christ the remembrance of Gods eternal decree and promise, Christ was not
amazed on the Cross.
and so shake ye persuasion otherwise settled in his heart yt God had sworn he
would not fail David.] I had rather confess mine ignorance in not
understanding, then show any skill in refelling this answer. It is true that a
mighty fear may so affect a man for the time, that it shall hinder the senses
from recovering themselves, and stop the faculties from informing one the
other. But this must be some sudden object astonishing the heart; and so
terrible that it suffers us not presently to gather our wits together, and
to consider of it. But what is this to our purpose? was Christ in a trance on
the cross? and so continued eighteen hours, from his entering into the garden
after supper, to the ending of his life the next day at three of the clock
after noone? and all this while so affrighted and amazed that he could not
remember he was the son of God, and sent to redeem the world? his words and
deeds at his apprehension, at his examination before the chief Priests and
Elders at his condemnation by Pilate, at his crucifixion and expiration do
they make any proof, or give any sign of a man in a maze? when he boldly
professed himself before the high Priest Mark. 14.
TO BE THE SON OF GOD; when he told Pilate as well the cause why John. 18
HE WAS BORNE, as the place whence he had John. 19
POWER OVER HIM; when he warned the women of Jerusalem TO Luke. 23
WEEP FOR THEMSELVES and their children; when he prayed for his persecutors,
as Luke. 23.
NOT KNOVVING WHAT THEY DID, and promised PARADISE to the penitent thief that
hung by him; when he bequeathed the care of his John. 19
MOTHER to the fidelity of his DISCIPLE, and Luke. 23
COMMENDED HIS SPIRIT into the hands of his father; was his memory or
understanding taken from him by fear in any of these actions? or do we not
rather see his death answerable to his life, that is full of constancy,
clemency, fidelity and piety? If any be otherwise minded, God grant they be
not in a deep trance of selfe-liking: that will rather challenge Christ's
memory, then suspect their own fancy. Could he forget himself to be the
son of God, that so often and openly called God his FATHER? that in the
heat of his agony praying used none other style, but Matthew. 2^
O MY FATHER? that in the counsel of the Scribes and Elders would not
conceal himself to be Mark. 14
THE SON OF GOD, no not to save his life, but said Mark. 14
I AM the son of the blessed? that dying committed his spirit to his Luke 23.
FATHERS HANDS? he remembered to call for drink, that the John. 19
scripture might be fulfilled; and John. 19
knew that all things touching him were performed; and had he forgotten who he
was, or why he came into the world, even Matthew. 1^
to save that which was lost?

And in all good sort to admonish them that are learned, to look a little
better, before they resolve on so strange a conclusion in divinity; if we put
Christ in such a maze on the cross, that for fear he forgate his fathers
counsel, purpose, promise, voice, and oath; yea his own function, union and
person: what obedience or patience, what humility or charity do we leave him,
in suffering the death of the cross? what virtue find me, where remembrance
fails? or what merit is it for a man to be amazed? how hangs this with
their own position, that the sense and suffering of Gods wrath in the soul of
Christ is the chiefest and principallest part of our redemption? is it so
material for man's salvation, as they affirm, and can it not be maintained but
by taking from Christ both judgment and memory? is this that great mystery
of devotion, which true religion may not endure, except we suppose the son
of God to be for fear besides himself? have they not spun a fair thread, to
be so zealous for Christ's suffering the very pains of hell, here on earth,
and when all is done their assertion cannot be saved from impiety, but by
casting Christ into a fit of a Lethargy? for that God was in deed angry, and
offended with his own son, is odious and enormous blasphemy. That Christ so
conceived, and persuaded himself, or so dissembled, when there was no such
cause; charge the son of God not only with falsitie, but with
infidelity. To decline both these mischiefs there is no mean left, but to
say, that the very force of pain made Christ forget both his own person,
and his Fathers eternal counsel and love toward him; which is to fly one
absurdity with an other. For though by this maze they excuse Christ from
sin, as being neither advised, nor suffered by fear to be master of
himself; yet by the same they exclude him from all the graces and virtues of
his passion, on which our salvation is grounded; and leave him as without
memory, so without merit; since the faculties of the mind, overwhelmed and
astonished with fear or pain, have no full apprehension, much less just
deliberation, and least of all free election of good and evil. In which case if
we suppose our Savior to have bin during his suffering on the cross we show
our selves to be void of all understanding, in that we cleave to our own
fancies against the witness both of nature and scripture. Read who list the
manner of Christ's praying, answering and suffering, before and at his death; and
tell me wherein he showed any defect of judgment, or want of remembering? Peter
says, Christ 1. Peter. 2
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. If he
were stricken with fear besides himself, it is a bad example for us to follow.
But in deed he neither did, nor spoke any thing, no not in the mids of his
pains, but very advisedly, quietly, religiously, and obediently: such as
might well beseem the Savior of the world, humbled in our flesh, and chastised
for our sins, but no way partner of our impatient and sinful affections.

Christ wauered not in his prayers in ye garden
[He wauered (some think) in his prayers; and corrected himself as ouershot,
in that he asked at his fathers hands:] such holdfast they take of his words,
that feign would have his wits amazed with their imagined fear and horror
of hell fire. But by their patience, their expositions must not look to be
canonical in the church of God. If they say any thing well, we take it with
their praise; if otherwise as men they miss their mark, we refuse it with
their leaves. 1 Galat. 5
God has called us unto liberty, 1. Corinthians. 7
not to be servants of men; and to serve erroneous constructions, is worse
than to bear tyrannous exactions. Was Christ unadvised in his prayers in the
garden? and did he revoke that which suddenly slipped from him? All prayer
without faith is sin in Gods sight. What then was Christ's prayer, if it were
directly bent against the determined purpose, and revealed will of God, but
evident sin? His thrice repeating Matthew. 26. verse 44.
the self same words with good distance of time between, and advised and
vehement zeal, what was it, if it still needed to be revoked and amended, but
a voluntary spurning at the steadfast decree and eternal counsel of God for
man's redemption? But god forbid, we should so conceive of our savior, as if
there were in his deeds, words or thoughts the least inclination to contradict
his fathers resolution. He was not only patient without refusing, but obedient
without misliking his fathers will. Esaias says of him. Esaias. 53^
He was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth. He was
brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a Lamb is dumb before his
shearer, so opened he not his mouth. Does the holy ghost give him this
testimony, that he mildly and silentlie bare all the oppressions and
afflictions, that were laid on him, and shall we dare avouch, that he
vehemently and often struggled, and striued in his prayers against the known
will of his Father; and sought by all means to decline the work for which he
came into the world? [His flesh (they will say,) feared death, though his
spirit submitted it self to the will of his heavenly Father.] As if his flesh
did pray, and not his spirit? if then his prayers were passionate and
unadvised, his spirit cannot be excused from consenting and yielding thereto.
And where do we learn that Christ's flesh refused the law of his mind, and
so prevailed against the spirit, that it wrested from him inconsiderate and
disobedient thoughts, and words? or when we thus say, do we not plainly
bring the son of GOD within the communion of our sinful corruption?

[But his spirit was amazed with fear, and so he knew not what he prayed.
Christ prayed often and earnestly but with full assurance to be heard.
] We take too much upon us to put Christ besides himself, when it pleases us.
His prayers in the garden were zealous, but religious; vehement, but reverent;
mourneful, but faithful. He offered up Hebre 5.
strong cries and tears, but HE WAS HEARD in that he asked; and so long as
God performed, what Christ desired, it is more then presumption to challenge
his prayers as inconstant and wavering. For my part though I could not conceive
the sense of Christ's prayer in the garden, yet do I fully resolve he was most
assured in faith, his prayer should take effect. His often repeating ye same
words, notes how great a thing he requested at his fathers hands, which yet
he obtained, though it were never so great. That which you call a reuocation, I
take to be a limitation, whereby Christ declared, he never meant to ask or have
any thing against his fathers liking; nor in any sort to prefer his own choice
or ease, before his fathers will. If this be a trance, then faith and obedience
are no fruits of Gods spirit, but fits of a distempered humor, and in the end
we shall conclude godliness to be madness. For greater submissio^ or more
devotion, then Christ uttered in that agony, can no man show. If therefore we
condemn this as a maze in Christ, when shall zealous and devout persons be in
their wits?

[But the scripture says, he was Mark. 14. verse: 33. Christ might at the
first be abashed with Gods majesty, or man's misery; but he recovered himself
before he entered into his prayers.
AFRIGHTED, and ASTONISHED.] The lively beholding of Gods majesty, or ma^s
misery might both afright and astonish his humane nature on the sudden, but
presently, recollecting himself, he fell to vehement and intentive prayer, and
therein continued almost an hour, not warbling in his words, nor wavering in
his petitions or affections; but perseuering in the same mind, and in the same
matter, till he obtained his desire. Now to be abashed at Gods presence,
declared his piety: and to be stricken at the heart with the feeling of
vengeance provided for us, commended his charity. Lay these two, devotion to
God, and compassion toward men, as the grounds and causes of his Agony, and
you shall easily clear this foul heap of absurdities and impieties, that now
pursues the contrary position. It is humility for man's infirmity to shake
and tremble at the appearance of Gods glory. It is mercy, to stand defixed
and even astonished with the sense and grief of man's final judgment and
eternal punishment. From this fountain, that is from the meditation of the
divine Majesty, and commiseration of humane misery, if we derive the HEAVINES
of heart, FEAR and ASTONISHMENT, which Christ suffered or showed in his agony,
we can do him no wrong; because the more violent, the more eminent signs they
were of submission to God, and compassion on man: his faith and love not being
oppressed with stupiditie, How and why Christ might be ravished.
but inflamed with such vehemency, that the weakness of man's flesh not able
to follow the readiness of his spirit, ravished with a wonderful feruencie
to give himself to save the world, might for the time fail in the exterior
actions, and offices of the body. But we must beware that we continue not this
astonishment, when he came to his prayers. For in prayer the heart must be, not
one lie prepared and advised; but sincerely affected and wholly devoted to
ask nothing, but that which tends to Gods glory, and agrees with Gods
will. He that otherwise asks any thing at Gods hands, prays not, but
presumptuouslie tempts God, and seeks to make the wisdom and power of God
serviceable to his corrupt appetites. Mat. 20.
You know not what you ask; said Christ to the sons of Zebedee, when he
refused their petition, and reproved their folly. How shall we believe, we
shall receive, if we ask we know not what? Faith must be rightly direc^ed,
and thoroughly persuaded, before it can obtain. Christ's prayers then in the
garden were neither abrupt without sense, nor wavering without faith, that they
needed be excused or corrected; but his devotion was instant, and persuasion
constant that he should prevail; and therefore he ceased not to ask the
self same thing thrice, till he was heard, and strengthened by an Angel from
heaven.

[He asked that, they will say, which was not granted.] I am resolutelie of
another mind. Christ's prayer could not be rejected.
My reasons are, first the Apostle says. Heb. 5.
HE WAS HEARD offering up strong cries and tears. Secondly, Christ himself
says; John 11.
Father I thank thee, because thou have heard me. I know THOU HEAR ME
ALVVAYES. And how could it be otherwise? For if he prayed according to the
will of God, he must needs be heard; and against the will of God he neither
did, nor would pray. For that were sin in him, that was not ignorant of
Gods will, both determined and revealed. And God forbid, we should be so
wicked, as to say or think, that Christ would thrice in most earnest prayer,
impugn his fathers will so well known, and so often foretold by his own
mouth. I believe rather his own report of himself; for he could not lie.
John. 8.
I do nothing (said he) of my self, but as my father has taught me, so
speak I these things. For he that sent me is with me: the Father has not
left me alone, because I DO ALVVAYES the things, THAT PLEASE HIM. Though I
bear record of my self, my record is true; FOR I KNOW WHENCE I CAME, AND
VVHITHER I GO. As he could not be ignorant, so could he not be
forgetful of his Fathers counsel and decree. The glory of God might appall
him at the entrance into his prayers: but his constant continuing one and the
same request to his Father three several turns, with intermission of time,
and admonition to his Disciples to watch and pray, proves he had not
forgotten himself, that still persisted in his purpose; nor yet striued
against his Fathers will, in that his prayer was accepted, and assured from
heaven.

[Did then the cup pass from him; which was the sum of his prayer?] No doubt
it did in that sense which he desired. The cup mingled by Gods just judgment
for the sin of man, The cup did pass from Christ in that sense in which he
prayed it might.
did pass both from him, and us, by force of his prayer; not that he did not
taste of it, but in that yielding himself to the temporal and corporal
chasticement thereof, he quenched the spiritual and eternal vengeance, that
was consequent after death: the abolishing whereof was a work worthy of the
son of God; and a memorable effect of that earnest and instant prayer, which
our Savior made in the Garden, thereby shutting up hell, and opening heaven to
all his members. And for that cause the Prophet Esaias joins his patient
suffering and vehement praying, as needful grounds of our redemption; he
bare the sin of many, and Esaias. 5^*
PRAYED for the TRESPASSERS: and the Apostle reckons Christ's Hebr. 5.
PRAYERS OFFERED WITH TEARS, and his pains Hebr. 5.
suffered through obedience as principal parts of his Priesthood, and
effectual sacrifices for the sins of the people.

As praying in the garden Christ must be free from forgetting either his
fathers will or love; Christ on the cross must be assured his sacrifice should
be accepted.
so suffering on the cross he must have not only patience and obedience, but
intelligence and assurance that the bloody sacrifice which he offered, should
be accepted as the propitiation for our sins, and himself exalted from the
shame and pain of the cross to everlasting honor, joy, and glory. He did
not offer himself on the altar of the cross, supposing or presuming it might
please God thereby to be favorable unto man; but as he came into the world
anointed and sent of purpose Matt. 1.
to save his people from their sins, so did he Phil. 2.
humble himself to the death of the Cross, being thereto appointed by his
heavenly father; and therefore most assured that God was immutablie determined
to accept his sacrifice for the sin of the world, and Colos. 1.
by the blood of his cross to set at peace things both in heaven and in
earth: and to reconcile us that were strangers and enemies in evil works,
through death in the body of his flesh, to make us holy and without fault in
the sight of God. This Saint Paul says was Gods Colos. 1. verse. 19. and 20
GOOD PLEASVRE, to which Christ was Phil. 2. ver. 8.
OBEDIENT, and therefore neither ignorant of it, nor doubtful in it; but
assuredly resolved with fullness of faith and hope, that he which had decreed
it, could not be changed; and that God which had sent him, would not deceive
him. And for that cause the Apostle makes the death of Christ to be a Ephe. 5.
SACRIFICE OF A SVVEET SMELLING SAVOVR UNTO GOD; and says, that Heb. 12.
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, FOR THE JOY WHICH WAS SET
BEFORE HIM, endured the cross, and despised the shame (thereof) and is placed
on the right hand of the throne of God. So that howsoever late writers have
found out the terror of Gods wrath, and horror of eternal death in the soul
of Christ suffering; the Apostle teaches us, that Christ hanging in the shame
and pain of the cross, had not only peace and favor with god, as offering
a sweet smelling sacrifice, but also joy before his eyes of everlasting glory
at the right hand of ye throne of God. And with him agree both Peter and David,
when they bare witness of Christ, that his HEART WAS GLAD, and his TONGVE
IOIFVL, and that even Acts. 2. Psalm. 16.
HIS FLESH should REST IN HOPE, notwithstanding the anguish of death, force of
the grave, and fury of hell. For God would neither forsake his soul in hell,
nor suffer his flesh to see corruption.

Dare any man doubt of this doctrine, which is so clearelie and fully
delivered us in the Scriptures? We must suffer as Christ did; which I hope is
not the pains of hell.
Or make we a pastime of it, in favor of our fancies to ouerturne the very
principles of truth? 1. Pet. 2.
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. For if Romans 8.
we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him. Must we suffer the
pains of the damned, before we may hope to be partakers of his glory? The
gain which we have in Christ, when we have refused all things as vile for
his sake, is to know the fellowshippe of his afflictions, Phil. 3.
and to be conformed unto his death; if by any means we may attain to the
resurrection of the dead. Shall the communion of Christ's sufferings bring us
to the true torments of hell, and must we persuade our selves that we are
forsaken of God, before we can be conformed to his death? 1 Peter. 4*
Rejoice (says Peter,) when ye do communicate with Christ's sufferings. Must
we then REJOICE in the horror of hell, and be glad of Gods displeasure toward
us? I think not. How far fuller of comfort is the Apostles doctrine, where
he says; 2. Cor. 1.
As the sufferinges of Christ abound in us; so our consolation abounds
through Christ. Christ's affliction on ye cross^ was full of consolation.
And our hope is steadfast concerning you, that as you are partakers of the
sufferinges, so shall you be of the comforts. What comfort these men can find
in the pains of the damned, I know not; they else where seem to say, that
all fears and griefs, all terrors and torm^nts are trifles unto the sense and
feeling of Gods displeasure and just indignation; but the holy Ghost I am sure
proposes to us the Cross of Christ as the way to perfection, that never
wants consolation. For therein though our 2. Cor. 4.
outward man perish, yet the inward man is daily renewed; and when our bodies
die to sin, as did Christ's, our souls live to God, as did his. Excellently
does the Apostle describe the comfort of Christ's Cross in all the faithful,
when he says. Ibidem.
We are afflicted on every side, but not ouerpressed; wanting, but not
utterly destitute; persecuted, but not forsaken; falling, but not perishing;
always bearing about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life
of Jesus might be manifest in our bodies. For we, whiles we live, are still
delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life of Jesus might be manifest
in our mortal flesh. Christ then in the mortification of his body on the
Cross, was neither OVER^RESSED, FORSAKEN, nor PERISHING; but relieved and
supported inwardly by the power of gods spirit, in which he reioiced, whiles
his flesh endured bitter and sharp torments. And this rule, 2. Cor. 12.
When I am weak, then am I strong, was true in Christ, and after his example
shall be in all his members. For Gods Ibidem.
power is perfited in infirmity. Ibidem.
Very gladly therefore must all the godly rejoice and take pleasure in their
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in them. How can this be called
Christ's power, if he wanted it in his infirmities and afflictions? And if we
have it from him, why presume we to take it from him in the time of his
sufferinges? Shall the scholar be above his master? or the servant more
perfect then his Lord? Yea, then God manifested in the flesh? But I hope men
learned will take good heed how they diminish the comfort of Christ's cross;
we must Heb. 12.
look to Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. If he were amazed,
perplexed, and forsaken in his afflictions, who shall raise and comfort us in
our extremities? He that himself was astonished and overwhelmed, with his
sufferings on the cross? It may then be said unto him, Luke 4.
Physician heal thy self. Shall he comfort us, that could NOT COMFORT
himself? Can we REJOICE AND TAKE PLEASVRE in following his steps, when he
sanke under the burden, and suffered both his faith and hope for the time to
fail? But far be from us these unsavory thoughts, and unseemly speeches.
Heb. 2.
It was fit that he from whom, and by whom are all things, should CONSVMMATE
BY AFFLICTIONS THE PRINCE OF OUR SALVATION, that should bring many sons unto
glory; the self same way that he went before them. Which cannot be by
doubting and distrusting the favor and help of god, much less by suffering and
enduring the pains of the damned; but by desiring through love, and reioicing
under hope to take up Christ's cross and follow him; 2. Cor. 12.
delighting in reproaches, necessities, persecutions and anguish for Christ's
sake, that 1. Pet. 4.
when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice with fullness of
everlasting joy.

Do we then exempt the Lord Christ from all sense of his fathers wrath against
our sins; whiles we defend in him peace and joy of the holy ghost, as he hung
on the cross? All miseries are the effect^ of gods wrath.
There is a feeling of gods wrath which may stand with the pacification and
consolation of the inward man; and there is a sense of Gods wrath which
overthrows both, and breeds a fearful apprehension of Gods displeasure
toward us; in which is neither peace nor comfort. All the miseries of man's
life, whatsoever they be, came first from the force of gods wrath revenging
sin; and therefore not only death and damnation, but al kinds of troubles,
pains and griefs, in our states, bodies and minds, which shorten or sower this
present life, are degrees of gods wrath, and chasticements of our transgression
and corruption. When the plague was kindled amongst the people for murmuring
against Moses and Aaron, Moses said to Aaron, Number. 16.
take ye censer and put fire and incense therein, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atoneme^t for the^: for there IS WRATH GONE OVT FROM
THE LORD; the plague is begun. When the prophet Iehu reproved Iehosaphat for
aiding Achab the king of Israel; he said 2. Chro. 13
would thou help the wicked? and love them that hate the lord? even for this
cause WAS THE WRATH OF THE LORD UPON THEE. The prophet Esaias comforting the
church, says Esaias. 51
Awake, awake and stand up o Jerusalem, which have drunk at the hand of the
Lord, THE CVP OF HIS WRATH. By the prophet Micheas the Church humbles her
self under the hand of God in these words. Mich. 7.
I will BEAR THE WRATH of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until
he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me. Every where the like is used
in the scriptures. Esaias. 47.
I WAS WROTH with my people, and gave them into thine hand, (says God to
Babylon) and thou did show them no mercy, but did lay a very heavy yoke
upon the ancient. So Jeremy complains to God. Thou have Lament. 5.
utterly rejected us, thou art EXCEEDINGLY ANGRY WITH US. These, and many such
places more, mention the wrath of God, which the saints and servants of god
tasted and felt for their sins; but they do not import that Gods eternal
favor and love toward his children in heavenly things, was vanished or
changed. The 2. Tim. 2.
foundation of God stands sure; yea the Romans 11.
gifts and calling of God are without repentance. And therefore it is utterly
impossible, that Gods election should alter, or that he should not John. 13.
love his own unto the end; but ^ Peter. 4.
judgment beginning at the house of God, 1. Cor. 11.
we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. And albeit yt bitterness of affliction some time bite so near, that the
conscience of our sins accusing us as unworthy to be the sons of God;
fear calls Gods favor in question for the time; yet that temptation rises
from the guiltines of our hearts, and weakness of our faith, which gives way
to the devil: otherwise as we ought to been god will be Heb. 8.
merciful to our iniquities, and remember our sins no more, for his covenant
made with us in the blood of his son; so should we be fallie persuaded, that
when we endure chastening, be it never so sharp, God Heb. 12.
offers himself unto us, as unto sons; for what son is it, whom the
father chasteneth not? So that if we be without correction, whereof all are
partakers, we are bastards and not sons, since God chasteneth us for our
profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

This correction and chastisement of God, because it Heb. 12.
seems grievous for the present, and not joyous, is called in the scriptures
the rod and wrath of God; not that Gods love cease when he corrects his
children; ( for Heb. 13.
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son, that he
receives;) But as the blessings which he abundantly bestows on us, do
manifest his gracious and undeserved mercy; so the plagues, with which he
visits our sins, do witness his righteous and provoked judgment. And in
that sense must we reckon them to be the signs and effects of Gods wrath. For
as he is justly offended with our iniquities because they resist his will Romans
2.
dishonor his name, and Ephe 4.
grieve his holy spirit, by who^ we are sealed unto the day of redemption; so
when he chasteneth our transgressions, the scourge which we feel is truly
said to be the wrath of God; not that God is touched with any pe^turbation or
alteration in himself, but his justice leads him to inflict that punishment
on us, as well to bring us to hate that we have done, by godly sorrow; Gods
wrath toward his ^ mixed with mercy and justice.
as to make us more wary how we attempt the like, which is religious fear
restraining us from often and easy offending the majesty and sanctity of God.
But this vengeance of our sins because it is temporal, when it should
justly be eternal; and afflicts the body, where it might worthily kill
the soul; it is rather the chastisement of a father, then the rigor of a
Judge. And yet the scriptures call it wrath, because God never proceeds to
punish, but when he is provoked and despised, in such sort, that were it not
for smart of correction, we would fall to the rage of open rebellion.

Wherefore the displeasure of God against our sins was very great, The wrath
of God against our sins was very great in the cross of Christ.
that pursued our suertie, being innocent and obedient, and even his own and
only son, with all manner of corporal and temporal scourges unto death,
before it could be pacified; but that Gods favor toward his son was
altered or diminished, or that Christ in fear and terror apprehended any such
change in his father, or so much as doubted the constant and eternal counsel,
and decree of God, to make him the Savior of the world, and by the blood of
his cross to make peace in heaven and earth; these are so dangerous doctrines,
that I think no learned divine will undertake them. Hebre. 5
Though he were the son, yet learned he obedience, by that which he suffered,
says the Apostle. Now obedience could not breed diffidence but confidence; and
was the virtue, that so highly pleased God in Christ, that he was Ibidem.
made the author of eternal salvation unto all that OBEY HIM. A double sense
then of Gods wrath Christ Jesus had. The first that pursued his body unto
death on the tree, where 1. Peter. 2.
he bare our sins; that is the Esaias. 53.
chastisement of our peace, the STRIPES of our iniquities, and VVOVNDES of our
transgressions. The next was the serious contemplation of that eternal and
intolerable vengeance; which the justice of God had in store for us, by reason
of our manifold sins; whose danger and destruction touched him as near,
through the tenderness of his love and piety, as if it had been imminent
over his own head. And therefore even sick with sorrow for us, and
trembling at the terror of Gods wrath prepared to revenge our unrighteousness,
he never left SVVEATING, WEEPING and CRYING to God for us, that his stripes
might heal us, his anguish excuse us, his death quicken us, and his person
sustain and suffer for us, whatsoever the justice of God would lay on him,
till he was heard, and allowed of God to offer the sacrifice, that should
propitiate the sins of the world. In these pains and fears, whiles he
felt the arrows of God sticking in his flesh, and saw the terror of eternal
death ready to swallow up all his members, we may grant, that the CONSOLATION
and JOY, which the humane soul of Christ before had of his Fathers continual
presence and assistance, was for the time somewhat diminished; his heart being
oppressed with sorrow, his body afflicted with sharp and bitter pain, his
soul besieged with fear and care for us, that neither the dreadful wrath of
God overwhelmed us, nor the deceitefull fraud of Satan undermined us: but by
no means we may admit in Christ either fear or doubt of his own salvation;
nor forgetfulness of his person or function; but the harder the work he
undertook, the stronger his faith, that performed it; the more terrible our
danger, the more steadfast his love, that shrunk not from us in so great
extremity.

[Might not yet the soul of Christ in this constant and full assurance of Gods
love toward him, and mercy toward us, feel the torments of hell for the
time without any distrusting or doubting of his salvation, or our redemption?]
The essential torments of hell, are the absolute loss of Gods kingdom,
without recovery, and exquisite sense of hell fire everlastingly without
release. Neither of these without horrible blasphemy can be imagined in the
soul of Christ: the ^est that are consequents to these, as desperation,
murmuration, darkness, horror and such other impressions are like to these;
and could no more have place in Christ's person, then the antecedentes might.
And since it is no where witnessed in the Scriptures, nor any way proved,
that Christ suffered the pains of hell; why strive we to establish a mere
conceit of men, never written or spoken of, before our age? bear we so small
regard to the Church of Christ, and to all the learned fathers and teachers in
the same, It should somewhat move us, yt hell pains were never added to Christ's
cross for 1300 years since the Apostles time.
that for thirteen hundred years no man ever knew or heard the right way,
and true mean of our redemption and reconciliation to God, till the pains of
hell were lately devised? Abuses and errors did by little and little creep
into the church by the wiliness of Satan, and wilfulness of men; but that the
gates of hell should so much prevail against it, as from the Apostles time to
this present age, no christian should ever truly teach or rightly believe how
we are saved by the cross of Christ, is to me so strange, that I will be ten
times advised, before I will once admit it. Let us give thanks to God, for
dispelling the mist of darkness and ignorance, that ouerspred the world under
Antichrist: but let us never glory that we first invented a new faith,
neither testified in the scriptures, nor mentioned in any ancient writers, nor
ever heard of amongst christians before our time. It is no corn but cockle
that springs so late in the Lords field; it is no says, but fancy that
never before was in y^ foundation of Christ's church. The simplicity therefore
of the scriptures continually PRESSING the DEATH and BLOOD of Christ, as the
TRVE CAUSES of our salvation and redemption; and the consonancy of all
antiquity according therewith, do so challenge my faith, and establish my heart,
that I will see this new devise of hell pains suffered in the soul of Christ,
better warranted, before I wish it to be believed.

And as for the doctrine of the church of England, The doctrine here delivered
is authorized by the laws of this realm.
which some men would feign infect with this late fancy, give me leave, men
and brethren to admonish you shortly but truly; that who so will read the
sermon of the Number 3.
salvation of al mankind, in the first volume of Homilies; and likewise the
two Homilies, concerning the death and Number 13.
passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, contained in the second tome of Homilies;
shall find that the doctrine which I have delivered you, has the public
approbation of Prince and Parliament, the consent and agreement of all the
Bishops, and the subscription of all the clergy of this kingdom, to be
taught as truth in all the churches of this realm, and so has had, as well in
the days of king Edward the sixth, as all the time of her majesty's most
happy reign, whatsoever some forward nouices have told you to the contrary.
And thus much let me speak in the Honor of her majesty, and this realm; I
see no cause, why the doctrine of the church of England so plainly warranted
by the Scriptures, so fully confessed by all the Fathers, so long continued in
Christ's church without contradiction, so sufficiently authorized, so generally
acknowledged, should be controlled or corrected, either by the dangerous
devises of some late writers, or by the unsettled humors of some late teachers.
Hold therefore in Gods name close to the rules of the holy ghost, close to the
words of the christian and catholic Fathers, close to the laws of this
realm: they all concur and conioine together, howsoever some giddie spirits
have lately buzzed in your ears that I impugned the doctrine of the church of
England.

I Have delivered you four effects of Christ's cross; the merit of his
suffering which was infinite; The fi^t effect of Christ's cross; which is the
glory of his resurrection.
the manner of his offering, which was bloody; the power of his death, which
was mighty; the comfort of his cross, which was and is necessary for us all;
there remains the glory of his resurrection, which was heavenly, of which I
did not purpose to speak, when I first entered this matter; but the ignorance
of some, imagining I denied the Article of the Creed, HE DESCENDED INTO HELL
(for descent but on the cross they admit none) and the zeal of others
importuning me to know what they might safely believe touching that article,
has made me to change my mind; and in this last part to show, that I neither
frustrate the faith, nor alter the Creed by any thing that I affirm, or
refuse. Where to let you see the multiplicitie of men's wits and conceits;
there are four several opinions that take hold every one of this Article of
our Creed, and challenge the true meaning thereof as their peculiar and
undoubted right. Four opinion touching the article of the Creed he descended
into hell.
The FIRST applies it to the soul of Christ suffering on the cross; the
SECOND to the body of Christ buried; the THIRD to the state of Christ's soul
severed by death from the body; the LAST to the conquest and triumph which the
humane soul of Christ had over hell by the glory of his resurrection, as his
body had over death. Which of these has the best right, and fittest sense to
be an article of our creed, will appear by comparison in the end and vpshot of
all; in the mean while, I will shortly sift them, that you may see the
substance of them, and so be able the better to judge of them.

The first is the very same, which I have already handled, and refused as not
consonant to the christian faith; but rather repugnant to the dignity,
certainty, sanctity of Christ's person, conjunction, and communion with God. The
scriptures avouch, that Christ's SOVLE was IN HELL, but not whiles he lived here
on earth: it was a consequent to his death, and no part of his suffering on the
cross, as I showed before. And since the times do so much vary, there can be
no truth in taking the one for the other. In this life God sometimes suffers
the sorrows and fears of hell to besiege his servants, and 1. Samuel. 2
brings them even unto hell; but his saints descend not into hell: fear may
humble them, that would otherwise presume of themselves, The ^eare of hell may
fall on us, but not on Christ.
or make trial how fast they stand on that foundation against the which the
gates of hell shall not prevail: but this conflict of conscience must resolve
on the assurance of Gods favor, except they yield themselves unto to
despair. In Christ as there was no use, so was there no place for any such
temptation. There was in him no danger of pride to exalt him; and therefore no
need of fear to depresse him: no slacknesse or coldness could take hold of
him; and so no terror requisite to awake him from sleep, or inflame his zeal:
generally there was in him no corruption of nature, no infection of sin, no
wavering of faith, no want of grace, no doubt of Gods favor; and so those
dreadful thoughts and fears of hell, which amaze other, could not arise
within his heart; but all the pains and griefs, which the son of God felt
in his precious body, or righteous soul, as they were VOLVNTARY for our
example, and SATISFATORIE for our sin; and not MEDICINABLE for any
infirmity of his, nor PROFITABLE to bring him to perfection of holiness, as
they are in us: so were they proportioned to his person, that was most assured
of Gods everlasting love; and to his gifts, that could endure no inward
decrease; and therefore he must in this point differ from all the saints of
God, that ever were or ever shall be on earth. For they may be tossed with the
waves of temptation, rising from the remembrance of sin, and remorse of
conscience; but our Savior, as he was free from all touch of sin, so was he
from all fear of heart, that he should or might be rejected from Gods
favor, or adjudged to everlasting death. Smart, pain and grief of body or
mind, be it never so great, will commend his obedience and patience; but the
SENSE of damnation or separation from God, or the FEAR or DOUBT thereof in
Christ, as they quench faith, and abolish grace, so they dissolve the union and
communion of both his natures; or else breed a false persuasion, and sinful
temptation in the soul of Christ. In us that have infinitely provoked the
justice of God, it is the true beholding what we have deser^ed, if God be not
pleased for Christ's sake to pardon and forgive us; In Christ, that was
perfectly righteous, and personally joined with God, there could be no
apprehension of hell pains as due unto him, or determined for him, without
renouncing his innocence, and leaving the unity of his person; and
consequently he must find or fear, that God would be inconstant, and unjust;
which are more then heinous impieties. For Christ could not FEAR or DOUBT his
own salvation, but he must fear or doubt, that either his humane nature
should be separated from his divine, or his divine together with his humane
be cast into hell fire; from which the Lord bless the tongues and thoughts of
al christian men. As for Christ's not remembering in a maze, that he was the son
of God, and savior of the world; is a seely shift to shun these
inconueniencies; I had rather simply deny, then any way believe this kind of
descending into hell.

Do I charge then any man with upholding these impieties? God forbid. I see by
their own words they purpose and profess by all means to decline them, and no
doubt detest them; but I confess my dulnes, that see not how to avoid the
one, if I avouch the other. How Christ in some sense may be said to have
suffered the pains of hell on ye cros^e.
If we take hell pains METAPHORICALLY for great and intolerable pains; in
which sense the word may be used; then it is no danger to say, Christ
suffered on the cross the pains of hell: because there can be no doubt,
but HIS PAINS were exceeding GREAT, and more SHARP, then we can conceive
or utter. But this is not the meaning of the Creed in that Article he
descended into Hell; by reason there are words before inferring the pains,
which he SVFFERED, when he was CRVCIFIED. If we attribute the sense of Gods
wrath, and feeling of hell pains unto Christ by way of COGNITION and
COMPASSION toward us, for so much as the soul has her sight, and pity has
her inward feeling of other men's miseries, as if they were our own; it is no
wrong to the person or function of our Savior for us to confess, that he
considered and grieved to see the burden of Gods everlasting wrath due to our
sins, none otherwise then if himself had been subject thereto: so long as
we leave him certainty and security of his own salvation and our redemption;
that his bowels of mercy may be moved and affected for our danger, and not
for his own. It is far more religious to press the soul of Christ with
violent panges of grief and sorrow for our inquities and miseries; then to
touch him with any fear or doubt of his own innocence or safety. Charity
is a fitter Agony for the son of God in our flesh, then either timiditie or
stupiditie; and yet I do not think this to be the sense of the Creed, when it
says he descended into hell; for that it were somewhat strange to express
the virtues of Christ's suffering, by his descending into hell.

Papists were the first brochers of this opinion, that Christ suffered hell
pains on the cross.
And least the insolent sect of Jesuits should take such pleasure as they do,
in misconstruing other men's words, and blazing them unto the world as
erroneous and impious; let them remember, that some of their own side, and
those not of the meanest both for learning and religion amongst them, have not
only waded as far as any other new writers in this position; but for
ought that I read, have gone farther; howsoever they will defend it or excuse
it. Nicholaus Cusanus a Cardinal of their church, and a great aduiser of the
council of Basil, 50. years before Luther appeared, first broched this
assertion. Nicholaus de Cusa Excitationum lib 10. ex sermon: qui per spiritum
sanctum semetipsu^ obtul^s.
Passio Christi, (qua mayor nulla potest esse) fuit vt damnatorum, qui magic
damnari nequeunt, scilicet VSQVE AD POENAM INFERNALEM. The suffering of Christ,
(then the which there can be no greater,) was as of the damned, which cannot
be more condemned, EVEN UNTO THE PAINS OF HELL. And again. Ibidem.
Illam poena^ sensus CONFORMEM DAMNATIS IN INFERNO, pati voluit in gloriam dei
patris sui. Tha^ pain of feeling agreeable to the damned in hell, Christ would
suffer for the glory of God his father. Augustinus Iustinianus, that set out
the Psalter in Hebrew with six translations and observations, the same year,
that Luther began to write; in his scholies upon the 30 Psalm, mentions
this opinion of Cusanus, and says, August. Iustinianus in scholiis Octapli^
Psalm. 30.
Se huius ^rudit issimi viri, and in omni scientia eminent issimi opinionem,
nec amplecti, nec aspernari; He neither embraces nor rejects the opinion of
that most learned man and excelling in all kind of knowledge. Johannes Ferus a
Franciscane and preacher at Mogunce, about the same time that Calvin wrote,
goes further then any other writer, that I have read. Commenting upon these
words of Christ, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, he says, Ferus.
lib. 4. in Mat. cap. 27. in illa verba^ Deus meus, deuenitus
Exuit Christus hac hora DEVM, non abijciendo, sed non SENYIENDO: seposuit
patrem vt hominem ageret. Sic and Deus pater, nunc non patrem, sed TYRANNVM
AGIT, quamuis interim amicissimo in Christum sit animo. Illa Christi derelictio
panor est conscientiae nostrae ob admissa peccata, quae iudicium dei and iram
aeternam experitur: and sic afficitur, quasi in perpetuum derelicta and reiecta
a facie Dei esset. That very hour Christ put off GOD, not casting him away,
but not FEELING him; he laid aside his father, that he might show himself to
be a man. So also God the father now takes unto him the PERSON not of a
father, but OF A TYRANT; though in heart he were most loving unto Christ. That
forsaking of Christ is the fear of our conscience for sin committed, which
feels the judgment and eternal wrath of God; and is so affected, as if it
were forsaken and rejected from the face of God for ever. And as if this were
not enough to say, that Christ put off his divine nature, as having no feeling
of it, and God the father played the PART OF A TYRANT; he goes on and adds.
Ibidem.
Non solum supplicium a nobis meritum, verum etiam DESPERATIONEM NOSTRAM in se
transtulit. Itaque Christus vt peccatores liberaret constituit seipsum in locum
omnium peccatorum, non quidem furans, adulterans, occidens, etc: sed
stipendium, poenam and meritum peccatorum, quae sunt frigus, calor, esuries,
sitis, timor, tremor, horror mortis, horror inferni, DESPERATIO, mors, INFERNVS
IPSE) in se transferens, vt samem fame, timorem timore, horrorem ^orrore,
DESPERATIONEM DESPERATIONE, mortem morte, INFERNVM INFERNO, breuiter SATANAM
SATANA, vinceret. Christ did transfer to himself not only the punishment
which we had deserved, but even OUR DESPERATION. And therefore Christ, that
he might deliver sinners, set himself in the place of all sinners, not by
stealing, adultering, killing, but by transferring unto himself, the wages,
punishment, and desert of sinners, which are heat and cold, hunger and
thirst, fear and trembling, horror of death, HORROR OF HELL DESPERATION,
death, HELL IT SELF: that he might overcome hunger with hunger, fear with
fear, horror with horror, DESPERATION WITH DESPERATION, death with death,
HELL WITH HELL, and lastly, SATAN WITH SATAN. Truly I know no man that so
plainly avouches, Christ admitted and received unto himself DESPERATION, as
this Friar does. For where other men warily decline to say that CHRIST
DESPAIRED, this Franciscane boldly says, Christ transferred unto himself
DESPERATION, HELL, yea, THE DEVIL and all, and was so affected for the time,
as if he had FELT THE ETERNAL WRATH OF GOD, and were REJECTED FOR EVER. Could
those quarrellers have gotten the like advantage against any of our writers,
they would have filled the world with their tragical exclamations of HERESY,
BLASPHEMY, TVRCISME, PAGANISM, and I know not what; and therefore let them
go and wash their own faces from these spots, before they declaime so
violently against our deformities.

And albeit I like not these speeches either in theirs or ours, yet I clear
them both from any purpose of wilful blasphemy. Charity supposes the best
They might be deceived in the sequel of their assertion, but sure they were
never so unadvised, as to fasten either DESPERATION or DAMNATION on the soul
of Christ. Perhaps they thought he was besieged and assaulted with these
temptations, and that the humane nature of Christ, being left to it self,
could not presently and easily stand clear from the vengeance due to our
sins, but with some conflict and fear, wrestled from under the weight of our
iniquities, and in this fight did sweat blood, and spoke as if he were
forsaken: yea Ferus seems to mean that Christ did voluntarily take the
burden of desperation and damnation from us, and laid it on himself; against
whom it could not prevail; that by transferring those dangers from our persons
to his, and suffering them for the time, he might break them, and dissolve
them for ever.

Natural infirmities, Sinful infirmities are more heinous in Christ then in us.
which are outrageous in us by reason of our corruption, Christ might suffer to
arise within him, and there temper them, as Cyrill and other ancient fathers do
teach; but sinful extremities, as desperation, confusion, reiection,
damnation, Christ must conquer by repelling, not by suffering: least the
fellowship of our sins be more heinous in him, then in us. For as his faith,
hope and love must by many degrees exceed ours in perfection; so the quenching
or slaking of these graces in him, is greater sin then in us. Doubt and
distrust is far more impious in Angels, by reason of their excellent
knowledge and strength, then in men; and most impious in the soul of Christ,
who by his personal union with God, derived clearer intelligence in knowing
Gods will, and greater assurance to persist therein, then either man or Angel.
For the very Angels have but the condition of their creation, from which some
fell; and confirmation of grace, in which the rest stand: but no creature ever
had so fast conjunction, and full communion with the godhead, as the soul of
Christ. And therefore DVBITATION, DESPERATION, TREPIDATION in his soul are
more heinous sins, then in any other creature; for so much as they believe not
ye truth, trust not the promise, rest not secured in the VOICE and OATH of God,
which all are immutable and impossible to be false; and fear least Gods
goodness and love will fail; and in fine do deprive him of his divine
nature, since without verity, bonitie, and constancy, there can be no God. It
then Christ's soul could not be infected with sin, nor have any society
with evil, no not for an instant; these doubts and fears of Gods favor, and
his salvation must be far from him; and in the full persuasion, and steadfast
expectation of eternal joy and bliss, how desperation should lodge, I yet
understand not.

God might reveal, and the soul of Christ in this life behold, as all ours
shall when we appear before the face of God after this life, what cup was
prepared for the wicked to drink, and the sight thereof as it is most
fearful, so might it make him tremble, though he were never so free from it;
but more then the VISION of Gods wrath, and COMMISERATION of man's danger, if
we attribute to the soul of Christ; we must either grant he was tempted as
well with our iniquities, through lack of grace, as with our infirmities
through want of strength; or else cast him into a trance at the time of his
passion, as some do, to excuse him from sin. For that in the fullness of
Gods favor, grace and spirit, the soul of Christ should feel the flames of
hell fire; Christ's soul ^reer from hell. then either saints or angels.
can neither be proved, nor defended by the word of God. The proof I leave
to them that like the position; which if any man affirm, he were best be
sure of his footing. It is no small arrogancy, and blasphemy to sit Judge in
Gods place, and to condemn Christ's soul to hell fire, without a sound and
clear commission, to warrant that assertion. Besides hell fire in the
Scriptures being ETERNAL; by what authority will they quench it at their
pleasure, and make it temporary? And if Christ's soul being personally
joined to the Deity, notwithstanding might feel the fury of hell fire, when
shall the Saints of God, that can never be so united unto his glory, nor
assured of his society, nor so endued with his sanctity, be free from the
flames of hell? If that union and communion which Christ had with God, could
not exclude hell fire; what shall hinder but that the Angels in heaven may for
the time likewise feel the flames thereof? Can they have faster coherence, or
fuller presence of God, then he which was joined with God in unity of person?
They come not near the favor and grace, knowledge and truth, power and
stedfastnes of the manhood of Christ, which here on earth they did serve and
adore. But none of these things can be intended in the Creed; for there the
articles are placed in ORDER and TIME, as they were performed. And therefore
when Christ was DEAD AND BVRIED, he then DESCENDED INTO HELL.

The second opinion is, that Christ's descent to hell is all one with his
burial, This opinion is not false, but impertinent and idle.
for that SHEOL in the old testament does most commonly, if not continually
signify the grave. But this is nothing to the Creed, whose authority and
antiquity if we reverence, it is soon concluded, that hell there does not
signify the grave. For first it is absurd, that in a short rehearsal of the
faith made for the simplest to conceive, one article should be twice
repeated; and after a plain and known word, he was buried which no man
could doubt of; a dark and enigmaticall phrase of speech, HE DESCENDED INTO
HELL, which few men did understand, should be added, rather to obscure then
to expound the former. Again, HE DESCENDED, signifies a voluntary motion,
where as the body dead has neither WILL nor MOTION. Thirdly, HELL in the
new testament, is so unusual for the grave; that I think no example can be
showed thereof. Though therefore this exposition cannot be charged with
falsitie, for Christ was truly buried; yet may it not be endured by reason of
the idle repetition, and strange circumloquution, which troubles and
confounds the hearer; besides the improprietie and incoherence of the word,
that a dead corpse should descend, and specially unto hell.

The third opinion does neither mistake the TIME nor the PART which descended:
for they refer the words of the Creed to Christ's SOVLE after DEATH, but
they change the name of hell into the state of the dead; and so con^esse that
Christ's soul after separation from the body endured THE STATE OF THE DEAD.
The third opinion can hardly avoid (...).
To this a number of learned men incline, because they would avoid Limbus
patrum; disliking by all means that the souls of the righteous and faithful
before Christ's suffering should be kept in a region or part of hell; and
thence delivered by his descent. I see well enough what they would feign
decline; but what if by their far fet exposition they fall into that error
which they seek to fly? Do they not fairelie profer, and quite besides the
mark? Let us look a little into their conceit. Christ descended into hell,
that is, say they, his soul after death, conuersed among the souls of the
just, that were dead before him. But where were the souls of the just? In a
place, or no? Without a place can nothing be, but only God. All creatures be
they souls or angels are desined with place, though they do not replenish
their places as bodies do; yea what soever is not circumscribed within a place,
is infinite; which no creature can be. The souls then of the righteous must
of necesstie be in a place. And what call you that place by your opinion?
Forsooth even HELL. For Christ's descending into hell, as you expound it, was
his conuersing among the souls of the dead. Those souls then were in a place,
and that place by your construction the Creed calls Hell. Their state you
will say, is called hell, but not their place. A witty difference I assure
you. The place for souls after this life, is answerable to their state. If
their state be hell, their place can neither be Heaven, nor Paradise. As is
their receptacle, so is their rest; the place does bring either joy or pain,
which is their state. So that if Christ descending into hell conuersed with the
souls of the righteous; of force the souls of the righteous were in hell,
which is the self same error, that you would seem by your new found
interpretation to prevent.

[But the state of the ^eade, is in Hebrew noted by the word Sheol; and
thither Christ descended.] And the state or place whither Christ descended, is
in the Creed named hell, and so Sheol is that which the Creed calls hell.
In deed some say, that Sheol does never in the old testament signify the
place of the damned: but I must be borne with, if I be not of their mind.
Many men say, that they never prove; and some speak they know not what. As
both parts of man sinned in the first transgression; Sheol as well hell as the
grave.
so was there a pit of perdition provided for either part; the grave for the
body, which there should rot; and hell for the soul, which there should be
tormented with everlasting fire. Both these pits, because they always expect
and exact as their due, the bodies and souls of mortal and sinful men, and
never are satisfied, are contained in the word Sheol; and are not distinguished
by the nature of the word, which is common to both; but by the circumstances
added, which are proper to either. For example, when the word Sheol is
qualified with an OPPOSITION to heaven with a difference of SCITVATION, as the
LOVVER PIT; with an ADDITION of the soul there suffering, or of the pain there
suffered; all these are proofs that the word Sheol, which is otherwise
indifferent, must there be taken not for the burial of the body, nor for the
change from this life, but ^or the state of destruction, and place of
damnation. Psalm. ^.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I sly from thy presence?
If I ascend into heaven, thou art there: If I lodge BENEATH IN HELL, thou art
there. Opposite to heaven is not the grave, where the bodies of all gods saints
do lie, but hell as being the farthest from it, and most repugnant to it; since
from hell to heaven there is no passage for man; but from the grave to heaven is
the assured hope of all the faithful. This opposition our Savior expressing
in the new testament, says. (...)
And thou Capernaum which art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to
hell. Christ does not threaten the contemners of his doctrine, and miracles
with the grave, which is common to all the godly; but with perpetual
destruction and punishment proportionable to the height of their pride, which
must needs be hell. And so much follows in plain words in the next verse.
Ibid. ver. 24.
I say to you, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of
judgment, then for thee. In the day of judgment as death, so the grave are
at an end, for the bodies of the wicked shall then live for ever; and then
shall Capernaum be cast down to hell for the contempt of Christ's preaching.

As hell is the farthest place from heaven, that can be named, so it is the
lowest, and therefore by the lower pit, is meant not the grave, but hell, which
in situation is far lower then ye outside of the earth where men are buried.
Job. 11
Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the perfection of
the almighty? to the height of heaven what can thou do? it is deeper then
hell; The lowest place and farthest from heaven is hell.
how can thou know it? Gods perfection is higher then the highest place,
which is heaven; and deeper then the deepest place, which is hell. To compare
his power or justice with the depth of the grave, which is not four yeards
deep at the most, were a very slender comparison for the incomprehensible
greatness of god; but since in height and depth it exceeds all things; there
can be no doubt, but it is compared with the highest and deepest places that
are; which are heaven and hell. In like sort, Psalm. 85.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest pit, can not be meant of the
grave. For men's souls are not enclosed in graves with their bodies, but as the
pit provided for the body is the higher of the twain, and the pit prepared for
the soul is the lower; so the lowest pit out of question is hell, where the
souls of such as are rejected from God are detained against the day of
vengeance. And albeit some of these speeches may perchance admit an
allegorical sense, and so signify the greatest and extremest dangers that
might be; yet the ground of the allegory depends on the nature of hell, and
not of the grave, because of the two sorts of pittes, hell is the lowest; and
made to receive the souls of men, which the grave does not. Deuteronomy. 32
A fire, (says God by Moses) is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn to the
bottom of hell, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains. Fire in the
grave there is none, in hell there is; neither can the sepulcher, where men's
bodies lie buried, be the bottom of hell. For so shall we make the place of
hell higher then the earth, which the scripture every where crosses, when it
calls hell the deep, or lowest pit. A fire then burning to the bottom of
hell, and inflaming the very foundations of the hills, can have no resemblance
to the grave, nor performance in the grave; but Sheol in that scripture, as in
many others, must signify the very place of the damned, which we call hell.

The words then of the Creed, he descended into hell, since the defenders of
this third opinion do not refer to the body of Christ buried, but to the
soul of Christ after death; it is evident by their position, that not only
Christ's soul after this life descended to hell, but all the souls of the just
and righteous leaving this world before Christ's coming, descended likewise
into hell. And this evasion of theirs, that Sheol in Hebrew signifies the
state of the dead after this life, be it good or bad, stands them in little
steed. For first they do not avoid that obscure and idle repetition, wherewith
the second opinion was charged; that, after a plain and easy article, he was
dead, the self same thing should be iterated again with a very dark and
doubtful kind of hebraisme, he descended into Sheol. By this former, he was
dead, every man must needs conceive, not only the separation of the soul
from the body, but also the subjection of either part to the state of the
dead. What needed then an unknown hebrew phrase he descended into Sheol, to
express the very same point, which before was fully and fairelie delivered?
Again, though Sheol be common to the bodies of the faithful and infidels, yet
may it be very well doubted, whether the souls of the righteous departed
this life be in Sheol, The scripture makes a descent to Sheol.
or no. And under correction I take it to be more, then the Scripture any
where does positiuelie affirm. My reason is, that Abraham's bosom is by our
Savior placed Luke. 16
ABOVE, PARRE OFF from the place, where the wicked after this life are
tormented. Now to Sheol the Scripture makes a DESCENT, not an ascent, as when
Jacob says; Genes. 37
I WILL GO DOWN TO Sheol unto my son, mourning. And again, Genes^ 42.
you will bring my gray hayres with sorrow DOWN TO SHEOL. And least we
should dream of a metaphorical kind of descent; in the rebellion of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, the scripture says; Numb. 16
THE GROVNDE claue asunder, that was UNDER THEM, and the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, with their families. So they, and all that were
with them, DESCENDED alive into Sheol, and the earth COVERED THEM. To Sheol
then the scripture makes a local descent, which is either of the body to the
grave, (for so Jacobs words must be understood; when he says, I will descend
to Sheol unto my son;) or of the soul after death, to the place of torment,
which is the reward of all the wicked. The Psalm. 9.
wicked (says David) shall be turned into Sheol, and al nations that forget
God. The souls of ye wicked were in Sheol before Christ's coming, but not of
the godly.
Where he does not mean, they shall die as well as the godly, which is likewise
the lot of all the just and righteous; but they shall have the due wages of
sin; both body and soul descending to Sheol; that is, the one to corruption
in the earth, the other to damnation in hell. For Sheol contains both, and
imports both to the forgetters and despisers of God; albeit it fasten no
farther on the godly, then to bring their bodies to the grave, which is the
gate of hell. Ezechiah mentioning in his prayers, how he was willed by the
prophet to prepare himself to die, thus expresses it. ^say. 38
I said in the cutting off of my days; I shall go to the gates of Sheol, I am
deprived of the residue of my years; but ye wicked go to THE DEPTH OF SHEOL,
which is the place of everlasting punishment. Proverb. 15
The way of life (says Solomon) is ON HIGH, to him that understands to
decline from SHEOL BENEATH. So that after this life, the souls that live, are
above, for the way to life is on high; the souls that die, go to the depth of
Sheol, even to the bottomless pit of perdition. Of him that hanteth harlots
Solomon says. Proverb. 9
He knows not yt her ghests are in the depth of Sheol, that is, so wrapped in
their sins, that they cannot prevent everlasting damnation. And again.
Proverb. 23
Thou shall smite the child with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from
Sheol. Correction will not save a ^hilde that he shall not see death, but it
will bow him to obedience, and so save his soul from destruction. Yea how
should David so often confess to God that his soul was freed from Sheol, if
by Sheol he meant the state after death? for thence it was impossible his soul
should be delivered. Psalm. 89.
What man lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 49
so precious is the redemption of the soul (from death) that it must cease for
ever. And yet comparing himself with the wicked, and his state with theirs, he
says. Psalm. 49.
Like sheep shall they lie in Sheol; death shall devour the^, and the
righteous shall have dominion over the^, in the day spring. But God will deliver
my soul from the power of Sheol; for he will receive me. Does David mean he
shall never die, or that his soul shall be delivered from Sheol, that is from the
state of such as were departed this life? ye imagination were both false and
absurd; but he means, that death shall devour the wicked wholly, as well
soul as body; whereas he did firmly believe, yt God would deliver his soul
from the power of Sheol, and would receive him after death* though his body
must of force by the condition of nature wax old as a garment, and rot in the
grave, til the day of resurrection.

And if any man think good in some such places, Abraham bosom is no part of
Sheol, or hell.
as these are, to interpret the SOVLE for LIFE, because it is the spring and
cause of life in the body; and SHEOL for the GRAVE, where life ends; I will
not utterly condemn his exposition, so long as he leans a different power
of Sheol over ye just and unjust, from which David says, God will deliver his
soul; and do not make the souls of the righteous DESCEND TO SHEOL after
death. For that directly impugneth the doctrine, as well of the old
testament, which says the Proverb. 13
way of life is on high; as of our Savior, who places Abraham's bosom VPVVARD
A FAR OFF from hell; when he says of the rich man; that Luke. 16.
being in hell in torments, he LIFT UP his ^ies and saw Abraham A FAR OFF, and
Lazarus in his bosom. Upon which place, S. Augusten learnedlie and truly
infers, August. epist. 99.
Ne ipsos quidem INFEROS VSPIAM scripturarum locis IN BONO APPELLATOS
potuireperire. Quod si nusquam in diuinis authoritatibus legitur, non vtique
sinus ille Abrahae, idest, secretae cuiusdam quietis habitatio ALIQVA PARS
INFERORVM esse credenda est: quanquam in ijs ipsis tanti magistri verbis, vbi
ait dixisse Abraham, Inter nos and vos chaos magnum firmatum est; SATIS VT
OPINOR APPARET, NON ESSE QVANDAM PARTEM, ET QVASI MEMBRVM INFERORVM, tantae
illius felicitatis sinum: Chaos enim magnum, quid est nisi quidam hiatus multum
ea separans, inter quae non solum est, verum etiam firmatus est? The name of
Inferi I could no where find in any place of scripture used IN ANY GOOD
SENSE: which if we do no where read in the authorities of the scripture,
surely Abraham's bosom, which is an habitation of secret rest, may not be
thought to be ANY PIECE OF THE LOVVER PARTS albeit in the words of so
sufficient a master (as our Savior) where he makes Abraham say, betwixt us
and you there is a GREAT GVLFE ESTABLISHED, it is EVIDENT ENOVGH, as I take
it; that the bosom of so great felicity, is NO PART NOR MEMBER of hell. For
what is a great gulf, but a great distance separating those places, between
which it lies? Inferi are the lower parts where the dead remain, which the
Hebrew calls Sheol; and touching Inferi, which are the places, or spirits
beneath, we may with S. Austen conclude two things out of the manifest words
of our Savior. First that Abraham's bosom is VPVVARD toward heaven, and
therefore the souls of the righteous before the death of Christ ascended
rather, then descended. Next, that neither paradise, nor Abraham's bosom,
(which was the receptacle for ye souls of all the sons of Abraham, that held
the faith, and did the works of Abraham,) was any part or member of hell. So
that CHRIST'S DESCENDING INTO HELL cannot be expounded of his conuersing with
the spirits of the just and perfect men after his death; nor of his enduring
the state of the dead; since the place, where their souls do rest after
death, is no where in the scriptures called HELL or SHEOL, or, as S. Austen
speaks, INFERI. And this I take to be so clear, that neither Jewish Rabbines
with their grammatical observations, nor Greek poets with their fantastical
imaginations may be suffered to contradict it. How easy it is to wrangle with
the words, NEPHESH, SHEOL, and HADES a mean scholar may soon perceive; but I
hold it no sound course to fetch the explication of the mysteries of christian
religion, either from such impudent impugners of it, as were the Rabbines, or
from such ignorant deluders of it, as were the profane poets, who talk every
where of heaven and hell, according to the false and lewd persuasion of their
own hearts. And therefore they may spare their pains, that promise us so many
thousand deponentes both Jewish and heathen, that Sheol and Hades do not
signify hell. It will trouble them more then they think, to bring us but one
good proof out of the scripture, that the souls of the righteous before
Christ's coming, were in Sheol or Hades; and till they do, I rest on Saint
Austens collection out of the words of Christ; that Abraham's bosom is no
piece nor part of Hades, or Inferi, which the hebrew calls Sheol, as being
divided from it with a mighty distance; and that the souls of the just
departing this life before Christ's death, were Luke. 16.
CARRIED UP BY THE ANGELS, INTO ABRAHAM'S BOSOM.

So that as yet we have not the true meaning of these words of our creed, he
was CRVCIFIED, DEAD, and BVRIED; HE DESCENDED INTO HELL; neither does any of
the precedent opinions come nere the plain and true exposition thereof. How ye
words of the Creed are best expounded.
For in my judgment they must have a sense both DIFFERENT in matter, and
CONSEQVENT in order, even as they lie, before we can rightly understand the^.
First he must be DEAD; then BVRIED in body, which was laid in ye earth: lastly
the soul after it was severed by death from the body, DESCENDED INTO HELL; and
this third point, he descended into hell, must neither be ALLEGORIZED, which in
matters of faith is very dangerous, so long as the proper sense contains a
truth; nor CONFOVNDED WITH THE FORMER: for so the Creed shall not shortly touch
mysteries of religion, but darckly trouble us with phrases of variation. And
therefore for my part, I retain in expounding this Article, 3. things;
DISTINCTION of matter, CONSEQVENCE of order, and PROPRIETY of words; and those
three considered, the sense of the Article may and must be, that Christ, after
his BODY was BVRIED, in SOVLE DESCENDED UNTO that place, which the scripture
properly calls HELL; and this sense I find to be so far from any falsity or
absurdity, that it is more honorable to Christ, and more comfortable to
christians, then any of the rest, that we have yet examined. Which that you may
the better perceive, give me leave somewhat farther to repeat the fruit and
force of his glorious resurrection.

Christ is called 1. Corinthians. 15
the first fruits of them that slept; not that never none before Christ was
restored from the dead, to live here on earth; but though many were so
revived again, yet from the foundation of the world not one was ever raised
unto a blessed and immortal life before Christ. Elias raised the 1. Regum. 17.
widow of Sareptas son; Elizeus the 2. Regum. 4
Sunamites; Christ himself restored to life the Marei. 5.
daughter of Iairus, the Luke 7
widows only son of Naim, and John. 11
Lazarus; yet all these after their return to life were still subject to sin
and death, as they were before; but he whom the scripture names Reuelat. 2.
the first begotten of the dead, was indeed the first, that ever rose from the
dead into an happy and heavenly life. For where man here on earth is beset
with three dangers, Christ the first that ever rose, conqueror of sin, death
and hell.
with SIN during life, with DEATH shortning life, with HELL tormenting after
life; (the just vengeance of sin delivering the body to death, the soul to
hell:) the resurrection of Christ, being the full conquest of all his and our
enemies, that impugn either his glory or our safety, must overthrow, sin,
death and hell; not in his own person only, to whom no such thing was due, but
in our steed, and for our good; yt we might be likewise freed from the power
of those foes; and as members be joined unto our head, wholly without any
hinderance, everlastingly without any disturbance, and joyfully without any
greeuance. Wherefore Christ rising into a SPIRITVAL, IMMORTAL, and CELESTIAL
life, freed us from the dominion of sin, fear of death, and fury of Satan;
and by Ephesians. ^^
quickening us, raising us up, and setting us together with himself, in
heavenly places, has not only given us the victory against sin, and death,
but even trodden down Satan under our feet.

Of Christ's conquest against sin and death, The conquest of Christ over sin
and death.
I shall not need to say much; things not impugned require less pains to be
defended; his conquest ouerhel, as in himself it showed most power, and
purchased most honor; so from us it deserves greatest thanks as bringing us
greatest comfort; that though sin remain, and death prevail against our
bodies, there is yet no cause to fear or doubt the fullness and surenesse of
our redemption, since the strength of hell is altogether conquered and
abolished from the faithful; which before was the very sting of sin and
death. As therefore Christ was Romans 4.
delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification;
so by MERCY REMITTING, and GRACE REPRESSING, he pareth the branches, and dries
the root of sin, till the body of sin and death turning to dust, and
withering in the grave, be restored again after Christ's example to perpetual
and celestial life and bliss. Insomuch that by lamenting sin past, and
resisting sin to come, sin daily dies in us; and the inward man of the heart
being lightened and renewed by grace does daily more and more, by desire and
delight of heavenly things, aspire to the imitation and participation of
Christ's resurrection. The force of sin then being quenched by Christ's dying
unto sin, and his rising again unto righteousness, the power of death is
abolished by the pardoning and decreasing of our sins; that being now the
passage to glory for all repenters, which before was the gate to hell for all
transgressors. In his own person Christ showed his conquest over death, not by
keeping his flesh from death, which he could easily have done, but by saving
it from rotting in the sepulcher, and by raising it again into an immortal
and glorious state: that death being swallowed up by the power of his life, he
might take from us the fear of death, whiles here we live: and change the
curse of death, making it now a Revel. 14
rest from all labors, which before was an entrance into perpetual pain.
This enemy, because he does least harm, shall be last destroyed: even at the
day of the general resurrection, and not before: and serves now rather to
repress sin, then to revenge sin; the godly being by death delivered from
the committing, loving, or fearing sin; and the wisdom of God providing,
that as sin brought death into the world; so death should abolish sin out
of the world. This is briefly the victory, that Christ obtained against
sin and death, by his dying and rising from the dead. His conquest over hell,
as it is more questioned, and more expected, so will I not refuse to show you,
what I think may be safely believed, and must not rashly be rejected of any
christian.

The conquest of Christ over hell and Satan may be no way doubted by any
divine, In vain is all that christ did for us, if hell be no^ conquered.
that rightly handles the mystery of our salvation. In vain do we speak of
releasing sin, or despising death, if the right of hell to us, and power of
hell over us do still remain. And therefore the very ground of Christ's
conquering sin and death, is his subduing of hell and Satan, that they should
lay no challenge to, nor have no force against the faithful. It is then on all
sides accorded, that hell and Satan must be fully conquered by Christ, before
the work of our redemption can be perfectly settled or assured; but as well
the time when, as the manner, how, are somewhat questioned, and that makes the
whole matter the more needful to he discussed. To refute every man's fancy
that speaks hereof, were an infinite labor; to search out a truth in this
case, that may safely be received, and comfortablie embraced, if not
necessarily urged, is the sum of mine intention, and should be the end of
your expectation; with this prouiso, that no man carpe before he righlie
conceive; nor pronounce before he well examine that which shall be spoken;
least he check the Scriptures before he beware, and condemn the whole Church
of God without any cause.

In expressing Christ's conquest over hell and Satan, I think best to observe
these three things: The method of handling Christ's descent.
WHAT he did unto Satan and his kingdom; WHEN; and with WHICH PART OF
HIMSELF he did execute this triumph. WHAT HE DID unto Satan, we shall
learn, by seeing what he suffered at Satan's hands. Proportionable to Christ's
humiliation was his exaltation; and for the violence which he endured, he
received full satisfaction. As then on the cross Christ suffered at Satan's
hands, and by Satan's means REPROACH, RAGE, and VVRONG; Christ's conquest over
Satan had these three effects.
so in his resurrection he reaped a triple recompense from Satan: SVBMISSION,
whereby his pride was subjected under Christ; CAPTIVATION, whereby his rage was
restrained, and himself chained by Christ; RESTITVTION, whereby his spoils
were divided, and delivered unto Christ. When I say that Satan was SVBDVED,
TIED, and SPOILED by Christ rising from the dead, let no unsettled brain
imagine, this is superstitious and popish; as I mean them, and as the
scriptures deliver them, they are prophetical and Apostolical. And least you
should think I delude you with words, I will show you whence I take them;
first jointly all in one sentence, then severally from sundry places of the
holy scriptures. Our Savior in the Gospel does purposelie make this
comparison, The proof of these three by the scriptures
or utter this parable concerning himself and the kingdom of Satan. Mat. 12.
Mark. 3.
How can a man ENTER into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he
first BIND the strong man, and then SPOIL his house? Christ then ENTERED upon
Satan's house as a CONQVERER; TIED him as the STRONGER; SPOILED him as the right
OWNER of that, which Satan unjustly detained from him. And albeit it may not
be denied, but Christ whiles he lived on earth, made some proof, of his
right and power, to dissolve the works, and displace the force of Satan, from
the bodies and souls of men; yet it is evident that the full demonstration of
his victory, and perfection of his glory were reserved to the time of his
resurrection, when he brake the (...) and sorrows of death and hell, and
ascended to his father, not only clothed with honor, and immortality, but
armed with power and principality; Phil. 2.
all knees bowing unto him, in heaven, earth and hell, and all tongues
confessing that Jesus was the Lord, to the glory of God. These very parts of
Christ's conquest over Satan, the Apostle does comprise in one sentence to the
Colossians, saying: Christ Colos. 2.
SPOILED powers and principalities, and made A SHOW of them openly,
TRIVMPHING over them in his own person. That powers and principalities in this
place do signify wicked and sinful spirits there can be no question; those
names in the scriptures are proper to Angels, be they good or badde; as Roman.
8 verse. 38. Ephesians. 3. verse. 10. and 6. verse. 12. Colos. 1. verse. 16 1. Peter.
3. verse. 22. And here must needs import evil Angels, because Christ had no
cause to conquer or spoil the elect Angels, which served him, and ministered
unto him; but the badde that impugned his truth, and envied his glory. Over
those then Christ TRIVMPHED as a conqueror; those he OPENLY SHEVVED as
captives bound with chains; those he STRIPPED OR SPOILED of the goods which
they had unlawfully gotten. And this the Apostle says he did execute in his
own person, as a triumph fit for the son of God, 1. Cor. 15.
all things being subjected under his feet, yea, 1. Peter. 3.
Angels, powers, and mights subdued unto him, when he ascended into heaven.

And though some late translators, to decline the descent of Christ to hell
after death, do imagine that the wicked Angels were CONQVERED, SHEVVED and
SPOILED by Christ in his suffering the pains of hell on the cross; On the
cross Christ obtained his triumph, but he executed it at his resurrection
and to that end do alter the ancient and constant reading of the text,
putting in stead of (...) in his own person, (...) in the same cross; yet
since both scriptures and fathers with one consent do contradict that
dangerous speculation, I may not admit it as consonant, either to the faith
or truth of the Scriptures. For the conquest which Christ had over Satan and
his Kingdom, was not by RESISTING, much less by SVFFERING the assaults of
hell. He is no conqueror that with much ado saves himself and his from the
fury of his enemies; but he that subdueth and treads his adversaries under
his feet, and so maistreth them, that he may dispose of them at his will, he
is truly called a conqueror. And since the Apostle says, Christ SPOILED the
powers of darkness, and made AN OPEN SHOW of them, and TRIVMPHED over them, it
is an evident wrong to Christ to think that all the conquest he had over
them, was at length to REPEL them; and with mighty fears and cries TO ESCAPE
their force. Yea the redemption of mankind is altogether uncertain and
insufficient, if our head being God and man, could do no more but by long
struggling wind himself out of Satan's claws. We must confess an other kind
of conquest, before the kingdom of Christ can ouerrule all as it must; and his
Church be secure from the gates of hell; to wit, that Mat. 28.
ALL POWER in heaven and earth was given unto him; that Philip. 2
EVERY KNEE in heaven, and earth, and hell bowed unto him; that he had and
has THE Revel. 1.
KEYS of death and OF HELL; and could Psalm 2.
RVLE his enemies with a rod of iron, and break them like a potters vessel;
that by his death, he Heq. 2.
DESTROYED him, that was the ruler of death, even the devil. This conquest
Christ purchased by his passion, but he did not execute it till his
resurrection; otherwise he could not have died, if death on the cross had
been thoroughly conquered. But he was humbled and exinanited on the cross,
even unto death, that he might after in his resurrection be exalted, and
replenished with all honor, power, and principality, in heaven, earth and
hell. Howbeit of the time WHEN he triumphed, we shall afterward speak; we
now observe WHAT he did in his triumph over hell and Satan; and by the
Scriptures we find that Christ ENTERED Satan's house, TIED him, and SPOILED
his goods; or as the Apostle expresses it, he SPOILED POWERS and
PRINCIPALITIES, MADE AN OPEN SHOW of them, and TRIVMPHED OVER THEM IN HIS
OWN PERSON.

And least I be thought to pretend an ancient and uniform reading of Paul's
words in this place without just proof, let us see what ancient fathers have
followed the same. The Siriacke translation of the new Testament, which is of
no small antiquity, reads Colos. 2. The fathers read in s^metipso in his own
person, and those yt read (...) apply it to Christ, and not to the cross,
save only Occumenius.
IN SEMETIPSO, IN HIS OWN PERSON, as I do. So do Origin, in Epistola ad
Romanos, lib. 5. cap. 5. Epiphanius in Anchorato, and contra Pneumatomacheos
haeres. 74. Chrysostom homili. 6. in 2. ca. ad Colos. and Theodorete likewise
in 2. cap. ad Colos. Of the Latin Fathers, in whom it may better be
distinguished, the book de Trinitate under Tertullians name, Augustine contra
Faustum: lib. 16. cap. 29. and Epistola 59. a Hilarious de Trinitate. lib. 1.
and lib. 9. Fulgentius ad Thrasimundum. lib. 3. Hieronymus in cap. 2. ad Colos.
Ambrose upon the same place, Ruffinus in Symbolum Apostolicum, and so
throughout the Latin Church without any dissenting. Only the Greek
collections under O^cumenius name, refer that triumph which saint Paul here
speaks of, to the Cross, saying that Christ shamed and confounded the devil
on the cross, in that he was openly crucified in the eyes of all the people.
O^cumenius^^ 2. cap. ad (...).
And although I condemn not the sense as false, that Christ wrestled with
Satan on the cross, and even there ouermaistred his power, yet that Christ had
no further or greater triumph over hell and Satan, then by dying on the cross
in the sight of men, does utterly abolish the glory of his resurrection, and
contradicts the whole course of the scriptures. By his suffering and dying on
the cross; he deserved and purchased the exaltation, and triumph which he had
afterward, when he rose from the dead; and even before he died, he was fully
assured, that neither his soul should be left in hell, nor his flesh see
corruption; but that God would raise him again, and give him all power in
heaven and earth; and make all knees in heaven, earth, and hell to bow unto
him, Christ's resurrection was a famore glorious triumph over Satan, then his
passion was.
and place him at his right hand in the brightness of eternal glory. It may
therefore be confessed and believed, that Christ overthrew Satan on the cross;
and so triumphed in spirit against him, or had a spiritual triumph over him,
as David foretold, when he said in the person of Christ; Mine heart was glad,
and my tongue joyful, yea my flesh shall rest in hope; but that the glory of
his resurrection did not far excel the shame of his passion, and that his
rising from the dead was no more victorious and triumphant, then his yielding
himself unto death, is directly repugnant to the truth of the scriptures.
Though he were 2. Cor^
CRVCIFIED THROVGH INFIRMITY, yet lives he (says Paul) through THE POWER of
God. So that to die, even in Christ, was infirmity, though voluntary; to live
again as he lives in the height of celestial glory, was a clear
demonstration of the power of God in him. Rom^
He was declared to be the son of God, in power by the resurrection from the
dead. Insomuch that if Christ had died, and not risen again, his conquest had
not been worth the speaking of. 1. Cor. 15.
If Christ be not raised, your faith is in vain, says Paul; and ye are yet
in your sins. Christ's death then without his resurrection had been a full
conquest of Satan over Christ, and all his members. That which Paul says, is
true, as well in Christ as in us; (...)
It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in WEAKNESS,
it is raised in power. Since then in the death and cross of Christ the holy
ghost notes ^ Heb. 13.
reproach, ^ Heb. 12.
shame and weakness; we do foulie err, if we ascribe no greater, nor other
triumph to Christ over death and hell, then his cross and passion. Luke. 24.
These things, Christ was to suffer, and (so) to enter into his glory; but we
must make as great difference betwixt his dying, and his rising again, as we
would betwixt his weakness and his power; his conflict, and his conquest;
his depression, and his exaltation; his suffering in reproach, and his reigning
in glory.

For the better evidence whereof, you shall see the holy scriptures at large
express the very same parts, and the very same time, which I observed unto
you. Phil. ^*
Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, The cause and
^^ne of christ's triumph.
even the death of the cross. WHEREFORE God also highly EXALTED him, and gave
him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every KNEE SHOULD BOVV,
of things IN HEAVEN IN EARTH, AND BENEATH THE EARTH. Under the earth are no
reasonable creatures to kneel to Christ's person and scepter, but the damned
spirits and souls in hell, except we take hold of Purgatory, or Limbus
patrum; the elect in heaven do willingly serve him; such as live on earth,
do endure his justice or love his mercy; the spirits beneath do find his
truth, and feel his hand; the most adverse acknowledge his name, and fear his
force. This exaltation of Christ to reign over heaven, earth and hell, came
after his death, as being the reward and effect of his obedience unto death.
So says the Apostle. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death,
even the death of the Cross. WHEREFORE (or for which cause) God highly
exalted him, that in the name of Jesus all knees in heaven, earth and hell
should bow. Then on the cross, or before his death the time was not yet come,
that Christ should be thus exalted; but there rather was the time and place of
his humiliation; and when he rose again, Math. (...).
all power in heaven and earth was given unto him. Revel. ^.
I was dead (says he himself) and behold I am alive for evermore; and I HAVE
THE KEYS OF HELL AND OF DEATH; that is all power over death and hell, to
Revel. 3.
shut and no man may open; to open, and no man may shut. The Prophet Esaias
points to the very same CAUSE and TIME of Christ's exaltation. Esaias. 5^
BECAUSE he has powered out his soul unto death: THEREFORE will I give him his
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoils with the mighty. If
FOR THAT CAUSE; then AFTER THAT TIME, Christ divided the spoils of the
mighty; or (as the Apostle speaks) he spoiled powers and principalities.
And noting exactlie the TIME of Christ's triumph, the Apostle says (...),
ASCENDING ON HIGH, HE LED CAPTIVITY CAPTIVE. This that he ascended, what
means it, but that he first descended into the lower Ephesians. 4.
parts of the earth? Christ did not lead captivity captive, when he
descended into the lower parts of the earth, but when he ascended from
thence. The Devils then which held us in captivity, were themselves lead
captive, when Christ ascended from the lower parts of the earth; and then were
powers and principalities SPOILED, and openly SHEVVED, Christ TRIVMPHING OVER
THEM, not on the Cross at the time of his passion; but IN HIS OWN PERSON, at
the time of his resurrection and ascension. An effect of this triumph is this,
that an Angel was sent (in the Revelation of Saint John) from heaven having
the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. Revel. 10.
And he took the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and
bound him a thousand years. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him
up, and sealed upon him, that he should deceive the people no more. If a
messenger from Christ had this power over Satan, to bind him, and shut him up,
what command then had Christ himself over hell and Satan? And how wholesome
and gladsome a thing is it for us to believe and confess, that Christ Jesus
our Lord and savior has Satan, and all the pawers of hell chained at his
will, and by his conquest over them so rules and restrains them that they
can not stir but by his leave and appointment; and thus shall he hold them
captive, till he deliver the kingdom to God his father, and thoroughly tread
both death and Satan under our feet. This doctrine I trust maintains no
superstition, but sound and true religion, as well touching the parts, as the
time of Christ's conquest and triumph over death and hell.

It rests now to search what part of Christ had this triumph over hell; for
so much as Christ consisted of two natures, divine, and humane; Christ's manhood
must triumph and not his Godhead.
and his manhood by death was then divided into two places, the body being
separate from the soul, and lying in the dust of the earth, but without
corruption. And first, we must not refer this triumph to his divine nature;
by reason it was no maisterie for god to conquer his vassal. The (...) 3.
seed of the woman must bruize the serpents head, and not the maker of heaven
and earth with his almighty power and majesty. Besides the godhead of Christ
could neither truly DESCEND, nor ASCEND; as being every where present; nor be
EXALTED as being equal with the highest, nor RECEIVE GIFT, as having all
fulness in it: but that nature which led captivity captive, did first DESCEND
into ye lower parts of the earth, and after ASCENDED, and was EXALTED, and
RECEIVED this power and honor as a GIFT from God, in respect of his obedience,
patience, and humility. The places are before alleged, there is no need to
repeat them. It was then Christ's humane nature, which God so highly EXALTED
for his former obedience unto death, and to which all power was given in heaven
and earth; his divine was ever in even degree with his father, full of
majesty, power and glory. It is not to be neglected, that Ireneus says,
Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 20.
Si homo non vicisset inimicum hominis, non just victus esset inimicus. If a
man had not overcome the enemy of man, the enemy had not lawfully been
overcome. Which proportion of justice the Apostle urges, when he says; as 1. Corinthians. 15
by a man came death, so by a man came the resurrection of the dead. Since then
the humane nature of Christ by condition might, and by desert must be exalted
above all creatures; and by the rule of justice had the conquest of satan and
his kingdom; it is no hard matter to discern, And in his ma^hood the soul,
not the body, which lay dead in earth.
which part of Christ's manhood must overthrow death, and which must triumph
over hell. The body of man, whiles the first death lasts, is not due to
hell; it must lie dead and senseless in the earth; and so can neither live,
nor feel the pains of hell. Christ's body then lying in the grave without
SENSE, MOTION, OR LIFE, could have no conquest over hell; over death it had,
being preserved in the grave without all corruption; and raised from the dead
to a blessed and immortal state without all imperfection: Over hell it had
none, because that part of Christ which did conquer hell, must have as well
MOTION TO DESCEND thither, and POWER TO REPRESS there the rage of satan; as
also LIFE AND SENSE TO SPOIL powers and principalities, and by leading them
captive to make an open show of them; from al which, the first death kept the
body of Christ; till the time that his soul ascending with triumph from hell,
took his body from death, and so made a perfect conquest over hell and death,
not only for his own person, to whom all power was given in heaven and
earth, but for his members also, for whose safety he took from Satan the keys
of hell, and of death, that he himself might be Romans 14
Lord of the dead and the living. So that now the power of hell is destroyed,
and Satan restrained, and the faithful freed from all fear, and assured that
Matthew. 16.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. And this is that victory,
which God threatened to death and hell by his prophet, saying: Osee. 13
I will redeem them from THE POWER OF HELL; I will deliver them from death. O
death I will be thy death: O HELL I VVIL BE THY DESTRVCTION; repentance is hid
from mine eyes.

Whether Christ's desce^t to hell be written in the scriptu^es, or no.
So agreeable is this doctrine to the christian faith, and so comfortable to all
the godly, that few would refuse it, except such as are waspishlie wedded to
their own fancies; if it might appear where this is written in the
scriptures. The which desire of religious minds, whiles I labor to satisfy, I
must forwarne them, how easy it is for co^tentious spirits to frustrate the
strength of all that God says, if they may be suffered with diverse
significations, and figurative interpretations, to elude when they list, the
words of the holy ghost, and decline the literal and proper sense of the
divine oracles as their pleasures. This rule therefore must be held throughout
the scriptures, yt in mysteries of religion, we divert not from the native and
proper significations of the words, but when the letter impugneth the grounds
of christian faith and charity. Otherwise we shall leave nothing sound and sure
in the word of God; if we may avoid al things by figures: that please not our
humors. August. de doctri. Christiana. lib. 3. c^p. 10.
To this lesson, (says Austen) whereby we take heed not to interpret a
figurative speech, as if it were proper; we must add an other, that we take
not a proper speech, as if it were figurative. First then we must show the
mean, how to find out whether the speech be figurative or proper. And this
is the way to discern them; Ibidem.
vt quicquid in sermon diuino, neque ad morum honestatem, neque ad fidei
veritatem proprie referri potest, figuratum esse cognoseas; that whatsoever in
the divine scripture CANNOT PROPERLY be referred to the honesty of manners, or
to the verity of faith, thou may be sure it is FIGVRATIVE. So long then as
the proper sense of the scriptures may stand with the Analogy of faith, and
direction of charity; we offer violence to the word of God, if we wrest it to
a figurative understanding.

From this rule, (which must be observed throughout the body of the scripture,)
if we do not rashly slide; it is no hard matter to show where Christ's descent
to hell is expreslie recorded in the scriptures. The words are well known, and
often alleged, if men were not disposed to pervert, or elude them with their
enigmaticall and allegorical constructions. Psalm. 16. Acts. 2 The words are
plain enough if we wrest the^ not from their proper sense.
Thou VVILT NOT FORSAKE MY SOVLE IN HELL, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. If Christ's soul in hell were assisted with the glorious power and
presence of God; ergo Christ's soul WAS in hell. And THERE it could not be,
without DESCENDING THITHER. The descent then of Christ's soul into hell, when
it was severed from the body, is apparently witnessed in the scriptures,
howsoever the diverse conceits of men do diversely expound it. To take the SOVLE
for the CARCAS; and HELL for the GRAVE, (as some do) if it be not a wrested
exposition, I am sure it is not the proper interpretation of the words; and
therefore in mysteries of faith by no means to be admitted. To let the soul
retain her true signification, and by hell to mean paradise (where others
defend the soul of Christ was all the time, that his body lay in the grave;)
if it be not a misconstruction, it is no literal exposition of the place, and
in my judgment a very strange kind of figure it is, to express Christ's
ascent into Paradise, by his descent into hell; and so to expound the words of
the Creed, that we draw them to a clean contrary sense. If therefore we lean
sorcing and wresting the words of the holy ghost, and let their proper and true
signification stand, as well ye words, as the circumstances will exactly prove
that ye soul of Christ after death DESCENDED INTO HELL. That this was performed
after Christ was dead, and consequently when his soul was severed from his
body, there can be no question, as I have showed before; for that Christ
says, his flesh Psalm. 16.
SHALL LIE DOWN (or take rest in the tabernacle of his grave) IN HOPE that God
VVIL NOT FORSAKE HIS SOVLE IN HELL; and in this hope Christ died: this
assistance was therefore gi^en him after death. That his soul must be taken
properly for that part, which after death saw the power and presence of God
not forsaking him, as well the separation of the body, The soul must not be
taken for the body, though man may be signifi^d by either.
as fruition of Gods assistance do plainly prove. Whiles we live, the body
or soul may rightly import the whole man; but after death it is more then
absurd to take the soul for the body, or the body for the soul: yea in men
here living, we must take heed that in matters of doctrine we mistake not the
one for the other. In matters of fact, to note the person by either part, can
be no danger; but in their attributes and properties, to confound them, is to
leave nothing certain in christian religion. Tertullian says truly.
Tertullian. d^ carne Christi. cap. 13.
Certe peruersissimu^, vt carnem nominantes anima^ intelligamus; and animam
significantes, carne^ interpretemur. Omnia periclitabuntur aliter accipi, quam
sunt; and amittere quod sunt, dum aliter accipiuntur: si aliter, quam sunt,
cognominantur. Fides nominum salus est proprietatum. It is most perverse, that
the flesh being named, we should understand the soul, or the soul being
signified, we should interpret it for the flesh. All things shall be in
danger to be otherwise taken then they are, and to loose that they are, whiles
they are mistaken, if we call them by other names then their own. The
distinction of their names is the preservation of their properties. And yet in
these words the case is cleerer. For here are both parts expressed and
distinguished as well by their NATVRES, and PLACES, as by their NAMES. Christ's
soul was not forsaken in hell, but enjoyed the glorious assistance of God,
even there, where God forsakes all others: Christ's flesh lying dead without
sense in the grave, was there preserved from all corruption. For David, says
Peter, Acts. 2.
spoke of Christ's resurrection, that his SOVLE was not forsaken, (or left) in
hell, nor his FLESH saw corruption. Tertullian. de carne Christi. cap. 13
Quum diuidit species, carnem and animam, duo oftendit, says Tertullian. When
(the scripture) deuideth the kinds, as the soul and the flesh, it notes two
distinct things. Since then Peter does not only so report, but so interpret
David's words, that he spoke of Christ's soul and Christ's flesh; it is evident
they must be two distinct and different things, both in David's prediction, and
in Peter's application.

Again in these words is not comprised the general state of the dead common
to Christ with all other, The circumstances prove the words must be properly
taken.
but a special prerogative verified in none, but in the true Messiah and
Savior of the world. For neither of these was ever accomplished in any, but
in Christ. Then as no flesh in the sepulcher was ever free from corruption, but
only Christ's; so no soul in hell was ever supported and assisted by God, and
not forsaken, but only Christ's. If by hell, we understand Paradise; it was
no privilege to be there not forsaken, but rather a childish absurdity to
think that any soul might there be forsaken; and so no cause for Christ so
strongly to hope, and so greatly to rejoice, that HIS SOVLE should not be
forsaken, where it was impossible, that any soul should be forsaken: but this
is rather a just ground of exceeding joy, if where all souls were forsaken
of God, as in hell they are; there Christ's soul should not be forsaken, but
assisted with the might and majesty of God, to break the force, and tread the
power of hell under his feet. And this proves Christ's resurrection more
strongly, (for which cause David spoke it) then if we apply the name of hell
to the state of Paradise. For if Christ did rise again without corruption,
because his soul was not forsaken of God in Paradise; then all the souls that
rise not in like manner, are forsaken of God, though they still remain in the
rest and comfort of Paradise; which is a palpable falsity, if not impiety. But
if neither the grave could corrupt his flesh, nor hell detain his soul; what
better assurance could be brought of his resurrection, then that neither death
could dissolve his body into dust, nor hell prevail against his soul. And
this I take to be S. Peter's reason when he says to the Jews: Acts. ^.
Jesus of Nazareth have ye taken by the hands of the wicked, and crucified,
and slain: whom God raised again, BREAKING THE SORROVVES OF DEATH, in as much
as it was IMPOSSIBLE he should BE HELD THERE OF. God made way for Christ to rise
again by BREAKING THE SORROVVES OF DEATH before him, that they should not
hinder him. Christ's body lying dead in the grave, and lacking sense could
have no sorrow. In Paradise a place of rest and joy, if his soul were there,
much less may we imagine any sorrow. Since then the sepulcher has no SENSE
where Christ's flesh lay; and Paradise has NO SORROVV; the SORROVVES OF DEATH
must needs be referred to the pains of hell, which were all loosed and
dissolved before Christ, because IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE THEY SHOULD TAKE HOLD OF
HIM.

[But Peter, they will say, names the SORROVVES OF DEATH, and not of hell:] as
if the name of death did not extend, as well to the Apoc. 2
SECOND DEATH, which is hell, as to the first, 20.
which is the dissolution of nature? 21.
and THE SORROVVES OF THE FIRST DEATH Christ apparently suffered, Death is
either the first or the second
as much as any man; and they ended with death, they dured not after death. But
in Peter's words the sorrows of death were broken at Christ's resurrection. God
Ac^es. 3
raised him up, loosing the sorrows (or pains) of death. Wherefore the
SORROVVES OF THE SECOND DEATH must necessarily be understood; and those were
all broken and dissolved before Christ, by reason his soul was not forsaken in
hell, but united unto God, and aided by the mighty hand of God, to tread upon
all the power of ye adversary, and in his own person to triumph over Satan, and
all the strength of the kingdom of darkness.

The word (...) by which S. Luke expresses Da^ids meaning does always note
hell in the new testament
Lastly howsoever some presumers on their Hebrew may wrangle with the word Sheol
in David's speech, thou will not forsake my soul in hell: yet the word (...),
by which S. Luke expresses David's meaning, does properly import in the new
testament the place of the damned. I remit poets and Pagans using that word
after their profane imagination, to the alleagers; in what sense the
Evangelists and Apostles take it, will soon appear by their writings. Matthew. 16
Upon this Rock (says Christ) will I build my church, and the gates (...) (of
hell) shall not prevail against it. The church does not assure the godly, that
they shall not die; but, that the gates of the Reuelat. ^^
second death shall not hurt the^. When the merciles rich man died and was
buried, as we read in the gospel of S. Luke, ye scripture says Luke. 16
(...), and being in hell, in TORMENTS, he lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a
far off, and Lazarus in his bosom. I hope the soul of this rich man, was
neither in the grave, nor in paradise, but plainly IN HELL, even in the
Ibidem. ver. 23
PLACE OF TORMENTS, where no mercy can be showed, nor release hoped for; and
that place and state of the damned S. Luke calls (...), and our Savior
expressing it, makes the rich man most truly to say; Ibidem. ver. 24
I AM TORMENTED IN THIS FLAME; S. John in his Revelation noting the coherence
of death and hell in the destruction of the wicked, says. Revel. 6.
Behold, a pale horse, and his name, that sat thereon was death, and ((...))
HELL FOLLOVVED AFTER HIM, and power was given THEM over the fourth part of ye
earth. After death follows none other death, but HELL, which is the second
death, and yt as it comes AFTER the death of the body; so is it distinguished
from the death of the body, because it kills the soul for ever; and that S.
John calls (...). He does the like in the 20. chap. of the same book. The
Reuelat. 20
sea (says he) gave up her dead, which were in her, and death and ((...)) HELL
delivered up her dead, that were in them, and death and ((...)) HELL were cast
into ye lake of fire, this is the second death. When our savior then says, I
have ye keys of death, Revel. ^
((...)) and of hell, he does not only mean the graves of dead bodies are
subjected to his power, but the place and pains of damned souls are likewise
at his disposition. And when Paul says; 1. Corinthians. 15
O death, where is thy sting ((...)) o hell where is thy victory? he teaches us
that God has given us the victory over DEATH AND HELL, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. That victory Christ could not make us partakers of, except he had
first triumphed over them both in his own person. And that victory Christ did
foresee and foreshew, when he said to God, thou will not forsake my soul (g
d="fo") in hell; (or leave it to the power of hell;) but assist me there, and
bring me thence with safety and victory.

The church from the beginning has confessed Christ's descent to hell.
If my collections were not allowed by the scriptures; the general faith and
confession of all the fathers in all ages and countries, since the first
foundation of Christ's church, should move men that are modest, not hastily to
leap from the universal consent of al places, and persons grounding
themselves on the manifest words of the sacred scriptures. To quote them all,
were to increase another volume; I will therefore content my self with showing
you, how soon it began, and how long it continued in the church of Christ, to
be received and believed as a matter of faith. Thaddaeus one of the 70.
disciples, mentioned in the tenth of Luke, taught the citizens of Edessa,
within ten years after Christ's death, amongst other points of faith, as
Eusebius reports, Eusebius. ecclesia^^ ^^stor, lib. 1 cap. 13.
Quomodo (Christus) crucifixus fuerit, and ad inferos descenderit, sepemque
illam antea nunquam diruptam sciderit; resurrexerit etiam, ac mortuos qui a
seculo dormierant, vna excitauerit; and quomodo solus quidem descenderit, multa
vero turba comitatus ad patrem ipsius ascenderit. How Christ was crucified,
and descended into hell, and overthrew the wall, which was never before that
time broken; and rose again, and raised up with him those yt had bin dead long
before; and how he descended alone, but ascended up to his father with a great
multitude. This report by some men is counted fabulous, for yt the letters sent
to Christ and received from him by the ruler of that city, are no where
remembered in the Evangelists: but by their leaves that reason is rather
frivolous: for so much as S. John says; John. 22
There are also many other things, which Jesus did, the which if they should
be written every one, I suppose the world could not contain the books, that
should be written. Since then this is no sure ground to reject a story, for
that it is not contained in the scriptures, I see no cause either to prejudice
the public and ancient records of the city of Edessa, remaining at that very
time when this report was made; or to mistrust the credit of Eusebius, as if
he had impudentlie forged the old monuments of that city, where he might so
easily be reproved. His words are. Eusebius. ibid.
Habes harum rerum testimonium scriptis comprehensum, and ex Grammatophylacio
vrbis Edessae tunc regiae de sumptum. Nam in ipsis publicis chartis, quae res
pris^as continent, ista ad hun^ vsque diem ex eo tempore seruata reperiuntur.
Nihil autem impedit, quo minus literas ipsas, quae nobis ex Archiuis desumptae,
and e Syrorum lingua his verbis translatae sunt, audiamus* Thou have the
testimony of these things comprised in writing, and taken out of the chamber
of Edessa, that then was a princely City. For in the public records, of
things aunciently past, thus much is there extant TO THIS VERY DAY, preserved
from the time wherein these things were done* And I think it best to set down
the letters, which I my self COPIED out of the Authentic records, and
TRANSLATED from the Syrian tongue in these words. How the report of a writer,
yt is not canonical, should have more credit then this has, I know not. The
records were ancient and public, and then extant to be viewed by every man,
when Eusebius did exemplify them. If we discredit all antiquity and
testimony which we see not with our own eyes; we must look to receive the
like reward from our posterity. Ignatius that lived with, and after the
Apostles, Ignatius (...).
in his Epistle to the Church of Trallis, consesseth the same Article, almost
in the same words. (...). Christ descended into Hell alone, and returned (or
rose again) with a great number, and brake down the rampiere that had stood
from the beginning, and ouerthrewe the mid-wall thereof. Athanasius present at
the great council of Nice as a Clergy man, though not then a Bishop, in his
short recapitulation of the Catholic faith, adds this Article, as necessary
to be believed of all Christians. As^anas. in Symbolo.
Passus est pro salute nostra, descendit ad inferos, tertia die resurrexit a
mortuis: haec est fides Catholica quam nisi quis firmiter fideliterque
crediderit saluus esse non poterit. Christ suffered for our salvation,
descended into hell, rose again the third day from the dead. This is the
Catholic faith, which except a man do firmly and fastlie believe he cannot
be saved. Saint Austen does so press it, that he pronounces it infidelity
to deny it. August. epist. 99.
Secundum animam (Christum) apud inferos fuisse aperte scriptura declarat, and
per Prophetam praemissa, and per Apostolicum intellectum satis exposita, qua
dictum est, non derelinques animam meam in inferno. That Christ according to
his soul was in hell, the Scripture plainly declares, forespoken by the
Prophet (David) and sufficiently expounded by the Apostles application, where
it was said, Thou will not leave my soul in hell. Ibidem^
Quis ergo nisi infidelis negauerit fuisse apud inferos Christum? Who then but
an infidel will deny, that Christ was in Hell? Hilarious makes it a
necessary cause of our redemption. Hilarious de ^rinitat. lib. 2,
Crux, mors, inferi, salus nostra est. Christ's Cross, death, and being in
Hell, are the means of our salvation. For as he died that we might live, so
he went to hell by Hilaries assertion, that we might go to heaven. Ibid. lib
3.
Christus Dei filius moritur, sed omnis caro viuificatur in Christo. Dei filius
in inferis est, sed homo refertur ad coelum. Christ the son of God dies, but
all flesh is quickened in Christ. The son of God is in Hell, but man is
restored to Heaven. And least we should think that Hilarie dreamed of
Christ's suffering hell pains on the Cross, as some have alleged him; his
words are plain else where, that Christ's soul after death descended into
hell. Hilarious in Psalm. 138.
Humanae istae lex necessitatis est, vt sepultis corporibus ad inferos animae
descendant. Quam descensionem, Dominus ad consummationem very hominis non
recusauit. This is the law of man's misery, that their bodies go to the
grave, their souls to hell: WHICH DESCENT the Lord did not refuse, to prove
himself in every point to be a true man. This necessity was the wages of
man's sin; the strength whereof could none abolish but only Christ. Idem de
trinit* lib. 4.
Hic vnus est, ^duersantes nobis ini^^^icasque virtutes ligno passionis
affigens, mortem in inferno perimens, spei nostrae fidem resurrectione
confirmans, corruptionem humanae carnis gloria corporis sui perimens. Christ
alone was he that fastened to the wood of his passion the powers which were
adversaries and enemies to us; that vanquished death even in hell; that
confirmed the stedfastnes^e of our hope with his resurrection, and abolished
the corruption of man's flesh with the glory of his body. Leo likewise. Leo de
res^^ domini, serm^ ^^
Resurrectio saluatoris, nec animam in inferno, nec carnem diu morata est in
sepulchro; quoniam deitas, quae ab vtraque suscepti hominis substantia non
recessit, quod potestate diuisit, potestate coniunxit. The resurrection of our
Savior neither stayed his soul long in hell, nor his flesh in the grave;
because his Godhead which did not depart from either part of his manhood,
mightily conjoined, what it mightily severed.

But no man has more pishilie, or more soundly delivered the full course, and
cause of Christ's descent to Hell, then Fulgentius; which I must repeat at
large, because every word is worth the marking. Tulgentius de passione
domini ad Trasim. lib. 3
Restabat ad plenum nostrae redemptionis effectum, vt illuc vsque homo sine
peccato. a Deo susceptus descenderet, quousque homo separatus a Deo peccati
merito cecidisset: id est ad infer^um, vbi solebat peccatoris anima torqueri,
and ad sepulchrum, vbi consueuerat peccatoris caro corrumpi: sic tamen, vt nec
Christi caro in sepulchro corrumperetur, nec inferni doloribus anima
torqueretur. Quoniam anima immunis a peccato non erat subdenda supplicio, and
carnem sine peccato non debuit vitiare corruption. Nam quia peceans homo me^uit
in seipso per supplicium diuidi, quia maluit a Deo praeuaricationis reatu
disiungi, propterea factum est, vt peccatoris mors ^arnem peccati ad sepulchrum
corrumpendam perduceret, animam inferno torquendam protinus manciparet. Vt
autem peccator fuisset gratuito munere liberatus, factum est, vt mortens
corporis, quam a Deo iusto peccator homo pertulerat just, Deifilius a
peccatore pateretur unjust: and ad sepulchrum perveniret caro iusti, quousque
fuerat caro deuoluta peccati: and vsque ad infernum descenderet anima
saluatoris, vbi peccatimerito torquebatur anima peccatoris. Hoc autem ideo
factum est, vt per morientem temporaliter carnem iusti, donaretur vita aeterna
carni: and per descendentem ad infernum animam iusti, dolores soluerentur
inferni. It remained for the full effecting of our redemption, that man assumed
of God without sin, should thither descend, whither man severed from God
fell by desert of sin: that is, unto hell, where the soul of the sinner was
wont to be tormented, and to the grave, where the flesh of the sinner was
wont to be corrupted; yet so, that neither Christ's flesh should be
corrupted in the grave, nor his soul be tormented with the pains of hell;
because the soul free from sin was not to be subjected to that punishment,
nor flesh clean from the contagion of sin should suffer corruption. In so
much as man sinning deserved by punishment to be severed from himself, who by
his transgression would needs be severed from God, therefore it was
appointed that the death of the sinner should bring his sinful flesh to the
grave, there to rotte; and presently should send his soul to hell, there to
be tormented. But when the sinner by the gift of (Gods) grace, was to be
delivered; it was provided, that the son of God should unjustly suffer at
the hands of sinners the death of the body, which sinful man had justly
been wrapped in by the justice of God, and the flesh of the just should come
to the grave, whither sinful flesh was tumbled: and that the SOVLE OF OUR
SAVIOVR SHOULD DESCEND TO HELL, WHERE THE SINFVLL SOVL^ WAS TORMENTED FOR THE
REVVARD OF SIN. This was therefore done, that by the flesh of the just
temporally dying, eternal life might be given to (our) flesh, and by the soul
of the just descending to hell, the torments of hell might be abolished.

Out of Fulgentius I observe two things; which if it please men to mark, they
shall clear themselves from all absurdities touching Christ's descent to hell.
The first is, THE PLACE, VVHITHER he desended; the next is, THE CAUSE, WHY he
descended. The place whither he descended was hell; whither the soul of man
sinning against God was adjudged for the wages of his transg^ession. The cause
of his descent, was to free all the faithful from the beginning of the world
to the end thereof from coming thither. And in both these, the Scriptures and
fathers do fully concur; though some ancient writers do swerve, and
strive about Christ's delivering some from hell, that were there at the time of
his descent, as they suppose. Which variety and uncertainty of opinions
concerning the state of the dead before Christ's coming has very much
entangled this question, and induced many men of learning and judgment
otherwise, to reject. Christ's descent to hell as a fable, or to wrest it to an
other sense, with new found expositions. Howbeit I see no cause, but the
doctrine of the Scriptures confessed by all the fathers may stand very
clear, whatsoever we resolve of this other assertion, touching the state of
the righteous departed this life before Christ's death. I will therefore shortly
discuss both the place and the cause, and so draw to an end.

As for the place whither Christ descended, the Church of Rome greedily hunteth
after it, to hear of her Purgatory; hoping, whence the souls of the
righteous were by Christ delivered, there to make a stand for souls, not
perfectly confessed and absolved in this life; that she may set to sale her
prayers and pardons. But if she follow Christ descending, Christ descended to
ye place of the damned.
her devotion must reach to the place and pains of the damned, for thither
Christ descended. And so by their leaves both Scriptures and fathers avouch.
First the words are plain, and must be proper, as well in the Act. 8.
Canon as in the Symbol. ^post.
Creed. Thou will not leave my soul in hell: and Symbol. ^post.
he descended into hell. Again the kingdom of Satan consists of these three;
SIN, DEATH, and HELL: SIN REIGNING, whiles the body and soul are joined
together; DEATH SEVERING them both, and TVRNING the body to earth; HELL
RECEIVING and TORMENTING the soul, till the day of judgment, when body and
soul shall for ever be cast into hell fire. If these three be not abolished
by Christ, Satan's kingdom is not destroyed by Christ; and specially if hell
be not vanquished; no part of our salvation is performed. The work of sin
is sweet, if the wages were not sower, which is hell fire. To raise our bodies
from death, is no favor, if Hell be not overthrown; it were more easy for
them to lie in dust, then to burn in hell. How has Christ restored us to
Heaven, if he have not yet freed us from Hell? Or brought us to God, if he
have not yet taken us from Satan? Wherefore either Hell must be destroyed, or
we are no way redeemed, And in all these, when I speak of Hell, I speak of
the place of the damned. For if the fear of damnation continue, what hope of
salvation can we conceive? But the Apostle says plainly, that Christ
through death Heb 2.
DESTROYED HIM, that had power of death, even the DEVIL; and DELIVERED ALL
them which for fear of death were all their life time subject to servitude. If
the DEVIL be DESTROYED, To destroy the devil, and to deliver man.
then Hell is fully conquered; for whiles that retains force against the
faithful, the Devil is in the height of his kingdom. Neither is death to be
feared at all, but in respect of hell following after death. If then all the
Saints here on earth be Heb. 2.
DELIVERED FROM THE FEAR OF DEATH, and Luke ^^
from the hands of all that hate (them) to serve (God) without fear all the
days of their life, in holiness and righteousness before him; it is evident
that hell is spoiled of all right and claim to the members of Christ, by
reason our head being there in our names, and for our sins, brake the
strength of hell, abolished the power, and loosed the sorrows and pains
thereof; that they should not take hold on him, nor ever after on any of
his. For as he suffered and died, not for his own sake, but for ours; so he
descended and loosed the sorrows of death and hell, not as provided for him,
but for us. And since to our sins was due damnation, and no lesser or easier
punishment; it was requisite that Christ should thither descend, and by
dissoluing the wages of our sin in his own person, thence deliver us; though
not there tormented, yet thither adjudged, and so release us, not as being
there, but from coming thither.

Touching the place, Thaddaeus one of the seventy taught, as we heard out of
Eusebius, that Christ descended into hell; Whither christ descended after death.
and brake the wall that was never before broken. From the dead many rose
before Christ's death, and therefore the partition betwixt death and life was
often broken by others, before Christ's resurrection; but from hell never
returned any, but only Christ; by reason that wall was never broken, but by
the Son of GOD. Athanas de salutari aduento^^ Christi.
Athanasius in like sort. In suae ad nostri similitudinem forma, nostram inibi
depingens mortem, vt in ea resurrectionem pro nobis concinnaret, ex sepulchro
quide^ corpus, animam vero ex ORCO reducem faceret, vt in morte mortem
dissolueret per exhibitionem animae, and per sepulchrum corporis in sepulchro,
corruptionem aboleret; ex orco vero and sepulchro immortalitatem and
incorruptionem ostendit, in forma nobis consimili viam nostram emensus,
nostramque detentionem relaxans, and hoc ipsum eximij miraculi fuit. In his
likeness to our nature (Christ) accomplishing our death, that in the same he
might perform his resurrection for vs', brought his BODY OVT OF THE GRAVE, and
his SOVLE OVT OF HELL; that in death he might dissolve death by presenting his
soul there, and by the burial of his body, he might abolish corruption in
the grave. So that even from hell, and from the grave, he showed immortality
(of the soul) and incorruption (of the body) treading the very way that we
should have trod, in the likeness of our nature, and releasing of our
detention. And this was a marvelous wonder. When Athanasius says, that Christ
in his humane nature trodde the very same way of death that we should have
done; his body and soul going to those very places whither ours should have
gone; he does not mean the place of rest, where ye souls of the righteous were
before Christ's coming; but the place whither the souls of men were condemned
for the sin of their first father; which is not Paradise, nor Abraham's bosom,
but the place of the damned, where the true death of the soul and wages of sin
are by Gods justice inflicted. Hear his own words. Athanas. de incarnatione
Christi.
Vbi corruptum fuerat humanum corpus, eo suum corpus protecit Jesus: and
vbitenebatur anima humana in morte, ibi exhibuit humanam suam animam, vt ipse
inuictus a morte, tanquam hominem se praesentem ostenderet, and solueret
catenas mortis vt Deus; vt vbi seminata fuerat corruption, inde exoriretur
incorruptibilitas; and VBI REGNAVERAT MORS IN FORMA HVMANAE ANIMAE, ibi ipse
ille mortalis praesens, immortalitatem exhiberet, atque ita NOS PARTICIPES
redderet suae incorruptibilitatis, and immortalitatis per spem resurrectionis
ex mortuis. Where the body of man used to rot, thither Jesus cast his body:
and WHERE THE SOVLE OF MAN WAS HELD IN DEATH, there did he exhibit his
humane soul; that he being in no wise to be conquered by death, might both
show himself there present as man; and yet break the chains of death as God;
that where corruption was sowed, thence incorruption might rise (even from the
grave;) and where death reigned over men's souls (which must needs be in hell)
there he being present as a mortal man, might demonstrate his immortality,
and so make us partakers, of his incorruption (in flesh,) and immortality (in
soul) by the hope of resurrection from the dead.

And because Hilarious and Fulgentius do so fully concur with Athanasius,
Athanasius agrees in this point with Hilary and Fulgentius.
that if we truly conceive the one, we shall easily understand the other; you
shall see the same doctrine, which the other two follow, more fully delivered
by Athanasius. Athanas. ibid^.
Quide Adae inobedientia quaestionem habuit, indicioque peracto duplicem paenam
in sententia sua complexus erat, dum rei terrestri italoquitur, Terraes, and in
terram reuerteris, (at que ita pro decreto, domini corpus in terram abscedit;)
animae dixit, morte morieris; atque hinc est, quod homo in duas parts
discerpitur, et vt ad duo loca discedat, condemnatur. Ac proinde upos fuit illo
ipso iudice, qui hoc decretu^ tulerat, vt ipse per se sententia^ solueret sub
specie conde^nati, inconde^natu^ se sinceru^que a peccatis oste^dens, vt
hominem deo reconciliaret, hominemque totum in libertatem vindicaret. I am si
mihi alium locum condemnationis praeter hos duos ostendere potestis, merito
hominem dixeritis tripliciter diuidi. Quod si tertium aliquem locum ostender^
non potestis, PRAETER SEPVLCHRVM ET INFERNVM, ex quibus plane ereptus est homo
Christo assertore, per suam speciem cum nostri similitudine congruentem; cur
igitur dicitis, deum nondum propitiatum esse? He that examined Adams
disobedience, and in the end of his judgment comprised in his sentence
(against Adam) a double punishment; speaking thus to the terrestrial part (of
man,) earth thou art, aad to earth shall thou return; and according to this
decree, the Lords body was laid in earth; even he said to the soul, thou shall
die the death; and thereupon man (dying) is distracted in two parts, and
condemned to two places. Insomuch that it was requisite, the very same judge,
which pronounced this decree, should by himself dissolve this sentence in the
show of a man condemned, but yet proving him self to be uncondemned, and
clear from sin, that he might reconcile man to God, and reduce the whole man
to liberty. Now if you can name me any other place, whereto man was condemned
besides these two, rightly may you think man (after death) is to be divided
into three (places;) but if you can show me no third place, besides the grave,
(for the body) and hell, (for the soul,) from both which man is fully freed,
Christ delivering him with like parts of himself answerable to our nature, how
say you then, that God is not yet satisfied? The whole man in Adam was in such
sort condemned for sin, that his body returned to corruption in the earth,
and his soul departed to torments in hell, which is the death of the soul
after this life. To the very same places whither man was condemned, and in the
same parts of our nature, the son of GOD vouchsafed to descend, that by the
lying of his body in the earth, our bodies might at the last day be raised
out of the earth; and by the presence of his soul in hell, on which the force
of hell could not fasten, our souls might for ever be delivered from coming
thither.

This condemnation of the body to the grave, and of the soul to hell for
sin, is that Hilar. in Psalm. 138.
law of humane necessity, which Hilary speaks of, whereto the Lord Jesus
submitted himself; not that his flesh should see corruption, or his soul taste
of da^natio^, but yt by the presence of his body in the grave, and of his soul
in hell he might show himself invincible to both, and so deliver us from both.
Hilar. de tri^^ta^. lib. 3
The archangels, powers, and principalities (in heaven) do with vnceasing and
everlasting voices glorify the son of God (says Hilary) quia homo natus
sit, mortem vicerit, portas Inferni fregerit, cohaerede^ sibi plebe^
acquisiuerit, carnem in aeternitatis gloriam ex corruptione transtulerit;
because he became man, vanquished death, brake the gates of hell, purchased unto
himself a people to inherit with him, and translated his flesh from corruption
to eternal glory. These two places the grave and hell, whereto sinners were
adjudged to have their bodies in the one to be corrupted, their souls in the
other to be tormented, Fulgentius does expressly pursue; as his words before do
plainly testify; and resolutelie concludes, that Christ's manhood for the full
effecting of our redemption must SO FAR DESCEND, Pulgen^. vt (...).
quousque homo separatus a deo peccati merito cecidisset; HOW FAR MAN SEVERED
FROM GOD, FELL BY THE DESERT OF SIN; THAT IS, TO HELL, WHERE THE SOVLE OF THE
SINNER USED TO BE TORMENTED, and to the grave where the FLESH OF THE SINNER
used to putrify. Now if any man think the soul of man severed from God,
did not for the wages of sin deserve the place and pains of the damned, he
had more need be catechized then confuted. For since without repentance men
Luke. 13.
perish in their sins; and Ezech. 18
the soul that sins, that soul shall die; the death of the soul after
this life is no where but in hell, where body and soul do perish
everlastingly. With these someth Saint Austen as touching the place. Si in
illum Abrabae sinum Christum mortuum venisse sancta scriptura dixisset, August.
epi. 99
non nominato inferno eiusque doloribus; miror si quisquam ad inferos eum
descendisse asserere auderet. Sed quia euidentia testimonia and infernum
commemorant and dolores, nulla causa occurrit, cur illo credatur venisse
saluator, nisi vt ab eius doloribus saluos faceret. If the holy Scripture had
said, that Christ after his death came to Abraham's bosom, and not mentioned
hell and the pains thereof, I marvel if any would have been so bold, as
to have avouched that Christ descended into hell. But for that evident
testimonies do name hell, and the pains (of hell) I yet see no cause, why our
Savior should be believed to have come thither, but to deliver from the
pains thereof. Wherefore when the scriptures teach us, yt Christ's soul was in
hell; we must not by hell mean Abraham's bosom, or Paradise, but ye very place
of the damned, where the souls of sinners are tormented. For Christ to redeem
man that was condemned for sin, descended as low, as man fell by the
punishment of sin in this life or the next, and fet us back from the
sentence of death pronounced against us, by presenting himself in our steed
to the very places, that were prepared to revenge our transgressions: his
flesh resisting the power of the grave, and his soul repressing and breaking
the pains of hell, that neither should be able to hinder the speed of his
resurrection, or weaken the work of our redemption.

As the place whither Christ descended, is expressly named in the scriptures to
be hell, and (...), where the wicked are everlastingly tormented; The end of
Christ's desce^t to hell, was the destruction of Satan, and deliverance of man.
so the purpose of his descent is plainly professed in the same, to be the
spoiling of Satan, and delivering of man from the power of hell. And these two
are so linked together, that the one is always included in the other; Christ
entering Satan's house to this end, that he might divide the spoils. First then
let us see, what the scriptures say of man's deliverance from the hand of
Satan; and afterward hear what some of the ancient writers have thereto added,
or therein doubted. The promise made in the prophet Esaias, that God Esaias. 25
will destroy death for ever, and likewise in the prophet Osee; Osee. 13
I will redeem them from the power of hell; I will deliver them from death; o
death I will be thy death, o hell I will be thy destruction: was not peculiar
to this or that age, nor proper to those that were already dead, or then borne
when this was spoken; but general to all the faithful from the beginning to
the end; whereby God assures them, that Osee. 13
hell shall be destroyed, and Romans 16
Satan trodden under feet, and 1. Corinthians. 15
death swallowed up in victory. Zachary John Baptistes father is the best
expositor of all these promises, when he says. Luke. 1
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited, and redeemed his
people. And has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his
servant David, (as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which were from
the beginning) even salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that
hate us. (Which was) the oath, that he swear to our father Abraham, that he
would cause us; being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, to serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. The salvation which God has wrought for us in Christ, does not free us
from afflictions and troubles, since 2. Tim. 3
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; but it
brings us DELIVERANCE FROM OUR (ghostly) ENEMIES; and saves us from the hand
of all that hate (our souls); that being quieted from their power and fear, we
should serve God in holiness all the time of our life. And albeit in this life,
our eyes Acts* 26
are opened, that we may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan, to God; and receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst
them, which are sanctified by faith in Christ^ yet the fear of death is not
taken from us, till we be assured, that hell is conquered; and no cause left
why we should tremble at death, that now is an entrance to a better life.

DELIVERANCE then, Deliverance was performed as well to the living and unborn,
as to the dead.
FROM THE HAND OF ALL that hate us, (which Christ has purchased for us,) has
in it not only remission of sins, and resurrection from death, but also the
destruction of Satan: whereby God acquiteth us from the power of darkness,
that is, from the fear of hell in this life, and from the danger thereof in
the next, and fully translateth us into the kingdom of his dear son; and
this deliverance belongs to all the members of Christ without exception, as
well living, as yet unborn. Christ (says the Apostle) through death Hebre. 2
destroyed him, that had power of death, even the devil, and DELIVERED ALL
THEM, which for fear of death were al their life long subject to bondage. If
ALL BE DELIVERED, that were oppressed with the fear of death, then surely the
living must needs be discharged from the bondage of Satan; and redemption from
the power of hell, which God promised unto his servants, was not proper to
any that were in hell at the time of Christ's descent, but it was, and is
extended to all the faithful before and after Christ's coming, that in this
life they should be secured, and in the next saved from him, that had the power
of death, and from the gates of hell. Fulgentius teaches this doctrine as
Catholic. Fulgent. ad Trasimundum. lib. 3.
Sicut mortuus pro nobis, omnes nos sibi commori fecit; sic solutis doloribus
inferni, omnes fideles ab ysdem doloribus liberauit. As (Christ) dying for us,
made us all to die with him; so dissoluing the pains of hell, he DELIVERED ALL
THE FAITHFVLL from the same. As all the godly, that ever were, are, or shall
be, died in Christ's flesh unto sin; so all the faithful from the beginning
of the world to the end thereof were delivered from the pains of hell, by the
presence and power of Christ's soul breaking the strength, and loosing the
sorrows of death even in hell. And therefore he says, Christ called himself
free among the dead, Ibidem.
vt ostenderet animam suam a peccato liberam, in infernum pro NOBIS
PECCATORIBVS DESCENDISSE, to show that his soul clecre from sin descended
into hell FOR US SINNERS. So that Christ descended to hell FOR ALL THE FAITHFVL,
and FOR US SINNERS, to deliver them and us from the sorrows of the second
death; and not for certain whom he found in hell, when he came thither.

Hilarious joins in the same confession, that Christ De trinitat. 1. 4
killing death in hell, confirmed the faith OF OUR HOPE with his resurrection:
Ibidem. lib. 3
and breaking the gates of hell, purchased a people that should inherit with
him. Athanasius every where treads the same steps; teaching us that Christ
Athanas. de salutari aduentu Christi.
perfited his resurrection FOR US, and out of hell and the grave brought
immortality and incorruption, releasing OUR DETENTION. And again, Christ Idem
de incarnat, Christi.
brake the chains of death as God, that where death reigned over men's souls,
there he being present as a man might demonstrate immortality (in his soul)
and so MAKE US PARTAKERS of his incorruption. And lastly, where death both of
soul and body was inflicted on man for sin, the one in the grave, the other
in hell; Ibidem.
he that gave the judgment, dissolved the sentence in his own person, under
the show of a man condemned; but in deed uncondemned, and free from sin,
that he might reconcile MAN to God, and bring THE WHOLE MAN into liberty.
FROM THE GRAVE THEN, AND FROM HELL MAN WAS FREED CHRIST DELIVERING HIM.

And least it should seem strange, We are delivered, not from being in hell
but from coming thither.
that our souls were delivered from hell ^y Christ's descent thither, where they
never were; S. Austen expounding David's words, Psalm. 85.
Thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell, shows that men may
be delivered as well from DANGERS CONSEQVENT as PRESENT; and as well from that
which is DESERVED, as from that which is INFLICTED. And first yt Christ
delivered OUR SOVLES from hell by his coming thither (though we were not
there) his words are plain. August. in Psalm. 85.
Est aliud (infernum) inferius, quo eunt mortui: vnde voluit deus eruere ANIMAS
NOSTRAS, etiam illuc mittendo filium suum. Propterea vox eius est in illo
psalmo, non quoquam homine conijciente, sed Apostolo exponente, vbi ait:
quonia^ non dereliquisti animam mea^ in inferno. Ergo aut ipsius vox est hic,
et eruisti anima^ mean ab inferno inferiori, aut nostra vox est per ipsum
christu^ dominu^ nostru^, quia ideo ille peruenit vsque ad infernu^, ne NOS
REMANEREMVS in inferno. There is a lower hell, whither ye dead go; whence it
pleased God to deliver OUR SOVLES, by sending his son thither. Therefore those
are Christ's words in ye psalm, not by ma^s conjecture, but by the Apostles
exposition, where he says; y^ have not left my soul in hell. So yt this verse,
Thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell, is either the voice of
Christ in this psalm, or it is our voice in the person of Christ our Lord,
because he therefore went to hell, LEAST WE SHOULD ABIDE (for ever) IN HELL.
And to prove this speech to be usual yt we are delivered from the dangers and
places in which we never were, but should have bin, if we had not bin saved
thence; he adds. Ibidem*
Recte dicis medico, liberasti me ab agritudine, non in quaia^ eras, sed in qua
futurus eras. Mittendus erat (quis) in carcerem: venit alius defendit eum;
gratias agens, quid dicit? eruisti animam meam de carcere. Suspendendus erat
debtor; solutum est debitum pro eo; liberatus dicitur de suspendio. In his
omnibus non orant, sed quia talibus meritis agebantur, vt, nisi subuentum
esset, ibi essent, inde se recte dicunt liberari, quo per liberatores suos non
sunt permissi perduci. Thou say rightly to thy physitia^, you have
delivered me from this sickness, not in which thou wast, but into which thou
wast like to fall. A man is about to be cast into prison; another comes and
rescueth him. What says he when he gives thanks? you delivered me out of
prison. A debtor was in danger to be hanged; the debt is paid for him, he is
said to be delivered from hanging. In all these things, they were not; but
because such were their deserts, that unless they had been helped, they had
fallen into them, THEY RIGHTLY MAY SAY THEY WERE DELIVERED thence, VVHITHER
THEY WERE NOT SVFFERED TO COME, by those that delivered them. Tertullian
declining to Montanisme in his book de anima, and defending the souls of all the faithful after Christ's coming to be kept, apud Inferos, in the region of
hell till the day of judgment, save of martyrs, to whom only he opened
Paradise, confess^th the other side, which in deed were true christians, made
this objection against him. Tertullian. de anima. cap. 55
Sed in hoc, inquiunt, Christus inferos adijt, ne nos adiremus. Caeterum quod
discrimen ethnicorum and christianorum, ficarcer mortuis idem? But to this end,
they say, Christ went to hell, that we should not come thither. For what
difference between the Ethnickes and Christians, if after death they be both in
one prison? So that in all ages this doctrine was preserved in the church,
which the scriptures do warrant, that Christ by his death destroyed the devil,
and delivered all the godly from the fear, not of the first death, which they
cannot avoid, and need not to fear; but of the second death in hell, which is
justly to be feared, and can no way be prevented, but by the power of that
redemption, which we have in Christ Jesus.

Where the souls of the righteous were before Christ's coming, is nothing to
this question.
[But all the fathers with one consent affirm, that Christ delivered the souls
of the patriarks and prophets out of hell, at his coming thither; and so
spoiled Satan of those, yt were in his present possession.] The doctrine of
Christ's descending into hell to save al his members from coming thither, must
not be confounded with this disputation, whether ye souls of the prophets and
Patriarks were before Christ's resurrection in hell or no; but what soever we
determine or imagine of this later question, the other position stands
uncontrolled, both by Scriptures and fathers: yet for their sakes, that
happily may stumble at this block, I will not refrain to speak what I
think of this assertion; so as I be first allowed to say with saint Austen.
August. in psalm. 85.
Quod dicimus fratres; hoc si non vobis tanquam certus exposuero, ne
succenseatis. Homo enim sum, and quantum conceditur de scripturis sanctis,
tantum audeo dicere, nihil ex me. Infernum nec ego expertus sum adhuc, nec vos;
and fortassis alia via erit, and non per infernum erit. Incerta sunt enim haec.
That which (in this question) I say brethren, if I can not avouch it as
certain, you must not be offended. I am but a man, and what I am assured by
the Scriptures, that I dare affirm, and of my self nothing. Hell neither I
have yet experience of, neither you; and perchance there shall be another way,
and by hell it shall not be. For these things are altogether uncertain. The
things after this life God will not have particularly known unto us, whiles
here we live; and therefore to make sudden resolutions of them, can have
neither certainty nor safety; yet so much as the scriptures reveal, we must
necessarily believe, and may boldly profess without any danger.

Touching the state of the dead in the old Testament, I see a number of
ancient writers incline to this conclusion, that the souls of the righteous
before Christ's death and descent were in hell; The reason why the fathers
thought they were in hell.
but as the foundation of their opinion is very weak, so the consequents are
plainly contradicted, both by Scriptures and fathers. This assertion first
grew from the confession of the Patriarchs and Prophets, that they must after
this life, DESCEND TO SHEOL; which the Septuagint do always express by the
word (...), and the Latin interpreter, by Infernus; whereupon the fathers
both Greek and Latin supposed the saints in the old Testament departing hence
DESCENDED TO HELL; But the signification of the word Sheol is so manifestly
mistaken, that it is now no great masterie to find the foil. When Jacob
says, Genesis 37.
I will go down TO SHEOL mourning to my son; and again, Genesis 42.
You will bring my gray hairs with sorrow unto Sheol; and likewise Job; Job.
17.
Sheol is my house; oh that thou would hide me Job. 14.
in Sheol till thine anger were past; as also David, Psalm. 89.
what man lives, that shall deliver his soul from the hand of Sheol? And
lastly Esai. 38.
Ezechias, I shall go to the gates of Sheol: If by Sheol in these places we
understand hell, as some Greek and Latin interpreters and writers have done;
we must needs confess the faithful dying in the former Testament descended
into hell; but if we take Sheol for the grave, where life ends and the body
lies; then make they no kind of proof, that the souls of the godly before
Christ's coming, were in hell, but only that their bodies were in the grave; of
which there was never any question amongst christians or pagans.

Now that Sheol in the Scriptures notes as well the grave where men's bodies
putrify, Sheol signifies as well the grave as hell.
as she place where the souls of the wicked are after this life detained and
punished, to him that considers the circumstances of these and other such
places, will soon appear. The words of king Ezechiah at large are these.
Esaias. 38.
I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of Sheol, I am
deprived of the residue of my years. I said, I shall not see the Lord in the
land of the living; I shall see man no more amongst the inhabitants of the
world. I have cut my life in sunder like a weauer. Here is a full
description of death, not of hell; and least we should dream, that both are
linked together, in the end he says; Ibid. ver. 18. and 19.
Sheol can not confess unto thee, neither can death praise thee, nor they that
descend into the pit, trust in thy truth; but the living, the living, he
shall confess thee, as I do this day. It is manifest impiety to say that
the souls of the Saints departed did neither CONFESS, NOR PRAISE GOD, nor
TRUST IN HIS TRVTH: but in the grave where the body wants sense and life,
this is most true, which Ezechias delivers, and confirmed by the holy Ghost
in diverse places of the Scriptures. Psalm. 6.
In death there is no remembrance of thee (says David to God) and in Sheol
who shall confess (or praise) thee? The souls of just and perfect men did
then most praise GOD, when they were loosed from the warfare of this life;
therefore they were not in Sheol; for in Sheol none shall confess unto God,
nor trust in his truth. Psalm. 1^5.
The dead praise not the Lord, nor all that go down into silence. DEATH,
SILENCE, and SHEOL, are taken for one and the same thing; and in none of these
is God praised, or confessed. And what can be plainer then that David says
in the 141. Psalm? Psalm. 141.
Our bones lie scattered at the mouth of Sheol, as chippes ^ewed on the earth.
Their bones I trust lay not scattered at the mouth of hell, but at the mouth of
their graves, where their bodies were buried. Job in like manner; Job. 17.
though I hope, yet Sheol must be mine house, I shall take up my bed in
darkness. I shall say to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm,
thou art my mother, and my sister. Darkness, corruption, and the worm are
the parts of Sheol; and th^se consume the body, they waste not the soul.
Solomon shall seal up this inquisition, where he ^aieth; Eccles. ^.
All that thine hand is able to do, dispatch it in thy strength; for there is
neither WORK, nor THOUGHT; nor KNOWLEDGE, nor WISDOM in SHEOL whither
thou go. If the souls of the righteous neither DO, nor THINK, nor KNOW
any thing, they be surely a sleep, and neither in joy nor pain; but if
this be absurd and wicked to affirm either of hell, heaven, paradise, or of
Abraham's bosom, then certainly SHEOL, where none of these things are, is THE
GRAVE; and there it is e^ident, all these things are wanting. Since then
without question Sheol signifies as well the grave, where the body lies dead
and rotten, as the place where the souls of unjust and sinful men are kept
and tormented; if in the words of the Patriarchs and Prophets, confessing they
must go to Sheol, we understand the grave, which indeed they meant; there is no
show in the scriptures, that the faithful before Christ's death went to hell,
as some fathers have collected out of these and such like sayings of the godly
before Christ's birth; but rather the places that mention their state after
death, do evidently import the contrary.

The Church of the Jews thought the souls of the righteous to be in peace.
The book of Wisdom, though it be not Canonical; yet does it show what
opinion the Church of the Jews had of the souls of the righteous departed
this life; and how much some ancient writers were deceived in this their
persuasion, that the spirits of the Patriarks and Prophets were in hell at the
time of Christ's descent thither. Sapient, ca. 3.
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no torment shall touch
them. They seemed in the eyes of the unwise to die, and their end was counted
misery, and their departure hence destruction; but they are in peace. For
though in the sight of men they were punished, yet their hope is full of
immortality. They were nourtured in some few things, but they shall be
rewarded in great things, for God tried them, and found them meet for
himself. He proved them as gold in the furnace; and received them, as the
fruits of a perfect offe^ing. In the time of their visitation, they shall
shine, and judge the Nations, and reign over peoples, and he that is Lord over
them shall reign for ever. They that trusted in him, shall understand the
truth, and the faithful shall remain in his favor; for grace and mercy is
with his Saints, and a due regard had of his elect. The souls of the
righteous, before Christ's coming were in peace, even in Gods hand, received
as a perfect offering. Grace and mercy was with them, and a special favor
toward them, no torments did touch them. If this were hell, what greater joy
and bliss could they have in Paradise? And this is in effect the very same,
that David hoped for, when he said, Psalm. 19.
God shall deliver my soul from the power of Sheol; for he will receive me.
Selah.

And if this be not plain enough, our Savior in his life time described
Abraham to be Luke 16. Christ himsel^^ placed ye (...) of the righteous far
above be^^ in (...).
far above the place of torment, and Lazarus in his bosom; and so huge a
distaunce betwixt, that there was no passing from the one to the other; yea the
thief was the same day that Christ died in Paradise; and yet our Savior
raised nor reduced none from Hell, by their own confession, till the third
day, that he rose from the dead. If Abraham were not in hell, nor Lazarus,
that lay in his bosom; if the rich man would have his five brethren warned,
least they came into that place of torment; how can it be true, that the
Prophets, and Patriarchs were in hell, when Christ descended, and not thence
delivered, but by his resurrection? Saint Austens collection upon Abraham's
bosom, is worth the hearing. August ^pi. 9^
Addunt quidam hoc beneficium antiquis etiam Sanctis fuisse concessum, Abel,
Seth, Noe, and domui eius, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, alijsque Patriarchis and
Propheti^, vt cum Dominus in infernum venisset^ illis doloribus soluerentur.
Sed quonam modo intelligatur Abraham, in cuius sinum pius ille pauper susceptus
est, in illis doloribus fuisse, EGO QVIDEM NON VID^O: explicant fortasse qui
possunt. Solos autem duos, id est Abraham and Lazarum in illo memorabilis
quietis si^s fuisse, antequam Dominum in inferna descenderet; and de ipsis
tantum duobus dictum fuisse illi diuiti; Inter vos and nos chaos magnum
firmatum est, vt ij qui volunt hinc transire ad vos non possint, neque inde huc
transmeare; nescio vtrum QVISQVAM SIT, CVINON VIDEATVR ABSVRDVM. Porro si
plures quam duo ibi erant, QVIS AVDEAT DICERE non ibi fuisse Patriarchas and
Prophetas, quibus in Scripturis Dei iustitiae pietatisque tam insigne
testimonium perhibetur? Quid ergo is praestiterit, qui dolores soluit inferni,
in quibus illi non fuerunt, n^ndum intelligo; praesertim quia ne ipsos quidem
inferos vspiam Scripturarum locis in bono appellatos potui reperire. Quod si
nusquam legitur, non vtique sinus i^e Abra^e, id est secretae cuiusdam quietis
habitatio, aliqua pars inferorum esse credenda est; quanquam in his ipsis tanti
magistri verbis, vbi ait dixisse Abraham, Inter nos and vos chaos magnum
firmatum est, SATIS VT OPINOR APPARET, non esse quandam partem and quasi
membrum inferorum tantae felicitatis sinum. Some add that this benefit was
yielded unto the Saints of the old Testament, Abel, Seth, Noe and his
family, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to the rest of the Patriarchs and
Prophets, that when Christ came to hell, they were delivered from those pains
there. But how Abraham, into whose bosom that godly poor. Lazarus was
received, can be imagined to have been in these pains, I for my part do not
see, let them DECLARE IT THAT CAN. But that only two, Abraham and Lazarus,
were in that bosom of memorable rest, before the Lord descended to hell; and
that it was said of these two only, betwixt you and us is a mighty gulf
settled, (so that such as would go from hence to you, can not; nor any that
would come from you to us,) I know not whether there be any man, to whom IT
SEEMS NOT ABSVRD. And if there were mo then two, WHO DARE SAY, the
Patriarchs and Prophets were not there, to whom the word of God gives so
great testimony of righteousness and godliness? What benefit he did them,
by loosing the pains of hell, in which they were not, I yet understand not;
specially since I cannot find the name of Inferi (or hell) in any place of
scripture used for any good. The which if it be no where in the divine
authority to be read, then surely the bosom of Abraham which is an habitation
of secret rest, is not to be thought any part of hell; albeit in the very
words of so great a teacher (as Christ is) where he makes Abraham say,
betwixt you and us there is a mighty distance established, it is evident
enough, as I think, that the bosom of so great happiness is no part nor member
of hell.

Saint Austen examineth the opinion of some ancient writer, The sum of S.
Austens collections out of the 16. of saint Luke.
that Christ descended to hell to deliver ye patriarks, prophets, and the
righteous of the old testament thence, and not only refuses, but after his
manner mildly refuteth that fancy, which had possessed many of the fathers
before him. Out of Christ's words in the 16. of Luke he deriueth two
conclusions; one that Abraham's bosom was a place OF REST AND HAPPINESS, or as
the scripture speaks, OF COMFORT; and consequently not of pain or torment,
as was hell; the other, that BETWIXT THEM is AN HVGE DISTANCE, so that by no
means Abraham's bosom can be taken to be ANY PART OR MEMBER OF HELL. Out of
the principles of divinity he draws two other positions, the first, that
Abraham's bosom was not made for Lazarus only; which is so absurd, that he
thinks no man will be so foolish as to embrace it. Abraham's bosom must be
open to the rest of his children, which did the works of their father Abraham,
as well as to Lazarus; with God is no respect of persons; and Mat. 8.
From the East and West shall come many, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior. The second is, that if
more besides Abraham and Lazarus were in that bosom of rest, the Prophets and
Patriarks, must needs be there, who for fidelity and piety are commended by
the witness of Gods spirit, and placed in the foundation of the Church with
the Apostles next the head corner stone, as 2. Pet. ^.
HOLY MEN OF GOD, inspired and moved by the holy ghost. These deductions
being sound and sure, whereof there can be no doubt, it is certain, Christ
went not to hell to fetch the Patriarchs and Prophets thence, for they were not
there; but in Abraham's bosom, which was an habitation of REST, COMFORT and
BLISS; so far distant from the place of torment, that by no means it could
be a PART or MEMBER THEREOF.

[But Austen himself says, he doubts not, but Christ delivered some from
the pains of hell at his descent thither.] Saint Austen refelleth the received
opinion of others before him, S. Austens conjecture that some were delivered
out of hell is v^ne weak.
that Christ descended to hell, to deliver thence the Patriarchs and Prophets
that were there detained; and adds, that because he then presently saw no
cause why Christ should descend, but to save from the pains of hell; he does
not doubt, but Christ delivered some from thence. But when he comes to make
proof for this his opinion, he faints, and says; the words of Peter, that
Christ loosed the pains of hell, may be taken in that sense; and that Adam
was then loosed, ALMOST the whole church consented. Howbeit both these proofs
are no more then probable, and scant so much; and therefore they compel no man
to receive S. Austens coniecturall inclination; but leave us at liberty, as
well to examine his reasons, as to suspend our judgments, till we see stronger
and better motives to induce our consent. For touching Peter's words, himself
confesses they may be referred to Christ. August. epist. 99.
Quod scriptu^ est in morte Christi factu^, solutis doloribus inferni, vel ad
ipsum potest intelligi pertinere, quod eos hactenus soluerit, hoc est irru os
fecerit, ne ab eis ipse teneretur, praesertim quia sequitur, in quibus
impossible erat teneri EVM: vel si causa quaeritur cur venire voluerit in
infernum, vbi dolores illi essent, quibus omnino teneri non poterat; hoc quod
scriptum est, solutis doloribus inferni, non in omnibus, sed IN QVIBVSDAM
ACCIPI POTEST, quos ille dignos ista liberatione iudicabat. What the Scripture
says was performed in the death of Christ, THE PAINS OF HELL BEING LOOSED,
may either be understood to pertain to Christ himself, that he loosed,
that is, frustrated those pains from taking any hold of him; specially
whereas it follows (in the Text) OF WHICH PAINS IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE HE
SHOVLDE BE HELD: or if we ask for the cause, why he would come to hell,
where those pains were which could take no hold of him; these words (loosing
the pains of hell) may be taken not of all, but of some, whom he thought
worthy to be delivered. Either way these words make nothing to S. Austens
supposition, that some were in the pa^nes of hell, when Christ did thence
deliver them. For if we apply them to Christ's person, which in deed S. Peter
does, they note that Christ brake before him the strength of hell, when he
approached to his resurrection. If we refer them to man's deliverance thence,
that Christ in our names and for our safety loosed the sorrows of hell; this
will prove, we should have gone to hell, if Christ had not saved us thence; but
that we were there, it no way proves. For he delivered all his, as well
living, and not then borne, as dead, from all the right and claim that hell
had to them; and as we were delivered, not from being there, but from coming
thither; so the dead might be acquitted and assured from the challenge that hell
had to them, though they were then in rest, and in hope of Christ's coming to
perform their expectation, and perfect their redemption from the power of hell.

As for the consent of the whole church ALMOST, How ye church might believe
Adams bands were loosed in hell by Christ's descent.
since Austen himself leads us to dislike the opinion of all the fathers
ALMOST, that the souls of the righteous were in hell before Christ's descent
thither; he opens the way for us to ask how the church came, by that
persuasion; whether by scripture, or by Tradition? Scripture there is none
extant for Adam, more then for all other men. Tradition for things done in
hell, where no man living was present, can none be pretended. The testimony,
which Austen alleges out of the book of Wisdom, makes rather against that
position, then for it. (Wisdom) Sapient. 10
kept the first man that was alone created, even the father of the world; and
BROVGHT HIM OVT OF HIS SIN, and gave him power to govern all things. That
wisdom brought Adam out of his sin, is here affirmed, but whether by
chastisement and repentance in this life, or by deliverance out of hell after
this life, since neither is specified, the first is rather to be received. For
God both by punishing Adams offense, and by offering him grace in the promised
Scede, did make way for repentance; yea the whole life of Adam was nothing else
but the meditation of his fall; but that Christ fet him from hell, when he
descended thither, can by no rules of religion be warranted. Indeed Christ
went to hell to loose the bands of Adams sin; and so the church might well
believe and profess. For the guilt of Adams transgression, and root of Adams
corruption, brought us all to be justly condemned to hell, but that the death
of Christ reconciled us again to God by the remission of our sins; and the
personal descent of our Savior loosed all the bands, and brake all, the
chains of darkness that were provided for us; and so freed Adam and his
offspring from the power and pains of hell. In this the whole church might
consent, that Adams sin was released, and Adams bands loosed by Christ's
descent to hell; but other tradition, what souls were in hell, and thence
delivered at Christ's coming, as it was altogether unknown to men on earth,
and consequently most uncertain, so is it rather presumptuous to define, then
religious to believe.

And least I should seem to be led with the spirit of contradiction, to
refuse both the tradition of the church, and opinion of the fathers, I will
plainly show, what causes me to consent to neither. From hell was no release,
by the doctrine of our Savior.
First in these secret and unknown things, no man's assertion is to be trusted
without the witness of the scriptures; and for so much as is expressed unto us in
the word of God, it rather crosses, then favors this assertion of the
fathers. Next the ancient writers here in do not only vary, one from
another, but even from themselves; to manifest that they had no settled truth,
but some conjectures, and those very slender in these hidden matters. Touching
the souls of the righteous departed this life before Christ's death, to omit
the place of the book of Wisdom already recited, which expresselie gain
says this supposall of the fathers, that the souls of the just were both in
hell and in torments: there is nothing exactlie revealed unto us in the
scriptures that are canonical, till we come to the xvi. of S. Lukes gospel,
where our Savior by the parabolicall history of the wicked rich man and the
godly Lazarus teaches us, what became of them both after their deaths; and
consequently what was the state of all the dead before his time; to wit, that
they were either CARRIED BY ANGELS TO ABRAHAM'S BOSOM, or PVNISHED IN THE FLAMES
OF HELL. These two places, as they be far distant the one from the other,
both in SCITVATION and CONDITION, the one being full of comfort, the other of
torment; so in this they agree, that there could be no ALTERATION in either.
The rich man in hell could neither obtain any means to be refreshed, no
not a drop of water to cool his heat; nor expect any time to be released.
Our Savior makes Abraham to say to the rich man, which must needs be true,
Luke. 16
between you and us there is settled a great gulf, (or mighty distance,) so
that they which would go from hence to you cannot, NEITHER CAN THEY COME FROM
THENCE TO US. After this life there was no changing of places, and namely from
hell there was no release. This our Savior taught for a resolute truth in his
life time; how then could the souls of the just be released and reduced
from hell by his descent? If Abraham and Lazarus were not in hell, but in a
place of rest and comfort far distant from hell, how then were all the
righteous before Christ's time not only in hell, but in the sorrows and
pains of hell? yea the son of God with his own mouth so often in the new
testament expressing the fire of hell to be Mark. 9^
unquenchable, and the worm there never to die, how dare we without any
warrant of the word of God, first to bring al ye souls of the righteous before
Christ, from Abraham's bosom to hell, and then to deliver them thence without
any witness of the holy scriptures? With one breath our Savior does thrice
pronounce in the gospel of Mark that in hell, neither the fire quenches,
Mark. 9.
not the worm dies; and presume we to quench the one, and kill the other
without any scruple?

[But the scripture says, the souls of the Patriarchs and Prophets were in
hell; and there to leave them after Christ's descent, were everlastingly to
condemn them.] The translators mistook the word Sheol, calling that hell,
which indeed was the grave, where the bodies of all the just both before and
after Christ were laid; but the teacher of all truth, whose doctrine we by no
means may distrust, places Abraham in rest, and makes his bosom a
receptacle for the souls of the righteous; and therefore we may strive about
words if we list, but we must leave the spirits of just and perfect men before
Christ's coming, that place, which Christ, teaching here on earth, assured us,
was assigned them of God. And since by the doctrine of our savior they were
not in hell, it is more then manifest, he did not fetch them thence by his
descending thither.

The fathers vary touching the place of the souls departed before Christ's
coming.
As for the supposall of the fathers, that Abraham, Jacob, Samuel, and David,
with the rest of the Patriarks and prophets were in hell; it were easy to show
their varieties, and contrarieties, if I took pleasure to discover their
weakness. S. Austen in his 99. Epistle to Euodius, and his 12. book de
genesi ad literam. cap. 33. exactlie contradicts the opinion of De anima. ca.
55.
Tertullian, In Psalm. 48. concio. 13.
Basil, In Eccle. cap. 9
Hierom, and In Epistol. ad Romans cap. 5.
Ambrose, that Abraham and the rest of the Patriarks and Prophets were in hell;
and proves that Abraham's bosom must not be thought to be any part or member
of hell. In his 57. Epistle to Dardanus he says, non faciledixerim; I cannot
readily pronounce. In his 20. book de ciuitate dei. cap. 15. he says, non
absurd credividetur, antiquos etiam sanctos, apud inferos fuisse, it seems
no absurdity to believe, that the Saints of the old testament were in hell;
until the blood of Christ and his descent to those places did deliver them.
And thus he either some times spared the credites of those that were before
him, or else by writing he so profited, that where at first he doubted or
yielded to others, at last he resolved the contrary upon the dew examining
the words of our Savior. Tertullian likewise in his book de anima says,
Cap. 55.
Habes de paradiso a nobis libellum, quo constituimus, omnem an^mam apud
inferos sequestrari in diem iudicij. We have written a book touching paradise,
where we defend that all souls are kept in hell until the day of judgment.
And speaking namely of Abraham's bosom; Idem. cap. 5^
Omnes ergo animae penes inferos, inquis? velis ac nolis, and supplicia iam
illic and refrigeria, habes pauperem, and diuivem. Cur enim non putes animam
and puniri and foueri in inferis? Are al souls then in hell, you will ask?
will you, nill you, you shall find there punishments, and refreshments; as in
Lazarus, and the rich man. And why should you not think that the soul may
be both tormented, and comforted in hell? and yet in his fourth book against
Marcion, he contradicts that false position, and comes soundly to the
truth. Idem contrae Marcion. lib. 4
Aliud inferi, vt puto, aliud quoque sinus Abrahae. Nam and magnum ait
intercedere regiones istas profundum, and transitum vtrinque prohibere. Sed nec
alleuasset dives oculos, and quidem de longinquo, nisi in superiora, and de
altitudinis longinquo, per immensam illam distantia^ sublimitatis and
profunditatis. Eam itaque regione^ s^^m dico Abrahae, etsi non coelestem
sublimiorem tamen Inferis. Hell is one thing, as I think; and Abraham's bosom
is another. For (Abraham) says a great depth is between these two regions,
and suffers none to pass to and fro. Neither could the rich man have lift
up his eyes, but unto places above him, and far above him, by reason of the
infinite distance betwixt that height, and that depth. That region then, I call
Abraham's bosom, which though it be not heaven, yet is it higher then hell.
Ambrose after the same manner, sometimes says, that Abraham was,( In Epistol.
ad Romans cap 5
apud Inferos) in hell; sometimes again, that Lazarus In Psalm. 118 sermon. 3
in Abrahae sinu recumbens, vitam carpebat aeternam: Lazarus lying in Abraham's
bosom, enioied everlasting life; and hard it is, that eternal life should be
in hell. In the one and the same chapter he allows the persuasion of the
heathen, Ambros. de bono mortis. ca. 10.
quod animae liberatae de corporibus (...) peterent, id est, locum qui non
videtur, que^ locum Latin Infernum dicimus: that souls departed from their
bodies did go to (...), that is, to an invisible place, which in latin is
called hell; and also the assertion of true religion, yt the Ambros. de bono
mortis. ca. 10.
grave was the receptacle of the body only; Ambros. de bono mortis. ca. 10.
animaru^ aute^ superiora esse habitacul^, scripturae testimonijs valde
probatur; But ye mansions of the souls are above, as may easily be proved by
ye testimonies of scripture. These are the habitatio^s of which Christ said,
there are John. 14
many mansions with his father. But I take no delight in rehersing their
ouersights, it will suffice that with one consent, The souls of the righteous
were in Abraham's bosom by the confession of the fathers.
they make Abraham's bosom a receptacle for all the just; and the place of
tormente where the rich man was, a prison for the wicked; calling the one hell,
and confessing the other to be the fruition of rest and happiness after this
life.

Orig. (...).
They that depart this world by death are according to their deeds and deserts
bestowed (says Origin) alij in locu^, qui dicitur Infernus, alij in sinu^
Abrahae, some to ye place which is called hell, others to Abraha^s bosom.
Hieron. in. Esaias. cap. 65.
Omnes quipatrem habent Abraham, and virtutu^ eius similes esse meruerunt,
requiescunt in sinu eius. All that have Abraham for their father, and obtained
to be like him in virtues, rest in his bosom, says Ierom: Ambros. in Psalm. 38
Iusti in Abrahae sinurequiescere leguntur, quod in eius gratia, in eius requie
in eius placiditate requiescunt, qui conforme^ ei fide^ induerunt, et ^andem in
bonis operibus fecerunt voluntatem. The just (says Ambrose,) are said to rest
in Abraham's bosom, because they rest in like favor, in like ease, in like
contentation, which put on like faith to Abraham, and followed his example in
well doing. And therefore he speaks else where to Abraham: Idem de bono mortis
cap. 12^
Expande sinus tuos, vt plures suscipias, quia plurimiin deu^ crediderunt. Open
wide thy bosom to receive mo, because many have believed in God. Hilar. in
Psalm. 51.
Extendit David spes suas ad infinitam perennitatis aetate^, nec concluditur
mortis occasu quu^ sciat sib^ in Abrahae sinibus exemplopauperis Lazariesse
viuendu^. David stretches out his hope to infinite eternity, and ends it not
with ye fall of death, knowing yt he should live in Abraha^s bosom, as did that
poor Lazarus, says Hilary. Neither David only, but all the faithful were,
and still are kept in Abraham's bosom, as Hilarie thinks, until the day of
judgment. Idem in Psalm. 120.
Exeuntes de corpore ad introitum illu^ regni caelestis, per custodia^ domini
fideles omnes reseruabuntur: in sinu scilicet interim Abrahae collocati, quo
adire impios interiectum chaos inhibet, quousque introeundi rursum in regnum
caelorum tempus adueniat; All the faithful departing this life, shall be
reserved in the Lords keeping, for that entrance into the kingdom of heaven,
placed the mean while in Abraham's bosom, whither the gulf between will not
suffer the wicked to come, till the time approach that (the godly) shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven. This time of entering into the kingdom of heaven, he
makes to be the day of judgment. Idem. in Psalm. 2.
Excipit (impios) statim vltor infernus: and decedentes de corpore, si ita
vixerunt, confestim de via iusta peribunt. Testes nobis sunt Euangelij dives et
pauper, quorum vnum angeli IN SEDIBVS BEATORVM, and in Abrahae sinu locauerunt,
alium statim regio paenae suscepit. Nihil illic dilationis aut morae est.
Iudicij enim dies, vel, beatitudinis retributio est aeternae, vel paenae:
Tempus vero mortis habet interim vnu^quemque suis legibus, du^ ad iudiciu^
vnu^quemque aut Abraham reseruat aut paena. Hell, as a revenger, presently
takes the wicked, and they leaving this body, according to their lives, do
forthwith perish from the right way. The rich and poor man in the gospel, do
serve us for witnesses, whereof the one was carried by the Angels, INTO THE
SEATS OF THE BLESSED, and placed in Abraham's bosom; the other the region of
punishment did straightway sease on. No delaie or stay may there be looked for.
The day of judgment brings with it the reward of eternal bliss, or pain:
but the very time of death in the mean season subiecteth all men to these
laws, that either Abraham or hell pains detaineth every soul unto
judgment. These Fathers confess, that all the just, as well before Christ's
resurrection as after, were and are still in Abraham's bosom; and there shall
continue till the day of judgment. How then could either Abraham's bosom be
in hell, or the Saints of the old testament be thence delivered by Christ's
descent, since they remain still in Abraham's bosom, as these fathers write;
and so shall do, to the end of the world? If Abraham's bosom were in hell,
being delivered from hell, they must needs be delivered likewise from
Abraham's bosom. If they be still in Abraham's bosom, then were they never
delivered thence; and that being in hell, as some fathers would have it, the
just of both testamentes are still in hell; and so none were delivered thence
by Christ's descending thither.

[But the calling up of Samuel by the Witch at Endor, proves yt Samuel and so
the rest of the prophets were in hell. For she saw 1. Samuel. ^8. Whether the
soul of Samuel were in hell, or no.
him ascending up out of the earth, and he said to Saul 1. Samuel. 18. Whether
the soul of Samuel were in hell, or no.
To morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me. Now that Saul being a
reprobate, and killing himself, should be in Abraham's bosom, it was not
possible. Since then Samuel and Saul after death were both in one place, and
that place was beneath in the earth, it is likelier that Samuel was in hell
with Saul, till he were delivered thence, then that Saul was in Abraham's bosom
with Samuel.] The raising up of Samuel after his death by the Witch, has
moved much question in the church of God, whether it were Samuel in deed that
rose and sp^ke, or whether it were the devil transforming himself in to the
likeness of Samuel, to drive Saul into despair. And albeit the matter may be
largely disputed on either side, yet neither opinion will infer that Samuels
soul was in hell; which is the point we have in hand. That it was not Samuel
himself which appeared, Reasons to prove it was an illusion of the Devil.
but the Witches familiar spirit in his likeness; these reasons prevail with
me. First, neither by Witches nor Devils could the souls of the saints be
commanded, or disquieted from their places, where they are in rest and peace.
Secondly, we are assured, by the doctrine of our Savior, that God will send
none Luke 16.
from the dead to instruct the living: yea all such conference is prohibited
and pronounced Deuteronomy. 18.
abominable by the law of God; not that the dead can arise or advise the
living, but because the devil under that color should not delude and abuse
the people of God. Thirdly, that which appeared received adoration at Saules
hands, which the Revel. ^^.
Angel refused at S. John's; and the soul of Samuel neither might, nor would
have accepted. Fourthlie, Saul forsaken and rejected of God, could not after
death rest in the same place with Samuel the elect and approved servant of
God. Lastly, the fathers do for the most part resolve, it was an illusion of
Satan to strike Saul into desperation.

Tertullian disputing against it very learnedlie, says. Tertul. de anima.
cap 57. Authorities to prove the same.
Ecce hodie (Simonis haereticos) tanta praesumptio artis extollit, vt etiam
Prophetarum animas ab inferis mouere se spondeant. Et credo, quia mendacio
possunt: nec enim pythonico tunc spiritui minus licuit animam Samuelis
essingere, post deum mortuos consulente Saul. Absit alioquin vt animam
cuiuslibet sancti nedum Prophetae a daemonio credamus extractam edocti, quod
ipse Satanas transfiguretur in Angelum lucis, nedum in hominem lucis.
Dubitauit, si forte tunc Prophetam se Dei asseuerare, and vtique Sauli, in quo
ipse morabatur: ne putes alium fuisse qui phantasma administrabat, alium qui
commendabat, sed eundem spiritum and in pseudoprophetide and in Apostata facile
me^tiri, quod fecerat credi: and ideo per quem visurum se credidit, vidit: quia
per quem vidit and credidit. Ibid.
Nulli autem animae omnino inferos patere, satis dominus in argumento illo
pauperis requiescentis, and diuitis ingemiscentis ex persona Abrahae sanxit,
non posse relegari renunciatorem dispositionis infernae, quod vel tunc licere
potuisset, vt Mosi and Prophotis crederetur. Even at this day the followers of
Simon (Magus) are so puffed up with the presumption of their art, that they
promise to raise from hell the souls of the Prophets. And I think they can
easily belie themselves; for so did the familiar spirit (of the witch at Endor)
resemble the soul of Samuel, when Saul rejected of God, consulted the dead.
Otherwise, GOD FORBID WE SHOULD BELIEVE, that the soul of any Saint, much
less of a Prophet, could be raised by the Devil; since we are taught that
Satan is often transfigured into an Angel of light, much more into a man of
light. Perchance (the Devil) did doubt to avouch himself to be the Prophet
of God, and that to Saul, whom he already possessed; least you should think
it was any other which commended the apparition, then he that procured it;
but even the same spirit both in the false Prophetess, and to the Apostata
(Saul) easily belied that which he had made to be believed. And therefore by
whom (Saul) believed he should see (the ghost of Samuel) by him he saw it;
because by whom he saw it, to him he gave credit. And to teach us that no
soul may rise from the dead, the lord does sufficiently determine by the
person of Abraham in that argument of the poor man in rest, and the rich man
in torment, that none can return to report the state of things in hell, which
then might have been done, to get the more authority to Moses and the
Prophets. The book of questions under the name of Iustine Martyr being of
good antiquity, if it be not his; says. Respons. ad quaest. 52.
Caetera omnia ab ipsa Pythonissa facta sunt, Daemonis opera, praestigijs eorum
oculos deludentis, qui videbant cum qui Samuel non erat. Veritas autem dictorum
a Deo fuit, qui permisit Daemoni, vt in forma Samuelis Pythonissae appareret,
and res futuras praemonstraret. Et quoniam Samuelem Saul non audierat, dum
amissionem regni praediceret illi, sed post diuinam sententiam ei regnum
adimentem, per hariolos imperium retinere satagebat, indignum eum duxit Deus,
vt ei ventura significaret per homines sibi adhaerentes. All the rest the witch
did by the operation of the Devil, deluding their eyes, which saw one that
was not Samuel. But the truth of that which was spoken, was of God, who
permitted the Devil both to appear to the witch in the shape of Samuel, and
to foretell the event of things to come. For in that Saul would not give ^are
to Samuel, prophesying unto him the loss of his kingdom, but sought to
retain it by the help of witches, God counted him unworthy to understand
what should come to pass by any servants of his. Theodorete in his questions
upon the first book of Kings, does reject this opinion, that the witch raised
up Samuel, not as false only, but as impious also. His words are. Theodoret.
questio^um in lib 1. Regum quaest. 62
Quomodo oportet intelligere do ventriloqua? Nonnulli dicunt eam vere retulisse
Samuel^m. No^nulli autem hoc refellerunt. Ego quidem PRIMVM EXISTIMO ESSE
IMPIVM Existimo enim mulieres necromanticas ne quamlibet quidem reducere
animam, tantum abest, vt prophetae, and tanti prophetae. Est enim perspicuum,
quod in aliquo alio loco degunt animae expectantes resurrectionem corporum. EST
ERGO VALDE IMPIVM credere ventriloquam habere vim tantam. What shall we say
concerning the witch? Some think she truly raised up Samuel; Some others
refell it. I think the first to be a WICKED imagination. For I resolve that
witches can raise no man's soul, much less the soul of a prophet, and of so
great a prophet. It is evident that the souls (of the dead) are in a place
besides this world, expecting ye resurrection of their bodies. It is therefore
VERY IMPIOVS to believe yt a witch has so great power. And where Theodoret
alleges a place of the Chronicles to prove, Ibidem.
Quod ipse deus vniuersorum, efformata vt voluit specie Samuelis, protulit
sententiam, and minime per aduersarios protulit sententia^; That God himself
framing the shape of Samuel as pleased him, pronounced the sentence, and did
not give that judgment by his adversaries: there are no such words in the
Text as he quoteth. For he cites them thus: Idem. quaest. 62
Et mortuus est Saul in suis iniquitatibus, in quibus peccauit domino super
eloquium domini propterea quod ipsum no^ custodiuit, and quod interrogauit Saul
in ventriloqua, vt exquireret, ET RESPONDIT SAMVEL PROPHETA, and non exquisiuit
in d^mino, and occidit eum. Saul died in his sins, in which he sinned against
the Lord, as touching the word of ye lord which he performed not, and also in
that Saul consulted the witch, to know what success he should have. And Samuel
the prophet answered him, and Saul sought not the lord, and he slew him. These
words, AND SAMVEL THE PROPHET ANSVVERED HIM, are not in the book of Vide lib.
1. Paralip. cap. 10. ver. 13. ^ 14.
Chronicles; and therefore Theodorets foundation being false, his conclusion
that God spoke these words, and not the devil, is no way justifiable.
Besides, if God had said, that Saul and his sons after death should be with
(God;) as he that spoke to Saul said they should be with him; God had
promised unto Saul ETERNAL LIFE after his departure hence; which is a plain
contrariety to the words of the Scripture, that says; 1. Paral. ca. 10.
verse. 13.
SAVL DIED IN HIS SINS. The first part then of Theodorets resolution, that a
witch could not raise the soul of Samuel, is sound and true divinity; the
second, that God made a shape of Samuel, and thereby answered Saul, is not
proved by any scripture, though it be so supposed by Theodoret.

S. Austen disputing the matter on both sides, though he no way yield that the
witch was able to raise up souls; yet he says, Ad Simplician. lib. 2.
quaest. 3.
Non est absurdum credere, ex aliqua dispensatione diuinae voluntatis permissum
fuisse, vt no^ inuitus, nec dominante aut subiugante magica potentia, sed
volens and obte^perans occultae dispensationi dei, quae and pythonissam illam,
and Saulem latebat, co^sentiret spiritus Prophetae sancti se ostendi aspectibus
regis, diuina cum sententia percussurus. It is no absurdity to think, that by
some dispensation of the divine pleasure it was permitted, that the soul of
the holy Prophet, not against his will, nor ouerruled or forced by any
magical power, but willing and obeying the secret will of God, which was
hid both from the witch, and from Saul, should show it self to the kings
sight, to the end it might the more astonish him with the judgment of God. And
albeit he make this possible, yet he inclines rather to this opinion as the
easier, and likelier, that the whole was but the deceit and work of Satan.
Ibidem.
Quanquam in hoc facto, potest esse alius FACILIOR intellectus and EXPEDITIOR
exitus, vt non vere spiritum Samuelis excipatum a sua requie credamus, sed
aliquod phantasma, et imaginar^am illusionem diaboli machinationibus factam,
quam propterea scriptura nomine Samuelis appellat, quia solent imagines, rerum
earum nominibus appellari, quarum imagines sunt. Although in this fact, there
may be another more easier understanding, and freer from (all) difficulties,
if we believe that the soul of Samuel indeed was not raised from his rest,
but that it was a phantasme, and illusion wrought by the craft of Satan; which
the scripture therefore calls by the name of Samuel, because resemblances are
wont to be called by the names of those things which they resemble. The self
same word for word he Ad octo Dulcitij quaestione. quest. 6
repeateth in his answer to the questions which Dulcitius proposed unto him;
and albeit in these places he sway indifferently betwixt both, or incline
faintly to the one; yet in his books De doctrina Christiana he calls it a
Sacrilegious representation of Samuels image. De doct. Christiana. li. 2. ca. 23
Non enim quia imago Samuelis mortui Sauliregi vera praenunciarit, propterea
talia sacrilegia, quibus imago illa praesentata est, minus execranda sunt.
Neither, because the image of dead Samuel foretold truth to king Saul, are such
SACRILEGIES, BY WHICH THAT IMAGE WAS SHEVVED, the less to be DETESTED.

But if it were the soul of Samuel that appeared, and no illusion of the
devil presenting himself in the habit of Samuel, Neither opinion proves that
Samuels soul was in hell.
the story no way conuinceth that Samuel was in hell. The witch said, I saw
gods ascending out of the earth; but her sight is no good proof, where the
souls of the just are, or whence they come, the devil might easily delude
her, and make her believe, he came out of the earth, that came from another
place. Again if the body of Samuel were taken up for his soul to appear in;
that was raised out of the earth, though the soul of Samuel came from Abraham's
bosom; and so he necessarily must rise out of the earth, if his body rose
withal, as we all shall at the general resurrection. And where the image of
Samuel said to Saul, 1. Sam. 1^.
To morrow thou and thy sons shall be with us; he did not mean their souls
should be in the same receptacles after death, but as Austen says: Ad
Simply. lib. 2. quaest. 3
Mortuus mortem viuo praenunciabat. He that was dead, foreshewed the death of
him that lived; Ad Simply. lib. 2. quaest. 3
vt non ad aequalitatem felicitatis sed ad parem conditionem mortis referatur:
That it should be referred to the like condition of death, and not to the
fruition of the same felicity. For if we so take the words, Thou shall be to
morrow with me, veique falsum est; it is certainly false, says Austen. f
Magno quippe interuallo post mortem separari bonos a malis in Euangelio legimus
cum dominus inter superbum illum diuitem, cum iam apud inferos tormenta
pateretur, and illum, qui ad eius ianuam vlcero sus iacebat, iam in requie
constitutum, magnum chaos interi^ctum testetur. That the good are after death
separated from the bad by a mighty distance, we read in the Gospel, where the
Lord witnesses, that there is a great gulf interiected between the proud
rich man, when he was tormented in hell, and the poor Lazare now in rest,
which lay full of sores at the rich man's gate. And so whether we take it to be
the soul of Samuel that spoke to Saul, or a Magical illusion of Satan
transforming himself into the shape of Samuel, neither way proves that Samuel
was in hell; howbeit I rather embrace the reasons that are extant in the
Quaest. ex ve^er. test^mento. ^uaest. 27.
questions of the old testament under the name of S. Austen, cited in the
Canon law, which though they be not Austens, are very ancient. Cause. 26.
qu^st. ^. 14. nec miru^.
Indignum facinus aestimo, si secundum verba historiae commodetur assensus.
Quomodo enim fieri poterat, vt art magica attraheretur vir and natiuitate
sanctus, and vitae operibus iustus? Aut si non attractus est, consensit: quod
vtrumque de viro iusto crede^e absur^um est. Porro hoc est praestigium Satanae,
quo, vt plurimos fallat, etiambonos in potestate se habere consingit.
Historicus mentem Saul, and habitum Samuelis descripsit, ea quae dicta and visa
sunt exponens, praetermittens si vera an falsa sint. Quid enim ait? Audiens in
quo hab^tu esset excitatus, intellexit, hunc esse Samuelem. Quid intellexerit
retulit, and quia non been intellexit, contra scriptura^, alium adorauit quam
deum, and putans Samuelem adorauit diabolum, vt fructum fallaciae suae haberet
Satanas. Si enim vere Samuel illi app^ruisset non vtique vir iustus permisisset
se adorari, qui praedicauerat deu^ solum adorandu^. Et quomodo homo dei, qui
cu^ Abraham in refrigerio erat dicebat ad virum pestilentiae, dignum ardore
gehennae, eras mecum eris? His duobus titulis subtilitatem fallaciae suae
prodidit improuidus Satan, quia and adorari se permisit sub habitu and nomine
Samuelis contra legem: and virum peccatis pressum, cum magna distantia
peccatorum and iustorum sit, cum Samuele iustissimo futurum mentitus est. Ad
eum enim transmigrauit (Saul) quem adorauit. I take it to be a wicked act, if
we acknowledge the story according to the words. For how could it be that a
man holy in birth, and just in life should be drawn (from the place of his
rest) by the power of a witch? If he were not drawn (against his will) he
consented (to come;) both which are absurd to believe of so just a person. And
this is the sleight of Satan, that to deceive the more, he makes as if the
just were in his hands. The story does describe the mind of Saul, and the show
of Samuel, expressing what was seen and said, but pretermitting how true or
false either was. For what says it? Saul hearing in what habit (the spirit)
was raised, understood it to be Samuel. It reports what (Saul) conceived,
and because he conceived amiss, he adored another then God, against the
scripture; and thinking it to be Samuel, worshipped the Devil, that Satan
might reap the fruit of his fallacy. For if Samuel had indeed appeared unto
him, the just person would never have suffered himself to be worshipped,
which preached God alone to be worshipped. And how did the man of god, that was
with Abraham in rest, say to that pestilent man, worthy of hell fire, to
morrow thou shall be with me? By these two ways Satan before he was ware
betrayed his fraudulent subtlety, because he suffered himself to be
worshipped under the habit and name of Samuel, against (Gods) law; and lied,
that Saul laden with sin should after death be with righteous Samuel, whereas
there is a great distance betwixt the just and unjust (after this life;) and
Saul went hence to him, whom he worshipped.

[If the fathers so much vary and dissent from themselves, and from others,
why do I press their testimony touching Christ's descent to hell?] I press
them no further then they accord with the words of the scripture, and with the
grounds of faith, and wherein they all concur with one consent. When they
swerve aside, Ivrge not the fathers but agreeing with the scriptures and with
them selves.
or part asunder, I dissemble it not; wishing the reader, as not to regard
their private opinions without good proof, so not to reject their general
confession in matters of faith agreeing with the scriptures, without better
demonstration then I yet see made for the contrary. That the devil was
destroyed, and man delivered by Christ's death from the fear of death, Heb 2.
is no supposall of mine or theirs, but the manifest conclusion of the holy
ghost. That Christ Colos 2.
in his own person spoiled powers and principalities, and openly triumphed
over them, that 1. Cor. 15.
death and hell might be swallowed up in victory, is not man's imagination,
but the Apostles resolution. That Christ's Acts 2.
soul was in hell, and there not Acts 2.
forsaken, if David's prediction, and Peter's application were not plain enough,
S. Lukes interpretation is so pregnant, that without wrong to the word, it can
not be pared. Lay these together, and see what they lack of Christ's soul
descending into hell. His being there must needs infer his descending
thither. And yet least some scrupulous person should stick at the phrase of
Christ's DESCENDING INTO HELL, I think S. Paul has words equivalent to them.
Ephesians. 4.
Ascending on high he led captivity captive. That he ascended, what is it, but
that he FIRST DESCENDED into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended,
is even the same that ascended above all the heavens, that he might fill al. If
hell be any where, there can be no doubt but it must be in the lower parts of
the earth. From the earth upward is heaven, where hell can not be. Christ then
DESCENDED into the lower parts of the earth, and thence led captivity
captive, that he might fill all (places) with his presence. Christ's sepulcher
was in the higher parts of the earth, Mat. 27.
hewn out in a rock, and thence he might lead the death of the body captive,
but not the devil, that was ruler over death, and had a challenge to the souls
of men that came not near their graves. Since then ascending from the lower
parts of the earth, he lead captive, all ye powers, that held man in bondage;
and those chiefelie were the powers of hell, which had interest into the soul
of man by reason of sin; it must needs be that Christ descended to those
parts of the earth, where man's captivity was strongest, which is in hell: and
thence freed him by his presence, and led those captives, that ruled over him,
as conqueror of all the power of the devil and darkness, whose prisoner man
was, before he was redeemed. Again, he first descended to the lowest, and
then ascended to the highest, that he might fill all places with his presence.
If he descended not to hell, how filled he that place, where he never was,
except with the brightness of his divine glory, which is every where present
without descending or ascending? But the Apostle says he descended to the
lowest, and ascended to the highest, that he might fill all (places) with the
presence of his manhood, all knees in heaven, earth, and hell bowing unto the
exaltation of his humane nature.

And if the lower parts of the earth, whither Christ descended to lead
captivity captive, Christ's desce^^ding into the deep, and into hell are al on^^
be not low enough to show the situation of hell; Saint Paul has plainer
words of Christ's descending as low as might be; when he writes to the
Romans in this wise. Romans 10
Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring
Christ down from above,) or who shall DESCEND INTO THE DEEP? (that is, to
bring Christ back from the dead.) Christ dying DESCENDED INTO THE DEEP, as
rising from the dead, he ascended into heaven. Now the deep is so low,
that no place can be lower; yea hell it self, and the prison of Devils is
known by that name in the new Testament. When the spirits, that possessed the
mad man amongst the Gadarens, were to be cast out by Christ, Luke. 8
they besought him, that he would not command them (...), to depart into the
deep. In the Revelation of Saint John, hell is called, Reuelat 9. verse 1^8.
(...), the pit of the deep, and the Devil is there named Ibidem. ver. 11
the Angel, (...), of the deep: yea the very place, where the Devil is shut
up, is expressed by that word; Revel. (...) 20.
I saw an Angel (says Saint John) come down from heaven, having (...), the
key of the deep, and a great chain in his hand. And he took the dragon that
old serpent, which is called the devil, and bound him, and cast him (...)
into the deep, Christ descended into the bottomless deep.
and shut him up. If (...) be a bottomless deep, then which can nothing be
deeper; if in the scriptures it properly signify the very dungeon of hell,
where the devils are kept; the Apostle then auouching that Christ, when he
died, DESCENDED (...), INTO THE BOTTOMLESS DEEP, does clearly confirm that he
descended into hell. As therefore, if we ask who can descend into the deep, or
ascend into heaven, we reuerse Christ's being among the dead and his sitting at
the right hand of God in the heavens, so if we confess the^ both to be
verified in Christ (and but in Christ they never were nor ever shall be verified
of any man) we must no more deny yt he descended into the bottomless pit, which
is hell, then yt he ascended into ye heavens; both are necessary parts of our
redemption, and evident proofs of his mighty operation. We must be freed from
hell, before we can be placed in heaven; and if Christ have omitted either, he
has performed neither.

What marvel then, if the ancient fathers with one consent, make Christ's
descent to hell, The descent to hell after death, a part of our redemption.
a material point of our redemption, and press it as an appendix to faith;
since it has so good ground, and just proof in the scriptures, howsoever they
or we doubt, where the souls of the righteous were before Christ's suffering.
De Trinitat. lib. 2
Crux, mors, inferi, salus nostra est, says Hilary; The cross, death, and
descent (of Christ) to hell are our salvation. ^^thanas. de salutari adue^mu
Christi.
Diuinitas neque corpus in monumento, neque anima^ in inferno destituit, hoc
est enim, quod dictu^ est per propheta^ non relinques anima^ mea^ apud inferos,
neque dabis sanctu^ tuu^ videre corruptionem. Quoc^rcain ANIMA quide^ CHRISTI
MORS DEVICTA EST, resurrectioque ab inferis deprompta, and spiritibus
annunciata est: in corpore vero dei corruption abolita est, et incorruptibilitas
e sepulchro emicuit. (Christ's) deity neither forsook his body in the
sepulcher, nor his soul in hell. For yt is ye meaning of the Prophet, when he
says; Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. Wherefore in THE SOVLE OF CHRIST DEATH WAS CONQVERED, and the
rerurrection from hell performed, and signified to the spirits, (that rose with
him:) In the body of (him that was) God, corruption was abolished, and
incorruption shined out of the grave. Yea Austen himself puts great
difference betwixt the certainly of Christ's descent to hell, and the
uncertainty of delivering of some souls thence, which he found there, as he
imagines. August. ^pist. 99.
Teneamus firmissime Quod fides habet fundatissima auctoritate firmata, quia
Christus mortuus est secundum scripturas, et caetera quae de illo testante
veritate conscripta sunt: in quibus etiam hoc est, quod apud Inferos fuit,
solutis eoru^ doloribus, quibus eu^ erat impossible teneri. Let us hold most
firmly, yt which ye faith contains, confirmed with most assured authority,
that Christ died according to the scriptures; and the rest yt is written of him
by the testimony of the truth, amongst ye which this is also to be nu^bred, yt
he was in hell, dissoluing ye pains thereof. Of which it was impossible he should
be held. Thus far does Austen urge the very articles of our faith confirmed by
the scriptures, and that makes him infer, Ibidem.
who then but an infidel will deny that Christ was in hell? But when he comes
to the second point of delivering some from hell, that were in the pains
thereof, he tempereth his style and says, Ibidem*
a quibus recte intelligitur soluisse and liberasse, quos voluit; from which
pains Christ may well be conceived, to have loosed and delivered whom he
would; and that which Peter says, loosing the sorrows of hell, Ibidem*
accipi potest in quibusda^, may be understood of some, whom he thought worthy
to be delivered. For which since there can be no sure proof brought out of
the word of truth, we shall do best to give ear to his own advise in the
like case. August. (...)
Ergo fratres sieve illud sieve istud sit, hic me scrutatorem verbi dei, non
temerarium affirmatorem teneatis. Therefore brethren whether this or that be
it, here take me as a searcher of the word of God, and not as a rash affirmer.

Christ delivered the bodies of some saints, from the power of hell* that is, he
raised the^ from death.
All the defense that may be made out of the Scriptures, that Christ delivered
some of the saints out of the present possession and power of hell; is that
which is written in the gospel of Saint Matthew, touching the bodies of the
saints rising from death. When Jesus yielded up the ghost; Matthew. 27
Behold the veil of the temple rent in twain, and the earth did quake, and
the stones did cleave; and the graves did open themselves, and many bodies of
the Saints, which slept, arose; and came out of the graves after his
resurrection, and went into the holy city and appeared to many. The death of
the body, as it is part of the wages of sin; so is it the Esaias. 33
gate of hell; and the Devil is said in the scriptures to have the Hebre. 2
power thereof. So that howsoever the souls of the just were in the hands of
God, and at rest in Abraham's bosom, their bodies lying dead in the grave, and
rotten with corruption were within Satan's walk; and when Christ raised them
out of their sepulchers to an happy life, he took them from the power of
darkness; and translated them into the kingdom of light. 1. Corinthians. 15
Death is an enemy, though the last that shall be destroyed; and Reuelat. 20
death, as well as hell, shall be cast into the lake of fire; and therefore
Christ took the keys both of Revel. 1.
death, and of hell; 1. Corinthians. 15
and by his rising from the dead insulted against both; o death, where is thy
sting? o hell, where is thy victory? It is the force of sin that kills the
body; and likewise the force of sin that rotteth the body; sin being the
strength of hell against body and soul. As then our souls are freed from the
power of hell, when our sins are remitted; so our bodies are delivered from
the handfast of hell, when corruption, the consequent of sin, is abolished. In
this sense it may be said, that Christ delivered some from the power of hell,
that is, their bodies from the sepulchers where they lay turned into dust. For
by death and corruption the sinful flesh of man is till the resurrection
subjected to the range of Satan, he being the Ephesians. 2
Prince of the air, and Ephesians. 6
governor of darkness, and Hebre. 2
ruler of death.

Saint Austen doubts, Whether the bodies of the the saints, that rose with
christ slept again or no.
whether those bodies of the saints were wholly freed from corruption; or lay
down again in death after they had given witness to Christ's resurrection.
August. epist. 99
Scio quibusdam videri, morte domini Christi iam talem resurrectionem
praestita^ justice, qualis nobis in fine promittitur; Qui vtique si non iterum
repositis corporibus dormierunt, videndum est quemadmodum Christus intelligatur
primogenitus a mortuis si eum in illa resurrectione tot praecesserunt. I know
(says Austen) some think, that at the death of the Lord Christ the same kind
of resurrection was performed to the just, which is promised to us in the end
of the world: but if they slept not again, by laying down their bodies, we
must look how Christ can be understood to be the first borne of the dead, if
so many went before him in that resurrection. But his reasons are of no such
force, as to persuade, that the bodies of the saints, which rose with Christ,
slept again in their graves, and returned to corruption; yea that would
somewhat impeach the power of Christ's resurrection, if it were able to raise
them to life, but not preserve them in life; and the whole fact will seem
rather an apparition, then a true resurrection. His first objection is answered
in the text it self. For the saints did not rise before Christ, but after
Christ; and so still Christ was the first borne from the dead. The words of
the text are; Matthew. 27^
many bodies of the saints, which slept arose; and came out of the graves
AFTER HIS RESVRRECTION. Now to think that they rose presently upon his
death, and stayed alive in their graves till he was risen, is a vain
imagination, and a way rather to punish them with a wearisome life, then to
prefer them to a comfortable resurrection. His second reason has some more
show, but it is not sufficient to conclude his intention. August. ^^pistola. 99^
It seems hard (says he) that David should not be in that resurrection of
the just, if it were eternal, of whose seed Christ is so often commended to
us with so great honor and evidence. And if David rose with them, Peter's proof
unto the Jews is very weak, when he says, Acts. 2
David is dead and buried; and his sepulcher remains with us unto this day.
For if David's body were risen before the speaking of those words, his sepulcher
was empty; and concluded nothing for Peter's purpose. For answer heereto, the
holy Ghost had no meaning by Peter's mouth to prove that David lay then in
his grave, David saw corruption though he were then risen from corruption, but
Christ's flesh never putrified
when those words were spoken; but only that David saw corruption, as his
sepulcher remaining to that day convinced; wherein his body was buried above
a thousand years before Christ's coming, and consequently must needs be
turned into dust many hundreds before Peter spoke the word. His prediction
therefore, that God would not suffer his holy one to see corruption, could no
way pertain to himself, but must be verified in some other, which was
Christ; and so Peter's argument was very sound and clear; whether David's ashes
were then in his sepulcher or no. Peter's other allegation, that Acts. 2. ver. 34
David is not ascended into heaven, does not hinder, but David might be
translated into Paradise, with the rest of the saints, yt rose from the dead,
when Christ did; but it is a just probation, that David's body was not then
ascended, when Christ sat in his humane flesh at the right hand of God; which
expresses the power and glory, whereunto the body of Christ was exalted by
his ascension into heaven. So that here Austen has some hold to prove, that
David did not ascend in body, when Christ did; or at least not to heaven,
whither Christ ascended; because in plain words Peter says, David is not
ascended into heaven; but either the bodies of ye saints slept again, when
they had given testimony to Christ's resurrection; or they were placed in
Paradise, and there expect the number of their brethren, which shall be raised
out of the dust; or lastly David was none of those, that were raised to bear
witness of Christ's resurrection; but only such were chosen, as were known
to the persons then living in Jerusalem. Whatsoever it was, August. de genesi
ad literam li. 8. cap. ^.
melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis: It is better (as
Austen says) to doubt of things (unknown and) hid, then to strive about things
uncertain. The last reason of S. Austen, that Hebre. 11.
God so provided for us, that the fathers of the old testament without us,
should not be perfect; proves not, that al ^he saints in Paradise lack their
bodies; for then we must deny that Henoch was Hebre. 11
translated, not to see death; and that Elias was 4. Regum. 2
taken up by a whirlewind into heaven; as also that he was Matthew. 1^
seen on the mount talking with Christ, which are directly affirmed by the
scriptures; but it will make some proof, that they have not ye same perfection
of joy and bliss, which they shall have, when all the members of Christ are
received into glory.

There remains one objection, which must be eased, before I end. And that
is, Christ said to the thief which confessed him on the cross: Luke. 23
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; how then could Christ's soul be
three days in hell, except we grant it might be in many places at once? S.
Auste^ laboreth in his 57. epistle to remove this stumbling block; and after
some turns and wrenches, he thus concludes. August. epist. 57.
Est autem sensus multo expeditior, and ab his omnibus ambiguita^^bus liber, si
non secundum id quod homo erat, sed secundu^ id quod deus erat, Christus
dixisse accipiatur: Hodie mecu^ eris in paradiso. Homo quippe Christus, illo
die secundu^ carnem in sepulchro, secundum animam in inferno futurus erat. Deus
vero ide^ ipse Christus vbique semper est. The far easier understanding, and
free from al these ambiguities is; if we take Christ to speak those words,
This day shall thou be WITH ME in Paradise, not of his manhood, but of his
Godhead. For the man Christ was that day in the grave according to his flesh,
and in hell as touching his soul; but the same Christ as God is always every
where. And though this answer please that learned Father best, that Christ
should speak of the thieves soul, and his divine presence in Paradise, yet
we have no warrant in the word of God so to fasten Christ's soul unto hell for
the time of his death, that it might not be in Paradise before it descended
into hell; and he first show himself to the saints to their unspeakable
comfort, before he went to subject the powers or darkness under his yoke.
That he Romans 10
descended into the deep, must be received, because it is avouched by the
apostle; but what time he went, or how long he stayed, as also what manner of
triumph he brought thence, cannot be limited by any mortal man; In all these
cases I think it safest to particularize nothing, which is not defined in the
word of God: there may be likelihoods, but the consciences of the faithful
must not be enforced, except to certainties. This is that I thought fit to be
said touching Christ's descent to hell; urging the force and fruit of his
going thither, or appearing there, to subject the whole strength and kingdom
of Satan unto himself, and to acquit all his members from coming thither;
but the time or manner of his descending, I dare not determine, least I should
auert you from truth to fables.

Far surer is the former doctrine, teaching the redemption of mankind by the
death of Christ to be all-sufficient and everlasting, wherein the scriptures
being evident and the Fathers consonant, I shall need no more words; I will
therefore close them both with the confession of Fulgentius, who lived 500.
years after Christ, and so commend you to God. Fulgens. de incarnat, and
gratia dom. nostri (...) christi. ca. 8.
Deus verus and viuus, imo deus veritas et vita aeterna, nisi idem verus homo
fieret, morte^ gustare non posset. Et ide^ homo qui mortem gustauit, siverus
deus and vita aeterna non esset morte^ vincere non valeret. Excepto illo, qui
sic homo est vt idem sit deus, quis est homo qui destruxerit mortem, aut quis
eruet animam sua^ de manu inferi? mors autem filij dei, quam SOLA CARNE
suscepit VTRAMQVE IN NOBIS MORTEM, animae scilicet carnisque destruxit, and
resurrectio carnis eius, gratiam nobis and spiritualis and corporalis
resurrectionis attribuit, vt prius iustificati per fidem mortis and
resurrectionis filij dei, resuscitemur ab infidelitatis morte, and post primam
resurrectionem scilicet animarum, quae nobis in fide collocata est, etiam
istacarne, in qua nunc vistimus, resurgamus, nunquam denuo morituri. The true
and living God, yea the God that is truth it self, and life everlasting, if he
were not also true man, could not have tasted death, and that man which tasted
death, except he had been likewise the true God, and eternal life, he could
not have conquered death. Saving he that was both God and man, what man could
have destroyed death, or delivered his own soul from the power of hell? But
the death of the son of God WHICH HE SVFFERED IN HIS FLESH ONLY, destroyed
both deaths in us, as well of soul as body; and the resurrection of his flesh
gave us the grace both of a spiritual and corporal resurrection, that being
first justified by faith in the death and resurrection of the son of God, we
might be raised from the death of infidelity; and after the first
resurrection which is of the soul, (from sin,) given us by faith, we may
also rise in this flesh, in which we now live, never to die any more. Pulgent.
de passione domini ad Trasim. lib. 3.
Cum SOLA MORERETVR ET RESVSCITARETVR IN CHRISTO propter vnitatem personae dei
and hominis, filius dei dicitur mortuus. Totum igitur HOMINEM cum suis
infirmitatibus sine peccato dei filius accepit; in tota traditus idem Christus,
SECVNDVM SOLAM CARNEM MORTVVS, Totus Christus secundum solam animam ad infernum
descendit. Humanitas ergo vera filij dei, nec tota fuit in sepulchro, nec tota
in inferno, sed in sepulchro secundum carnem Christus mortuus iacuit, and
secundum animam ad infernum Christus descendit. Secundum diuinitatem vero suam,
quae nec loco tenetur, nec fine concluditur, totus fuit in sepulchro cum carne,
totus in inferno cum anima. Aciper hoc plenus fuit vbique Christus, quia non
est deus ab humanitate, quam susceperat separatus, qui and in anima fuit, vt
solutis infernidolosuus AB INFERNO VICTRIX REDIRET, and in carne suafuit, vt
celeri resurrectione corrumpi non posset. Whereas ONLY THE FLESH died, and
was raised again in Christ, yet for the unity of the person, being God and
man; the son of God is said to have died. The whole nature of man then with
our infirmities, the son of God took unto him for our sakes, but without
sin: in the whole nature the same Christ being delivered, DIED ACCORDING TO
THE FLESH ONLY, and whole Christ descended into hell according to the soul
only. So that the true manhood of the son of God, was neither wholly in the
sepulcher, nor wholly in hell, but in the sepulcher Christ lay dead in his true
flesh; and in his soul Christ descended into hell. But as touching his
divinity, which is neither comprehended in place, nor measured with end, whole
Christ was in the grave with his flesh, and whole Christ in hell with his
soul. And thereby whole Christ was every where: because his Godhead was not
severed from his manhood; but was with his soul, that dissoluing the sorrows
of hell, it might return conqueror from hell; and with his flesh, that
speedily rising, it might not see corruption.

The dark places of Peter, that Christ by his 1. Pet. 3.
spirit preached unto the spirits (that are now) in prison, which in the days
of Noe were disobedient whiles the Arc was preparing: and likewise that ^.
Pet. 4.
the Gospel was preached unto the dead; I omit as nothing pertinent to Christ's
descent to hell; the first being verified in the time, and by the mouth of Noe;
and the second performed by the preaching of the Apostles, as Saint Austen long
since observed; who says of the first, August. epist. 99.
Considera ne forte totum illud quod de conclusis incarcere spiritibus, qui in
diebus Noe non crediderant, Petrus Apostolus dicit, omnino ad inferos non
pertineat, sed ad illa potius tempora, quorum formam ad haec tempora
transtulit: Take heed least happily all that which Peter speaks of spirits
closed in prison, which believed not in the days of Noe, do not at all
pertain to hell, but rather to those times which Peter compares with our age:
and of the second, Ibidem.
Quod Petrus dicit, propter hoc and mortuis Euangelizatum est, vt iudicentur
secundum homines in carne, vinant autem secundum deum spiritu, non cogit apud
inferos intelligi. Propterea enim in hac vita and mortuis Euangelizatum est,
idest, infidelibus and iniquis, vt cum crediderint, iudicentur secundum homines
in carne, hoc est, in diuersis tribulationibus and in ipsa morte carnis. That
which Peter says; (to this purpose was the Gospel preached unto the dead,
that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to
God in the spirit;) has no necessity to be applied to hell. For the Gospel is
preached in this life to the dead, that is to the infidels and sinners, that
when they believe they might be judged in the flesh after the manner of men, by
diverse troubles, and even by the death of the flesh. This I repeat the
rather, because some late writers have borrowed Saint Austens exposition, and
suppressed Saint Austens name; as if they were the first that ever looked into
the truth of these places. Other reasons there are, but they are not worth the
ripping up; I will therefore trouble you no further.

To the father that spared not his own son, but gave him for us all; to the
son that laid down his life for us, and redeemed us with his precious
blood; to the holy Ghost which seals the sufferings and comforts of Christ
in our hearts; even to the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, and God only
wise, be honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Conclusion to the Reader, for the clearing of certain objections made
against the doctrine before handled.
I Promised thee (Christian reader) in ye preface of this book, to give thee a
ta^^ in the conclusion how rashly and weakly the doctrine, which thou have now
read, was confuted, before it was printed, by one that professes Page ^^
He could not forbear but employ his talent to clear the holy cause ( as he
calls it) from all the corrupt fancies and vain imaginations of men: which,
God willing, I mean now to perform. Thou must not look that I will wast time
and paper to settle a giddie head, or stop a running rounge; but when by some
particulars I have made it appear how unfit he is to be refuted, or so much
as regarded by me; I will leave him to the depth of his follies. For though he
point plainly to my sermons, in directing his treatise: page ^8^
contrary to certain errors publikly preached in London, and sticks not to
Page 89.
name me; yet because he flies from the state of the chief Question which I
impugned, and takes the pains to over skip all my authorities with silence,
if not with contempt, and in reporting my reasons forgets and dissembleth
what pleases himself, as also in the defense of his holy cause he roueth as
he lists, neither keeping himself to any order, nor bringing any matter of
moment, but confusedly pouring out the hasty resolutions of his own brains,
spiced every where with ignorant and absurd positions: neither my leisure nor
my liking suffer me to seek him out, that has so far lost himself, nor to
vouchsafe him an answer, that so proudly despises all authority and
antiquity, which sorteth not with his fancy. I will therefore show thee (good
Reader) some examples of his insolent rejecting the Fathers, of his forgetful
or wilful altering my reasons, of his impertinent proouing that which is not
questioned, and skipping that which should be proved, of his erroneous and
dangerous assertions, of his intolerable ignorance in the tongue, whereof he so
much vaunteth, and then leave thee to God, if thou loath not the reading, as I
did the writing before thou come to the end.

Where I took for my text, these words of S. Paul, Galat 6.
God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified to me and I to the world. This co^futer would
bear men in hand, that I mistook my text, and forced a false conclusion from
it. Page 31.
This ( says he) is not only an objection, but even a foundation and
principal ground of this error, but so mistaken and forced as nothing may be
more. My reason he makes to be this; Christ's soul was not crucified but only
his body; therefore Christ's body only suffered, and not his soul. By this
(gentle reader) it may plainly be perceived, how well this gainsaier observed
my proofs. I drew no reason from these words, but proposing them for my theme,
took occasion from them to lay down; first the contents of Christ's cross,
how far it extended; and then the effects of Christ's cross, how much it
performed, which is the general method of the whole treatise. In the contents
of Christ's cross my words are these. Rightly then may the Cross note all
manner of miseries, for so much as our Savior going from the garden to the grave
suffered all sorts of afflictions; Vide page 4.
which I before specifying amongst others named these, shame, reproach, and all
sorts of deadly pains, besides heaviness of heart, and agony of mind, which
oppressed him in the garden; and this I made no different signification, but
rather a participation of the cross of Christ. When I came to Christ's
sufferings on the Tree, as Peter speaks, I used these plain words: the rest
(of his torments) which went before, not being excluded as superfluous, but
continued and increased by that ^harp and. extreme martyrdom which he suffered
on the Cross. Did I then make any such conclusion out of these words of Paul
as you imagine, Sir confuter? or did rather your wit and memory so slenderly
serve you, that you could not conceive or carry away the maine method of my
sermons, distinctly laid down at my first entrance into this matter? But as
you begin with my Theme, so you continue with the whole discourse, mistaking,
forgetting, perverting and maiming all that I alleged or concluded.

Nevertheless you take it to be clear, Page ^^.
that this text was mistaken by me, for the Apostle here speaks not of the
personal sufferings of Christ, but of the godly, which they suffer for
Christ's truth sake. To dim ties twy light is clearer then Sun shine; and to
a man of your understanding falsehood may be clearer then truth; but know you
Sir H. I. that I mistook not my text. For albeit the CROSS be some times
taken for the afflictions of the godly; yet THE CROSS OF CHRIST is no where
in the scriptures so taken. Again though we be 2. Cor. 17. verse 30.
permitted and Jacob. 1. ver. 2.
commanded to rejoice in our afflictions, yet to make it a thing detestable to
rejoice in any thing else, as the Apostle here does, by saying, God forbid
that I should rejoice but in the Cross of Christ; has no ground in divinity.
Himself says else where; 2. Cor. 11.
Of such a man (as was taken up into Paradise) will I rejoice; of my self I
will not rejoice, except it be of mine infirmities. Our Savior says to his
Disciples, Luke. 10.
Rejoice rather because your names are written in heaven. But of Christ
crucified, it is piety and duty to say, God forbid that we should rejoice
but in the Cross of Christ. For as to the Corinths the Apostle refuses 1. Cor.
all knowledge save of Christ, and him crucified: so here he renounceth all
rejoicing save in the Cross of Christ, that is in Christ crucified. This to
be the full and plain meaning of the Apostle in this place is to me as clear
as day light, and I hope will so seem to thee (Christian Reader) if thou
mark the words of Saint Paul in the 12. verse of this very Chapter, where he
charge the false Apostles with urging Circumcision, because they would avoid
persecution for the cross of Christ: Gala. 6. v^. 12
They constrain you (says he) to be circumcised, only because they would
not suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ; protesting the contrary for
himself in these words, but God forbid that I should rejoice but in the
Cross of Christ, VVHER BY THE WORLD IS CRVCIFIED TO ME, AND ^^ TO THE WORLD:
Meaning he does not only refuse the favors, but despise the terrors of the
world for the cross of Christ. In the first part of this comparison betwixt
himself and those that flattered the Jews with teaching circumcision for
fear of affliction, put your interpretation to yt words of the Apostle, and
see how absurdly it matcheth with them. They constrain you to be circumcised,
only because they would not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ, that
is as you expound it, because they would not suffer persecution for "the
afflictions of the godly. Has this exposition either sense or reason in it?
Or else is it evident that the Apostle here means by the cross of Christ,
the slander and shame of Christ's suffering on the Cross, which the Jews so
abhorred, that they pursued all that preached or believed it? Then
consequently Paul's rejoicing in nothing but in the cross of Christ contrary
to their course must needs import, that he reioiced in nothing so much as in
that shameful death which the Savior of the world endured on the cross; and
to that and he says in the former Chapter, where he more largely h^ndleth
this matter; Gal. 5. ver. ^1.
If I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? Then is the
slander of the cross abolished; meaning there was none other cause why the
Jews hated and persecuted him, but for preaching Christ crucified, to be the
true and only mean of our salvation, without circumcision or whatsoever
ceremonies of the law.

As the text is clear with the sense which I followed, so the fathers concur
with the same. Christ (says Austen) T^act in Io^^. ^^.
chose that kind of death to hang on the cross, that a Christian might say,
^ar be it from me to rejoice but in the cross of Christ. Chrysostom upon this
place, Chry^o^^. ^^ Galat^ ^
what is the reason (says he) that Paul so rejoices in Christ's cross?
because Christ for my sake ^^oke the shape of a servant, and for my sake
endured that he suffered. Adding far^her. Chry^o^^. ^^ Galat^ ^
Annon est gloriandum, quum ille dominus, quiverus est deus, non erubescit pro
nobis crucem subire? Have we not good cause to rejoice when that Lord, which is
true God, was not ashamed to endure the cross for us? Paul does Ierom in
Galat. 6
not rejoice (says Ierom) in his own righteousness or knowledge, but in the
faith of the cross, by which all my sins are pardoned me. Christ Beda. in
Galat. 6
bearing his cross on his shoulders, (says Bid) commends it, that Paul
might say, be it far from me to rejoice but in the cross of Christ. He was
despised in the eyes of the wicked for that, wherein the hearts of the Saints
should rejoice. I sta^e somewhat longer (gentle Reader) on this point; for
that, as it had bin a childish oversight in me at the very first entrance to
mistake the meaning of my text; so it is more then a malepart trick in him
unjustly to challenge me for it; but I ma^e the better content my self with
it, since this Refuter s^icketh not to use all the Fathers with like disdain,
whereof I will give th^e an example or two, that thou may see the headiness
of this hasty writer.

In the contents of Christ's cross, I observed out of, Vide page ^
Augustine, Vide page ^
Ierom, and Vide page ^
Bernard that no violence of death wrested Christ's soul from him, as it does
ours; but when he saw his time, he even at an instant laid it down of
himself, no pains hastening his death. Page ^^
This is a p^radoxe in Nature ( says this Controller) and contrary to
scripture which says, he was like us in all things sin only excepted. You
might give the learned and ancient Fathers better words Sir trister, what
soever you do me; your wits are too weak to refute their resolution. For where
like a P^ncee, you pray you know not what, they ground them^^lues on the
plain and express wordee of the scriptures. (...)
No man (says our Savior) takes (my soul) from me, but I la^e it down of
my self: I have power to lay it down, and have power to take it again. How
think you Sir; could any violence or pains of death take Christ's soul
from him; or had he power to lay it down when and as he would, which no man
else ever had or shall have? you reply, he was "like us in all things, sin
only excepted. Such proofs became well your person. Was he like us in his
birth? can we lie in the grave without corruption, as he lay? or raise our
selves from death as he did? Read more for shame and write less, till you be
better advised, or better instructed. Upon these words of Christ, I have power
to lay down my soul, and have power to take it again, Chrysostom writes
thus; Homili. 69 In Iohannem.
vtrumque nouum fuit and praeter communem consuetudinem. Potestatem habeo
ponendi eam: hoc est, ego solus potestatem habeo, quae vobis non est. Both
these (powers) were strange and above the common course of men. I have power to
lay down my soul, that is, I ALONE have this power, which you have not. If
you deny this that Chrysostom says, remember what God himself says: Luke.
12.
o fool this night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee, which Christ
says none could do from him, because he had power by his fathers appointment
to lay it down of himself.

In like sort, when I showed not mine own opinion, but the judgments of the
ancient fathers as well for the causes that might be of Christ's Vide page 19
agony in the garden, as for the meaning of his Vide page 34
complaint on the cross, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; observe
(gentle Reader) I pray thee, how absurdly he roleth from the one to the other,
and how insolentlie he rejects all the fathers, for that they uphold not his
humor of hell pains to be the ground of both. I alleged Ierom and
Chrysostom, that Christ on the cross cited the beginning of the 22. Psalm, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, that the Jews might know they had
fulfilled the words of the prophet David in that psalm foreshewing "the
passion of Christ. His answer is, Page 66
this sense is most absurd. To Athanasius, Augustine, and Leo, that Christ
spoke those words in the person of his church, which then suffered in him and
with him, he says, Page 67
This is no less absurd then the former, there is no reason or likelihood for
it. When I brought Ierom," Ambrose, Austen, and Bid, that in the garden Christ
might sorrow for the reiection of the Jews, who would pull the vengeance of God
on their own heads, to the utter destruction of their whole nation by putting
him to death, this Confuter foolishly and forgetf^lly makes this an
interpretation of Christ's complaint on the cross, and adds; Page 68.
This is more fond and absurd then the other. So when among other causes" of
Christ's agony in the garden that might ^e, (for I took upon me to determine
none) being six in number, I brought this for one out of Ambrose, that Christ
sorrowed for us, was SAD for us, and GRIEVED for us, he LAMENTED OUR VVOVNDES,
not his, OUR WEAKNESS, not his own death, Page 68.
This in effect ( says he) is nothing but what we affirm, howbeit this
ought not to have any place here; Page 69.
how could these words hang together, when he means to tell his father how
zealous he is for his glory, to say; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? There is no fashion in them thus signifying. What you speak boldly but
erroneouslie of the son of God; Page 55.
It cannot be strange if often times Christ fell amazed, confounded and
forgetful of himself for fear and grief, I may truly and justly say of
you; it is not strange to see you amazed, confounded and forgetful in your
writing. What I spoke of Christ's agony in the garden, you apply to his
complaint on the cross, and sale, the words will not hang together. Good Sir
awake out,, of your sleep, and learn at least to understand before you
answer.

As this presumer every where with disdain casts away the judgments of the
fathers which I produce, and prefers his own peevish conceit before them
all; so when he reports my reasons, he either ignora^tlie mistaketh them, or
purposelie peruerteth them, y^ they may the less encumber him. In the effects
of Christ's cross I noted out of the Apostle to the Hebrews three properties
of the true propitiatory sacrifice which took away the sin of the world;
Vide page. 18
It was a bodily, a bloody, and a deadly sacrifice, and amongst many
reasons to confirm the same, I brought these two, which the conf^ter after his
forgetful manner roueth at. The first in effect was this. The true sacrifice
for sin, which the Redeemer should offer, was shadowed and foreshewed by the
sacrifices which God commanded and accepted in the old testament: but the
sacrifices of the Patriarchs and of the faithful appointed by Moses
foreshewed and figured a bodily, bloody, and deadly sacrifice, and no pains
of hell; therefore the true sacrifice for sin was made by the body, blood and
death of the Redeemer, and not by the pains of hell suffered in his soul. The
second this; As the sacrifices of the law prefigured what the Savior of the
world should do for the abolishing of sin; so the sacraments of the new
testament confirm and scale that performed in the person of Christ Jesus,
which was the true propitiation for our sins, and price of our redemption:
but the sacraments of the new testament, and specially the Lords supper,
declare and confirm unto us the body of Christ given for us unto death, and
his blood shed for the remission of our sins; therefore this was the true
propitiation for our sins, and price of our redemption, and not the pains of
hell suffered in the soul of Christ, as some imagine. To the first the
Confuter answers; Page. 11.
The proposition is false taking it generally. The carnal sacrifices of the
Jews signified that which they were apt to signify, but not any further. The
sacrifices of beasts could not prefigure the personal union of God and man,
nor the reasonable and immortal soul of Christ, nor his resurrection, all
which were necessary points in the meritorious sacrifice. Secondly he
denies the assumption. Page. 12.
For certain of the Jews sacrifices set forth the sufferinges of the soul
of Christ also. As the escape Got in the 16. of Leuiticus, which was a sin
offering, though it were sent away free and untouched. To the reason drawn
from the Sacraments, he says, Page 14.
We are to answer as we did before. These are bodily and earthly Elements,
and therefore fit to set soorth bodily and apparent effects in Christ; they
can not set out the spiritual and invisible effects in him. And yet the
ceremony of breaking the bread, which is to show that Christ's body was
broken for us, can not belong properly to the body, but to the soul. These I
trust are your words; now hear my reply. I had no such proposition as you
frame to your self, that either the sacrifices of the law, or Sacraments of
the Gospel, were figures of our whole and absolute redemption, which is (as you
expound it) of all the fruits and causes of our redemption. This is your
evasion, not my proposition; I told you that as God had promised, so the
faithful believed, that his own son should be the Seed of the woman, and
by his death and blood should purge their sins. To continue this promise and
confirm the faith of all before and under the law, God appointed bloody
sacrifices, as continual remembrances and figures, not of the person, nor of
the function of Christ; but of the Sacrifice, by which he should abolish
sin; to wi^te, by his body slain, and his blood shed, which the carnal
sacrifices were fittest to resemble, since God would not have the blood of any
man, but of his own son shed for remission of sins. My proposition then
speaks of the true sacrifice for sin, and avouches that to be the true
sacrifice for sin, which was shadowed and figured by the death and blood of
those beasts, that God comma^^ded to be offered unto him. This proposition you
do not deny, for you grant, page ^1.52
The Jews sacrifices signified what they were apt to teach, and signify: but
they were apt and ordained of GOD to teach the Jews, that, by the death and
blood of the Messiah, they should be redeemed and saved from their sins;
ergo they were apt and ordained of God to figure and shadow the true
propitiatory sacrifice. And so the patriarchs and Prophets believed and
expected, whose faith and hope could neither be vain nor frustrate, since they
were thereto directed by Gods own appointment.

This proposition, be you Christian or Jew, you may not deny; and therefore
you do well to deny the assumption, and to affirm that certain sacrifices
of the Jews, as namely the escape Goat in the 16. of Leuiticus did signify
the immortal soul of Christ, which was Page. 12:
a sacrifice for sin, and did properly bear our sins, and suffer for our
sins.But Sir, if a man ask you how you prove that the escape Goat signified
the soul of Christ, what have you to say? Because both Goats (say you) are
a sacrifice for sin, as the Text speaks. You abuse the Text, and deceive
your self. The words are. Aaron Leuit. 16 verse. 5.
shall take of the assembly of the children of Israel two he Goats f^r a
sin offering, that is to make a sin offering of one of them, on which the
Lords lotte shall fall; So follow the words in the 8. verse of that chapter.
Aaron shall cast lottes over the two he Goats, one lotte for the Lord* and
another lotte for the escape Goat. And Aaron shall offer the Goat on which the
Lords lot shall fall, and MAKE HIM A SIN OFFERING. The taking of the Goats
from the people does not make them sacrifices for sin, but the offering them
unto the Lord by the Priest: so that though two were taken, yet lots were cast
which of them should he the sin offering, and which of them the escape Goat,
which consequently was no sin offering, because that was made a sin
offering, on which the Lords lot fell. And so if the escape Goat did signify
the soul of Christ, as you affirm more boldly then wisely, then was not the
soul of Christ a sin offering, neither did it suffer for sin, if your own
example may be trusted. Howbeit what the escape Goat signified, I am not so
forward to pronounce as you be, though I have better warrant so to do then
you have. For Cyrill, or as some think, Origin writing upon that place of
Leuiticus (...) In Leuit. lib. ^
If all the people of God were holy, there should not be two lottes cast
upon the Goats, one to be offered to the Lord, the other to be sent to the
desert; but there should be one lotte, and one offering to the Lord alone. But
now where in the number of them that come to the Lord, some belong to the
Lord, some deserve to be cast away, and severed from the Lords offering;
therefore part of the sacrifice which the people bring, to wit one of the
Goats, is offered to the Lord, the other is cast off, and sent into the
Desert. Ambrose in the like sense. Lib. 1. epist* 4.
As of two found in the field one istaken, the other forsaken; so are there
two Goats, one fit for sacrifice, the other to be sent away into the
Desert. He served for no use, neither might he be eaten or tasted of by the
children of the Priests* Beda joins with them. In Leuit. ca. 1*
If all the people were holy, there should not be two lottes upon the
Goats, but one lotte, and one offering; now when many are called and few
chosen, part of the peoples sacrifice is offered to the Lord, the other part
is cast away. Or else this may be understood of Jesus and Barrabas, that
one of them, which was the Lords lotte, even Jesus was slain; the other
accursed caitife was sent into the Jews Desert, bearing the sins of the
people that cried, Crucify him. So that the escape Goat by the judgment of
these fathers signified the reprobate among the people; and not the soul of
Christ; as you boldly avouch. But did it signify the soul of Christ; what
gain you by that? The escape Goat was neither done to death, nor made any
sin offering, as you falsely suppose, but was separated from the Lords
offering, and let go free and untouched. Then by your own similitude the soul
of Christ neither died any death, as you after falselie and absurdlie
conclude, that the soul of Christ died, and was crucified; neither was it any
part of the offering for sin to GOD, which you so much endeavor to prove.
Such is your understanding, that by your own examples, you overthrow your own
positions, whiles you labor to establish them with faint conceits of your own
devising.

[But in the burnt offering or holocaust prescribed, Leui. 6 you find more
help then in the escape Goat, to prove that Christ soul suffered for our sins
as well as his body.] If you mean that Christ's soul suffered the pains of
hell, I would feign see how you prove that out of the holocaust or burnt
offering. If you think the name of fire does somewhat relieve you, remember,
Sir, besides the sundry references that fire has in the scripture, the Leuit.
7. ver. 2.
holocaust was first slain, and after burnt; and therefore unless you will
fasten the fire of affliction as you call it, to Christ's body or soul after
his death, the burning of the dead sacrifice by fire will little further your
purpose. Again, in one and the same fire was the holocaust consumed. If this
therefore touch the death and passion of Christ, his body and soul must
jointly suffer one and the same kind of affliction; which is the thing you so
much impugn. And since by your own position the bodies of beasts page 11
could not "prefigure the immortal and reasonable soul of Christ, how comes
it now to pass that ye body of the holocaust after death shall signify as
well the soul as the body of Christ? Can you thus plant and pluck up with a
touch? It is no way denied or doubted by me, that the soul of Christ was
afflicted and tormented with sorrow and pain all the time of his passion;
which this Trister so much labors to prove; and therefore if the holocaust
did signify the whole manhood of Christ suffering for our sins, it could not
prejudice any thing, that I did or do teach, as anon thou shall (gentle
Reader) more plainly perceive; but yet why the burning of the holocaust
should signify Christ's affliction on the Cross, either in body or soul, I
see no proof made by this Confuter; and why it should not resemble Christ's
afflictions before death, these two reasons move me. First it was burnt after
it was dead; next it was wholly consumed by fire; neither of which can accord
with Christ's sufferings or the cross: but by the burning of that sacrifice, I
take rather the acceptance of Christ's death, or his incorruption after death
to be signified. For that part of each sacrifice which God reserved for
himself, and received to himself, was always burnt with fire; and the Hebrew
word, HOLAH, which the Scripture uses for the holocaust, signifies Genesis 8.
Exodus 29. Leuit. ^.
that which ascends up to God (by fire;) whence God is often said in the
scriptures, when he accepts an holocaust, to smell a sweet savor. Which
words saint Paul applies to the death of Christ in saying, Christ gave
himself for us to be a sacrifice unto God of a sweet smelling savor, that is
well pleasing and acceptable unto God. So likewise because the fire consumed in
the holocaust all that was subject to corruption, the holocaust may signify
Christ's incorruption after death. This sense S. Austen approoueth, when he
says. August. in. psalm. 50.
Sic leuetur holocaustum vt absorbeatur mors in victoriam; Let the holocaust so
ascend that death be swallowed up in victory. And again, August. in psalm. 65.
Quando totum consumitur igne diuino, holocaustum dicitur. Totum moum consumat
ignis tuus, nihil inde remaneat mihi, totum sit tibi. Hoc erit in resurrectione
mortuorum, quando mortale hoc induerit immortalitem. Cum absorbet ignis diuinus
mortem nostram, holocaustum est. When the whole sacrifice is consumed with
heavenly sire, it is called an holocaust. Let thy fire (o Lord) consume me
wholly, let nothing thereof remain mine, let the whole be thine: this shall be
in the resurrection of the dead, when this mortality puts on immortality.
When Gods fire consumes our Death, then is it an holocaust. And other kind of
holocaust is mentioned by Saint Austen, which I mislike not. Idem. in psalm. 49.
Holocaustum est totum igne consumptum. Est quidam ignis flagrantissimae
charitatis; totus exardescat igne diuini amoris, qui vult offerre Deo
holocaustum. An holocaust is when the whole is consumed with fire. There is a
fire of most fervent charity, he must wholly burn with the fire of the love
of God, which will offer to God an holocaust. No man ever burned with this fire
comparable to Christ Jesus; whose love toward God and man flamed, as unto
death, so after death, most fervently. So that touching the holocaust the
Confuter presumes but proves nothing; and yet if his supposall were granted,
it weakeneth not the force of my reason, since by the bodily and bloody
sacrifice shadowed in the law, I do not exclude the torments on the cross
imparted to the soul, or rather wholly discerned by the soul of Christ, but
only the pains of hell which were never figured by any sacrifice, nor
scaled by any Sacrament of the old or new testament, though now they be made
the principal part of our redemption, which indeed was purchased by the death
and blood of Christ Jesus.

In avoiding the reason which I drew from the Sacraments of the new testament,
and namely from the Lords Supper, in the length of six lines (Sir refuter)
you contradict the definition and institution of that Sacrament, as also the
plain resolution of S. Paul, and the principles of natural reason. The
Sacraments (you say) are earthly elements, they cannot set out spiritual and
invisible effects in Christ. I had thought Sacraments by their nature had been
visible signs of invisible graces, which definition is so common in the
schools, that no smatterer in divinity besides you is ignorant of it.
Chysost. in Mat. homil. 83.
Si tu incorporeus esses, nude dona ipsa incorporea tibi tradidisset, quoniam
vero corpori coniuncta est anima, in sensibilibus intelligibilia tibi
traduntur. If thou had been without a body, God would have given thee his
spiritual gifts uncovered; but because thy soul is joined with thy body, in
sensible things are delivered thee spiritual (or invisible) graces. In Psalm.
77.
Where all the Sacraments were common, (says Augustine) Grace which is the
virtue of the Sacraments, was not common to all. Ambros. de sacramentis. lib.
6. cap 1.
In the Lords Supper, that there should be no horror of blood, and yet the
grace of Redemption might remain, for a resemblance thou receiuest the
Sacrament, but thou obtainest the grace and virtue of (Christ's) true nature. So
that if those earthly elements of water, bread and wine, did not set out and
exhibit the spiritual and invisible effects in Christ, they were no
Sacraments. [But the Page 14.
Ceremony of breaking bread (say you) cannot properly belong to the body, but
to the soul.] In the first institution of his Supper did not Christ break the
bread, and deliver it saying, Take eat, this is my body? If breaking belong
to the bread, then breaking belongs properly to the body of Christ; for the
bread was ordained to show forth the body of Christ, and that S. Paul notes in
express words. 1. Cor. 10.
The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? But
Christ's body (you say) was not properly broken; because ye scripture says
John. 19.
not a bone of him shall be broken. A speculation fit for such a divine as you
are; had Christ's body nothing in it but bones? Had he not as well flesh as
bones? Luke. 24.
A spirit, says our savior, has not flesh and bones, as you see me have.
Then if Christ's flesh were rent and torn with whips, with nails, with a
spear, as it certainly was, though his bones were whole, his body was properly
and truly broken. For the cutting or tearing of the flesh, is the breaking of
the flesh, and from a part the whole may and does properly take his
denomination. And therefore Paul spoke truly and properly when he thus
expresses the words of Christ's institution, 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body, which is broken for you. Neither does he in that word vary
from Christ's institution, but he rather teaches us, that as the bread is
broken, and the wine powered out in the Lords supper; so was the flesh of the
Lords body given to be broken and torn on the cross for us, and his blood
likewise shed for the remission of our sins. Page 10.
The nails and spear, ( you grant) did pearce him, but in no sort can that be
called breaking or bruising in pieces, as the word in Esaias does plainly
signify. Wherefore the meaning is the torments of his soul did bruize and
break him in pieces. Your Hebrew, your Greek, and your Philosophy, came all
out of one forge, they are so like. You can not find that Christ's flesh was
broken and bruised on the Cross by grievous stripes and wounds, but you have
spied, that his soul was broken in pieces and that properly. If one of the
Prentices before whom you were wont to talk, should ask you into how many
pieces it was broken, your head would ache to shape him a wise answer. [But
the word DACHA which Esaias uses does plainly (you say) signify to break in
pieces.] Does it always and ever signify properly to break into pieces? How
can it then be applied to the soul, but improperlie and by a figurative kind
of speech? A Moole hill with you is a Mountain. The word does signify to
tread under foot, to bruise, to oppress, to humble. When David says the
enemy Psalm. 143. ve. 3.
has cast my life down to the ground; Will you say he has broken my life in
pieces? When Job says, Job. 19. ver. 2.
How long will ye vex my soul, and afflict me with your words, will you
add, and break me in pieces with your words? When Jeremy says of the men
of Judah. Ier. 44. ver. 10.
They are not humbled unto this day; Will you phrase it, and say, They are not
broken in pieces to this day?

In the power of Christ's death to prove the blood of our savior to be the true
price of our redemption, and that as well of our souls as of our bodies; I
alleged the words of Peter 1. Pet. 1.
You were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ; and of the souls in
heaven saying unto Christ, Revel. 5.
Thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood; when their bodies
were rotten in ye earth. Hence I reasoned, if our souls be not redeemed from
death by the blood of christ, our bodies have in this life no benefit of
redemption, I mean from death; for we die as do infidels, and our bodies rot
in the grave as theirs do till the day of resurrection. But S. Peter says,
we are redeemed, not we shall be; and the saints say to Christ when their
bodies lie in the dust, Thou have redeemed us by thy blood; ergo that
redemption which we have in this life, must be referred to our souls; and our
bodies must expect the general day of redemption in the end of the world. To
this our Confuter replieth, Page 23.
What a paradox, yea what impiety is this? Have our bodies no good at all by
Christ's death, no more then the bodies of infidels; because we die still as
well as they?Good Sir remember, Redemption from death is the point which I
urged; yt our bodies in this life have not, no more then the bodies of Infidels
have, but must expect it. And therefore if our Souls be not redeemed by the
blood of Christ from Sin and death, we have presently no redemption by the
blood of Christ, but must stay for the time of our resurrection before we
shall have it. Which is contrary to the words both of Peter and of the Souls
in heaven, that say to Christ when their bodies be rotten in earth, Thou have
redeemed us by thy blood. Here you tell us of the justification, mortification,
and sanctification of our bodies, as also of the expectation of glory, which
our bodies shall have, and think to make a great conquest of the words, NO
GOOD AT ALL; but pull in your horns. Besides that my meaning is very plain,
whatsoever the words were, which I might use, which I do not acknowledge to be
these that you bring, but that our bodies have no benefitte of Redemption from
death; mark well the condition annexed to the proposition, If our souls be
not redeemed by the death and blood of Christ; and then all these absurdities
which you thought to fasten on me, ^all full on your own head. For if our
souls be not redeemed by the blood of Christ, our bodies have utterly no
good, even no good at all by the death of Christ. [ They have you say
Justification, mortification, sanctifi^^tion, and hope of resurrection; besides
the lawful possession of earthly things.] Have our bodies these things of
themselves, or from our souls first justified, mortified; sanctified and
assured of life? I trust you dare not say that our bodies have any of these,
but for and from the Soul. Then if the soul be not redeemed by the death of
Christ, the body can have none of these, and consequently my words are sound
and good; and yours, if you stand to them against the condition annexed to
mine, are profane and false. [But I alter my words, you will say, to my best
advantage, when I see your objections to prevent that danger.] It had been
fittest for you to have stayed the printing of mine own words, and then you
might have charged me with them, and not be repelled as a forgette^ or
misconstruer of them, or to have gotten you a copy of that which I deliueerd
out that very summer to men of great honor and learning, a year and more
before I ever heard or thought of your pamphlet, because I found so many
humorous heads misconceaning and misreporting my words. But your hast^ was
such; you could not; or your skill, you would not stay the sight of mine
own words, least they should trouble you more then you were ware: and
therefore out of your own ill con^eaued, and worse digested Rapsodies, you
fram^ objections as pleases your self, which either were not mine, or not so
proposed by me. And that makes me pursue no more of your aunsweres, by reason
I spend more time in recalling you to the truth of my words, then in
refelling your exceptions, which have neither weight nor witness, more then
the buzzing of your own brain. Let us therefore view how well you behave
your self in your own proofs, which you cannot forget or mistake.

In proposing the question, and pursuing the proofs; there is some hope
(christian Reader) the holiness of the confuters cause will lead him to go
plainly and sou^dlie to work. Thus therefore he begins. Page 1.
The whole controversy has in it two points. 1. That Christ suffered for us
the wrath of God. 2. That, after his death on the cross, he went not into hell
in his soul.
Now then for the former, thus we say and constantly auow: Christ Jesus did
suffer in his whole manhood for the redemption and satisfaction of our sins:
yea he suffered properly and immediately in his soul and not in his flesh
only. Therefore he suffered for us the wrath of God. This consequent is
manifest and cannot be denied. The antecedent or first part of the former
general reason is denied and confidentlie rejected yet how falselie by Gods
help shall easily appear. Touching the first part of this controversy; were
you awaked or a sleep (Sir refuter) when I preached of these things, that you
so constantly auowe this was the question, whether Christ suffered for us the
wrath of God or no? if you were present and not a sleep, it is too much
boldness to outface the world in print, that this was the position which I
impugned. There were too many witnesses there, for me to deny, or you to
belie, the question; you know it well enough, but you cannot tell how to prove
that which I then reproved, and therefore you shrink from that, and dally with
general and doubtful terms, which according as they are expounded, may
either make with you, or against you. The question proposed by me, was, whether
it could be proved by the scriptures, or by necessary consequent from them,
that Christ in his soul suffered the true pains of hell such as the damned
do suffer, and we should have suffered, had we not been redeemed by him? I
added, if we took the pains of hell metaphoricallie for great and extreme
sorrows and pains, as David and Jonas did, she speech might be tolerated; but
if we took them properly for the very same which the damned do and shall
suffer in hell, as there is no proof for it, so there is no truth in it. To
this you say nothing, and so to all wise men make a confession that you cannot
justify that, which I then disallowed. Ye be come since to tell us that
certainly Christ suffered the wrath of God for us; which if it be granted
you, I do not see what it can help your cause, or hurt mine. For the wrath
of God extends to all pains and punishments as well corporal as
spiritual, in this life and the next, be they temporal or eternal. So that
no pain or punishment small or great could befall the body or soul of
Christ, but it must needs proceed from the wrath of God. Wherefore your idle
discourse of 32. leaves, in which you labor to prove that Christ suffered the
wrath of God for sin, might well have bin spared. Three lines directly to the
purpose had bin more worth then so many leaves thus wastfullie spent. But in
the end you conclude like a Clark, Christ suffered the wrath of God, Page 33.
which we affirm is equal to hell it self, and all the torments thereof.
What you affirm I little regard; what you can prove is that I intend. And out
of this proposition Christ suffered for us the wrath of God for sin, you
shall never conclude; Ergo he suffered the true pains of hell. Were your
proposition general shall Christ suffered all the wrath of God for sin, that
is the whole wrath of God and every part thereof due to sin, you might well
conclude; Ergo he suffered the true pains of hell; for hell indeed as it is
the last, so is it the greatest effect of Gods wrath against sin; but from an
indefinite proposition as yours is, which may signify the WHOLE or SOME PART
of GODS WRATH due to sin, you shall never infer what part you list, as
here you do.

Will you, to make your consequent good, amend your antecedent and make it
general; that Christ suffered the whole wrath of God, and every part thereof
due to sin? Then hear good Sir, mine answer. That proposition, besides that
it no way follows upon your first antecede^t; Christ suffered properly and
immediately in his soul, therefore he suffered the whole wrath of God and
every part thereof due to sin: besides I say that there is no coherence, no
consequence betwixt these two propositions; the later of them, that Christ
suffered the whole wrath of God due to sin, and every part thereof, is most
impious and blasphemous. For so neither utter desperation, nor final
reiection, nor eternal damnation are excepted, but Christ did and must suffer
them all; since they are parts, yea the chiefest parts and effects of Gods
wrath against sin. This is far from your meaning, as you often protest.
Truly I believe it; charity leads me to think, though you be somewhat
foolish in this cause, that yet you are not so devilish as to fasten these
things on the son of God. But you must also be so wise as to see, that if
your antecedent be general these will follow, whether you mean them or no: if
your antecedent be not general, but indefinite, as, Christ suffered the wrath
of God due to sin, that is some parts and effects of Gods wrath due to
sin, you shall never make choice in your conclusion which parts he suffered,
as namely the true pains of hell and of the damned. Now choose which you will,
either the inualiditie of your argument, or the impiety of your antecedent;
the one will prove you to lack learning, that you see not the difference; the
other that you want christianity, if you should not with mouth disclaim, and
with heart detest that horrible blasphemy.

You will pretend I know, your conclusion is not general: no more indeed is it;
your words are, therefore Christ suffered for us the wrath of God;but this
conclusion being indefinite, and very doubtful, will do you no good in the
fortifieng of your cause. For Christ may suffer the wrath of God in his body,
yea in his soul he may suffer it, and yet not the pains of the damned, or
of hell: but because you make this the maine foundation of your whole matter,
let us look somewhat better into it. You labor to prove by a long process
that Christ suffered the wrath of God for sin. First then what mean you by
the wrath of God? I hope you do not mean any inward affection or
perturbation in God, but as you expo^nde your self Page 37.
the very effects of his just wrath; you should say, of his justice and
power punishing" sin. And this warning (gentle Reader) if thou be simple I
must give thee, (for the learned know it of themselves,) that when thou
read in the scriptures, or hear me reason of the wrath of God, thou do
not imagine that God is moved with any inward mutation, but the punishment
ordained for sin by the justice of God, or inflicted on us when we have
sinned by the hand of God, (whatsoever mean it please him to use) is called the
wrath God. Ambrose says well; In cap. ^. ^^ Romans
Ira est non ei qui iudicat, sed illi qui iudicatur; It is no wrath to God that
judges, but to him that is is judged. Greg. moral. lib. 20. cap. 24
Quia culpas percutit irasci dicitur, says Gregory; God is said to be
angry, because he punishes our sins. And so Austen. August. de ciuitate
dei. li^^ 15. cap. 25
Ira de^non perturbatio animi eius est, sed iudicium quo irrogatur pana
peccato. The wrath of God is no affection of mind in him, but his judgment
whereby punishment is inflicted for sin. The conclusion is; August. in Psalm.
78.
nomine irae intelligitur vindicta iniquitatis, by the name of (Gods) wrath is
understood the punishment of iniquity. It is then evident that by the name of
(Gods) wrath, throughout the scriptures, is understood the vengeance or
punishment prepared or inflicted for the sins of men. Now what particular
punishments God has provided for sin as well in this life, as the next, to
chastise and revenge both the bodies and souls of sinners, would ask long
time to rehearse. The greatest and foarest are these judgments, which are
executed on the wicked, in the world to come; to wit, reiection from the
kingdom of God, and condemnation to hell fire, where not only darkness
amazeth the eyes, and remembrance of sin committed afflicts the conscience,
but an intolerable flame of fire tormenteth both soul and body for ever.
These terrible judgments of GOD against sin the Scriptures publish and
denounce to men in this life, that if the love of heaven do not win them to
obedience, the fear of hell should hold them from resisting and contemning
God. The greatest torment that in this life can befall a sinner is
desperation; when the soul of man, convinced in her self by the number of her
heinous ofsences, loses all hope of life to come, and casts her eyes wholly
on the fearful torments of hell prepared for her; the continual thought and
fright whereof do so amaze and afflict the comfortless soul, that she
sinking under the burden feels in her self the horror of hell before she
come to it. So that the loss of heaven, and fear of hell may torment wicked
and desperate persons in this life; but the execution thereof, after this life,
shall breed an other manner of astonishment and torment, then they can yet
conceive. If the thought of these judgments and punishments, ordained by
Gods power and justice for sinners, so afflict men, what shall the sight do?
If the fear of hell be so intolerable, what shall the flame be? when
therefore you say (Sir Refuter) Christ suffered for us the wrath of God; we
must not content our selves with that general word, you must tell us in
particular what parts and effects of GODS wrath Christ endured, before you
can avouch that which he suffered, to be equal to hell and all the
torments thereof. Did he suffer hell fire either in soul, or in body? the
damned shall suffer it in both. Did he find or fear himself to be excluded
from the kingdom of God? the damned do see themselves shut out for ever. If
he neither felt nor feared the MIST, the WORM, the FIRE of hell, nor so much
as DOVBTED the LOSS of Gods kingdom, what torments equal to hell can you
name us? [The wrath of God you will say, is equal to hell and all the
torments thereof]. The wrath of God is hell, and so are all the torments of
hell; yea they are the sharpest effects of Gods wrath against sin. And
therefore never play with generalities and ambiguities, but express plainly
what other effects of Gods wrath you mean. For since the loss of heaven, the
darkness, worm, and fire of hell, and the fear of both be the greatest and
sorest judgments of God against sin, that are decreed by his justice,
revealed by his word, and executed by his power, in this life or the next: we
plainly and truly say you can name us none other effects of Gods wrath
equal to these. If then it be heinous impiety to say, Christ suffered these,
and none other are equal to these, take back your lauishing untruth, that
Christ suffered the effects of Gods wrath, equal to hell and all the torments
thereof; for my part I see neither sense nor reason in it.

[ But it shall be soundly and evidently proved.] Will you prove you know not
what? Tell first what effects of gods wrath you mean, and then on with your
proofs. Your meaning may be such as you shall never prove. It may be such as
we will easily grant. For touching your words which you take for the castle of
your cause, Christ suffered for us the wrath of God; know you good Sir, Christ
suffered nothing at his Passion either in body or soul, were it little or
great, but it was an effect of Gods wrath punishing Sin, or as you delighte
to speak, it was the wrath of God. Well, if you be so loath to express your
mind, for fear you bewra^e your cause, let us hear your proofs; Page: 4
Thus we say and constantly auow: Christ Jesus did suffer in his whole
manhood for the Redemption and satisfaction of our Sins; yea he suffered
properly and immediately in his soul and not in his flesh only: As you have
begone so you will go on; talking is your profession, you did your self
wrong when you came to writing. This Antecedent as you utter it, (your meaning
is secret to your self) does neither good nor hurt to the Question. That
christ suffered in his whole manhood for the Redemption of our Sins is a
thing by me never doubted, nor denied; the doubt is, what he suffered in his
whole manhood; and what in each part of his manhood; for that he suffered all
that he suffered in his whole manhood your self do disclaim in the next
page, when you say, Page: 5.
This grievous Passion was in his soul properly and immediately, seeing then
his body was not touched with any smart. And when I gave six causes that
might be of Christ's agony in ye garden, did I so much as pretend that any of
them then touched his body, when he was affected with this passion of mind?
And except this be your meaning, that Christ suffered some things for our
Redemption in his whole manhood, and some things properly and immediately in
his Soul, your Antecedent has a flat contradiction in it self. For if he
suffered all, that he suffered, in his whole manhood, how could he suffer any
thing properly and immediately in his soul? which is the second part of your
own Antecedent. And if that be the drift of your general reason, about which
you spend 32. leaves, you may sit down and begin again a new pamphlet,
that shall have some more certainty then this has. For here you roue,
neither expressing, nor indeed knowing what you would have; only you hide
your self in this general phrase, that Christ suffered the wrath of God for
sin; but unless you specify" what he suffered, I do not mean to brabble
with you, or with any other, about general and uncertain speeches. What he
suffered more then the scriptures express, (for I faithfully believe all that
is there written) I do not easily admit you, or any other such presumer, to
deliver upon your credits; when you declare what you mean, and prove that you
say, you shall soon have an answer.

[Christ ( you say) Page ^^
assumed not our nature, nor any part of it, but ONLY to suffer in it properly
and immediately, even for the very purchasing of our redemption thereby.
Otherwise he had no need to assume both, but either the one part or the
other.] See what it is (good Reader) for a man to loose himself in the
wilderness of his own wit. To prove that Christ suffered both in body and
soul, which is a thing by no man denied (for the question is, what he
suffered, and not whether soul and body were joined in Christ's sufferings?)
this Refuter leapeth over head and ears into absurdities, not only against
divinity, but even against nature, and the very law of our first creation.
Page 16.
That the son of God had no END nor PVRPOSE" in taking our nature unto his in
the unity of person, but ONLY to suffer for our sins, Page 17.
is a bold and lewd oversight;" his end and purpose in taking our nature was
not only to suffer for us, but to do all that for us, which in his life time,
and after his death, by his resurrection, ascension, and mediation he did,
does, and will do for us. By his own mouth he revealed to us his fathers will
from heaven; by his example of life he taught us all perfection of holiness;
by his rising he swallowed up our death; by his intercession we receive all
the gifts and graces of God, which we have or shall have; by his sitting in
heaven with our flesh, he gives us assurance that our mortal bodies shall be
changed, like to his glorious body; yea the very union of our nature to his
is an effectual mean to make us one with him, as he is one with God. Had
Christ not been man, we could have had no interest in the fulness of his
obedience, in the riches of his graces, in the Communion of his spirit, in the
fellowship of his glory, which are the helps, supportes, and means of our
salvation, as well as his suffering for us: and man he could not be without
a soul and a body; neither part joined with his divine nature was sufficient
to make him a man. By the law of our first creation we are men consisting of
bodies and souls; and therefore Christ as our head must have both, NOT ONLY
TO SVFFER FOR SIN, but also to quicken, sanctify, and glorify both our
souls and bodies that he may perfect our salvation, and bring us to GOD,
without rejecting or excluding either part of our nature. Yea so advised you
are, Sir Refuter, in your reasons, that by your own assertion you conclude
Christ's flesh to be needelesse for our Redemption: for thus you say; Page 18.
This suffering (of the soul by her body which is natural and by sympathy
only) PROPERLY DID NOT MAKE TO OUR REDEMPTION. What is suffering, good Sir,
in your learning? The receiving of the blows, or the feeling of the pain? If
you beat or cut a dead carkas, that has neither life nor sense, will you
say it suffers? I think not. There must then be life and sense in the
body, before it can suffer or feel any pain. Now, life and sense,
pertain they to the body or else to the soul? If you knew not before, as by
the unlearned discourse it seems you did not, Saint Austen shall teach you;
except you will skorne him in this point, as you do in others. August. d^
ciuitate dei. lib. 21. cap. 3^
Si diligentius consideremus, dolor, qui dicitur corporis, magis ad anima^
pertinet. Animae enim est dolere, non corporis, etiam quando ei dolendi causa
existit a corpore, cum in eo loco dolet, vbi laeditur corpus. Sicut ergo
dicimus corpora sentientia and corpora viuentia cum ab anima fit corporis
sensus and vita; it^ et corpora dicimus dolentia, cum dolor corporis nisi ab
anima esse non possit. If we well consider, the pain which is called bodily
pain, belongs rather to the soul. The soul feels the pain, not the
body even when the cause of pain comes from the body, and the soul
greeueth in the place where the body is hurt; As then we say bodies are
living and feeling, when the life and sense of the body is by the soul; so
say we bodies full of pain, when the pain of the body cannot be felt but
by the soul. And so again; Idem de ciuitate dei. lib. 14. cap. 15
Dolores qui dicuntur carnis animae sunt in carne and ex carne; dolor carnis
tantummodo offensio est animae ex carne. The pains which are called bodily
pains, are the pains of the soul in the body and by the body. For bodily
pain is nothing else but the grief of the soul by the body. Whereof Divines
may not doubt, since natural reason and experience teaches, that as the
soul sees by the eyes, and hears by the ears of the body; so the soul
feels pain and offense by every part of the body, when it is wounded or
wronged. If this suffering of Christ's soul, by communion with his body, did
not properly make to our Redemption, which are your" own words; then neither
the stripes, wounds, nor death of Christ did any way make to our redemption;
since of all these violences offered to Christ's body, the flesh it self had
not the feeling but only the soul of Christ by communion with her body, or
as you term it, by Sympathy. Yea farther, by your own rule, the flesh of
Christ was needelesse in the work of our Redemption, for so much as his flesh
could not properly and immediately feel any pain; but of force must leave the
feeling of all that was suffered to the soul; and so whiles you talk so much
of the proper and immediate suffering of Christ's soul, you have clean
excluded all the sufferings of Christ, which the scripture expresses, as not
making properly to our redemption.

[But Page 19.
insteede of a false argument of mine, you will return a reason better
grounded, and of certain truth; which is this; Whereby Adam first, and we ever
since do most properly commit sin, by the same has Christ our second Adam
made satisfaction for our sin. But Adam first, and we ever since most
properly commit sin in our souls, our bodies being but the instruments of
our souls, and following the souls direction and will. Therefore Christ in
his soul chiefly and most properly made satisfaction for us.] Thou shall
perceive (christian reader) by the answer to this argument, how ill I spend
the time in pursuing this Trifler, which neither can tell what he would have,
nor what he should prove, nor whether his own reasons make with him or against
him. I made no such argument as here he pretends; the effect of my reason was
this. Vide page. 104
The flesh of Christ must be as able to redeem us as Adams was to condemn us:
but we inherit pollution and condemnation from Adams flesh; wherefore the flesh
of Christ must both quicken and cleanse us. The Mayor is evident, unless we
make the devil more able to destroy us by an other, then God is able to save
us by himself. The Minor is clear, without intermedling with the question,
whence souls be derived. I utterly refused to ground any reason upon that
difficulty; I used David's words, in sin my mother conceived me, and as
Ambrose says, In Apologia David. ca. 11.
prius incipit in homine macula quam vita; pollution (which is original)
begins in man before he has life. Now the soul is the life of the body.
Then if pollution cleave to the flesh before life come, and consequently
before the soul come, whence soever it comes; it is evident that Adams flesh
defiles and so condemns us. As for my conclusion that Christ's flesh must
quicken and cleanse us, if the premises would not support it, which they fully
do; the Scriptures will maintain it. John 6.
He that eats my flesh (says our Savior) and drinks my blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. I am that bread of
life. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread
that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. My
reeason standing good, Sir Refuter, let us look a little to yours, that you
say is so well grounded, and of certain truth. How prove you your first
proposition, In which part Adam did first Sin, by that part Christ must
satisfy for sin? Satisfaction for Sin the Scripture acknowledges none but
by death; because y^ Judge in prohibiting Adam to transgress threatened death:
Gene. 2.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death: and the Apostle
says plainly; Hebrue^ 9.
Christ is the mediator of the new testament, that THROVGH DEATH, which was for
the REDEMPTION of the transgressions in the former Testament, they which were
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. If nothing might
satisfy for sin but death; then consequently the Soul of Christ which could
not die, could not pay the satisfaction for our Sins, howsoever Adam did,
and we still do sin, most properly with our Souls. This is but a straw in
your way; for you stiflie, but absurdly, if not impiously defend, that Christ
died the death of the Soul; Vide page 79.
yet because the Scriptures and Fathers with one consent avouch the contrary,
yea S. Austen is so peremptory therein that he asks, QVIS AVDEAT DICERE,
WHO DARE AFFIRM IT? you shall give me leave to tell you that the Apostle
denies your Mayor, till you can make it good, not by your own unlearned
frenzy, but by good testimony of Scripture, that Christ did die the death of
the Soul. Now by your assumption, that Adam most properly committed sin in
his soul; If you mean that Adams soul was the agent, his body the Instrument
which the soul used as in all sins, so in this; that indeed is most true, but
directly repugnant to your conclusion. Put that for your Minor, that Adams
soul transgressed the commandment with her body and by her body; the
conclusion then follows in spite of your heart; ergo in satisfying for sin
the Soul of Christ must be punished with her body and by her body; which is
the thing you labor to overthrow with all the wits you have. Mean you
otherwise that Adam brake the Commandment of God, not by his body properly,
but by his soul? Then is your assumption a manifest contradiction to the fact
of Adam. For with his ears he heard the persuasion of the woman, with his eyes
he liked the forbidden fruit, with his hand he took it, with his mouth he did
eat it, which was the fact that God preciselie did prohibit. God did not say
to Adam thou shall not like it, or desire it, which the soul of Adam did, but
THOU SHALL NOT EAT THEREOF, which could not be performed but by the hand and
mouth of Adam: and therefore Adam transgressed the commandment not by his
soul, but by his body, even as in murder, theft, and adultery, these facts
men commit by their bodies and not by their souls.

[But in that and all other sins brought to effect, the soul, you will say,
is the principal agent, the body is but the Instrument.] I grant it
willingly; and thence I conclude, ergo in the satisfaction for sin, the
soul must be the principal patient and dolent, and the body by Gods justice
must be the instrument of her pain. And here mark I pray thee (Christian
Reader) whether this one argument do not utterly overthrow all that this idle
discourser has done, and would do in this whole pamphlet. For nothing is
more proportionable to Gods justice, then to join them in pain, that were
joined in sin; and to retain the same order in punishing, which they kept in
offending. But all prouocations and pleasures of sins the soul ^aketh from
her body, all acts of sin she commits by her bod^e: therefore the justice
of God both temporallie and eternally punishes the soul by the body; that
as it has been the Instrument of her pleasure, so it shall be of her pain.
And if GOD observe this course as well in his temporal as eternal vengeance
on the sins of men, why then should not the sufferinges of Christ's soul
by his body be truly and properly a satisfaction for sin, which this
great Doctor a little before said, Page 18.
made not properly to our Redemption?

For thy better instruction, gentle Reader, and my discharge, that the soul
takes her occasions to sin, uses her delights in sin, and perfourmeth
her attemptes of sin, with and by the body, give me leave in this point to
be somewhat the longer. Cyprian in prolog de natiuitate Christi
Caro est officina spiritus, qui in ea et per eam, quaecunque affectauerit,
peragit and consummat. The flesh (says Cyprian) is the forge of the soul,
which in that and by that acts and performs, whatsoever it affects. Hier.
contra Iouin. lib. 2
Per quinque sensus, quasi per quasdam fenestras vitiorum ad animam est
introitus. By the five senses of the body (says Jerome) as it were by
certain windows, vices (or sins) have their entrance into the soul.
Tertullian. de resurrect. car^nis^
Nusquam animasine carne est quamdiuest in carne; NIHIL NON CVM ILLA AGIT, sine
qua non est; siquidem in carne, and cum carne, and per carnem agitur ab anima,
quod agitur in cord. The soul (says Tertullian) is no where without the
flesh, as long as it is in the flesh. SHE DOES NOTHING VVITHOVT THAT, without
which she is not. Even that which is done in the heart, the soul does in her
flesh, with her flesh, and by her flesh: Yea he presses it farther and
says; Ibidem.
A deo non sola anima transigit vitam, vt nec cogitatus licet solos, licet non
ad effectum per carnem deductos, auferamus a collegio carnis. Et sine opere et
sine effectu cogitatus, carnis est actus. Negent factorum societatem, cui
negare non possunt cogitatorum. Et si anima est, quae agit and impellit in
omnia, carnis obsequium est. So far it is that the soul alone does perform
this life, that the VERY THOVGHTS IN THEM SELVES, never brought to effect, we
take not from the fellowship of the flesh. Yea the very thought VVITHOVT ACT,
VVITHOVT EFFECT, IS A DEED of the flesh. Let them now deny that to be the
souls companion in works, which they cannot deny to be her companion in
thoughts. For though it be the soul, that moves and leads to all things,
yet the flesh adds her service. And least it should seem strange that he
affirms, he points to the words of our Savior, Matthew. 15.
out of the heart come. evil thoughts. How true this is that Tertullian here
voucheth thou shall soon perceive (gentle Reader) if thou behold men in
SLEEP, in FRENSIES, in LETHARGIES, in APOPLEXIES; where the substance of the
soul is no way touched or decayed; but only the Instruments of her body,
which she uses in perceiving, remembering, understanding any thing, are
distempered, or obstructed. The experience hereof, is so easy and evident even
to the simplest among men, that I shall need to spend no more words to the
learned. Tertullians conclusion is this. Ibidem de re^urrect. carnis.
deum non licet aut iniustum iudice^ credi, aut inertem; iniustu^, si sociam
bonorum operum a praemiis arceat; inertem, si socia^ maloru^ a suppliciis
secernat. Non sit particeps in sententia caro, si non fuerit and in causa. Non
possunt ergo separari in mercede, quas opera coniung it. We may not think God
to be an injurious, or a negligent Judge: injurious, if he exclude the
(souls) companion in good works from (the souls) reward; negligent, if he
excuse the (souls) partner in evil, from the (souls) punishments. Let the
flesh have no part in the sentence, if it had no part in the cause. They cannot
be severed in wages, that were joined in work. If Tertullians assumption be
true, that in this life the soul can neither work, speak, perceive, desire,
nor think good or evil without the Instruments of her body; (excepting
always Gods power to inspire what pleases him; for he that framed the soul
can alter and change it at his liking, by the immediate working of his
spirit;) if Tertullians conclusion be true, that God the righteous judge of the
world in his everlasting reward of obedience, and likewise in his eternal
vengeance for sin will join and couple both body and soul together; then
apparentlie NO SVFFERINGS ARE SO FIT in THE PERSON OF THE REDEEMER FOR THE
SATISFACTION of sin, as those WHICH ARE COMMON TO DOES PARTS OF MAN, and
namely which the soul suffers from her body and by her body; which
overthrows all the Confuters unsalted and unsettled discourse of the souls
proper and immediate suffering in the person of Christ Jesus.

Do I then deny that the soul has any sufferings in this life and the
next, which come not by the body? By no means. For though those conioined
sufferings be most answerable to sins committed; yet the soul has some
proper punishments in this life, as sorrow and fear, when the body has no
hurt, from which Christ was not free as appears by his Agony: and so in the
next the souls of the wicked have grief and remorse besides the pain of
fire. The remembrance of sin shall not a little torment the wicked, but
perpetually afflict and gnaw their consciences as a worm that never dies.
The loss of Gods favor and kingdom shall not a little grieve them, when they
see others received into that eternal joy and bliss, and themselves
excluded. Chrysostom. in Genes. homil. 33.
Gehenna grauius est a dei beneuolentia excidere; to fall from Gods favor
(says Chrysostom) is more grievous then hell it self; and again, Chrysostom.
i^ Mat. homil. 24
Ego illius gloriae amissionem multo amarius quam ipsius gehennae supplicium
esse dico. Intoler abilis quidem res est gehenna: quis nesciat and supplicium
illud horribile? tamen si mill quis ponat gehennas, nihil tale dicturus est
quale est a beatae illius gloriae honor repelli. The loss of that
(everlasting) glory I say is far bitterer then the torments of hell it
self. Hell is an intolerable thing, and an horrible punishment: who knows it
not? Yet if a man would put a thousand hels he shall say no such thing as
this is, to be repelled from the honor of that blessed glory. Neither of
these two could be in the person of our Savior, much less the pain of hell
fire; no nor so much as the fear or doubt, that any of these should or could
light upon him; which amazeth and drives the wicked to desperation in this
life, and often afrighteth the godly, when they behold and consider the horror
of their own sins, and the dreadful power of the Judge. But this fear
could not possess the soul of our Savior, being always most assured of Gods
favor, and certainly knowing, not only the counsel and decree of his
father, that anointed and sent him to save his people from their sins; but
chiefly the conjunction of his humane nature with his divine, in the unity of
his person, which neither sin, nor death, nor devil, nor hell could infringe
or frustrate: And touching the fear of hell torments, which this discourser
would feign hide under the name of Gods wrath, hear (Christian Reader) what an
ancient father or two say. Cyrill examining the cause of Christ's tears and
prayers in the garden, and of his words, my soul is sorrowful unto death;
repelleth the fear of hell to be the cause thereof with some indignation.
Cyrill. thesauri. lib. 10. ca. 3.
Sed infernum tim^it, inquiunt: mirum est quod haec audeant dicere. But he
feared hell, they say: It is a marvelous thing that they dare so say. And
when others affirmed, Idem de recta side ad reginas lib 2 de sacerdotio Christi.
congruit ipsi mortem formidare, periculum suspicari, flere in te^tationibus,
et opus habere alterius manu vt seruetur, and ad haec discere obedientiam ex
iis quae te^ta^do passus est; It was fit for Christ to fear death, to suspect
danger, to weep in temptations, to have need of another to save him, and to
learn obedience by those temptations which he suffered, Cyrill replieth; hoc
est absurd and loqui and sentire, this is an ABSVRD BOTH SPEECH AND THOUGHT.
His own opinion is this. Ibidem
Igitur nos eramus in illo, tanquam in secundo generis principio, cum clamore
valido, and non sine lachrym^s adorantes, and aboleri mortis imperium,
roborarique vitam olim naturae donatam precantes. Therefore we were in Christ,
as in the second root of our nature, worshipping with strong cries and tears,
and praying the imperie of death might be abolished, and the life which was
given to man at the first strengthened. Athanas. contra Arrianos. serm^ 4.
Athanasius in like manner. Athanas. contra Arrianos. serm^ 4.
Qui (quaeso) non absurdum impiumque, hunc dicere mortem aut infernum
exhor^uisse, ad cuius conspectum Ianitores inferorum metu se contraxerunt? How
I pray you can it be but ABSVRD and IMPIOVS to say that (Christ) feared death
or hell, at the sight of whom the keepers of hell for fear shruncke away?
Hilarie having cited Christ's prayer in the garden, and his complaint on the
Cross, and his commending his soul into his fathers hands, as proofs
brought by others of Christ's fear at the time of his passion, says; Hilarious
de Trinitate lib: 10:
hoc legens, and non intelligens, aut pie tacuisses, aut etiam religio se
intelligentiam eius orasses: non magis per impudentem assertionem stulto furore
veritatis incapax vagaueris. Anne tibi metuere infernum chaos, and torrentes
flammas, and omnem paenarum vltricium abyssum credendus est, dicens latroni in
cruce, Amen dico tibi, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso? Reading this and not
understanding it, thou should either with piety hold thy peace, or
religiously pray for the right understanding thereof, and not with an
impudent assertion wander in a foolish madness, as incapable of the truth.
Will thou believe Christ feared hell gulf, and those burning flames and depth
of penal vengeance, when as he told the thief on the Cross, verelie I say
to thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise? What would these
fathers have said to these that defend Christ suffered the very same torments
of hell which the damned do, when they are so earnest against such as
imagined Christ might have some fear of hell?

In that which is past I have given thee a view (Christian an Reader) how
scornfully this Confuter rejects the judgments of the ancient fathers by me
alleged tou^^ing the causes of Christ's agony in the garden, and his
complainte on the Cross; as likewise how forgetfullie he changes, or
purposelie maimeth my reasons, that he may the better avoid them: and
thirdly how uncertain his propositions, and how lame his conclusions are,
that he makes for his own side, yea often such as overthrow his own
assertion; Thou shall hear now some of his special reasons, as he calls
them; but as the truth is, some of his special absurdities, and impieties:
wherein I will be no longer then of force I must be; I take little pleasure in
raking such an unclean sink.

The first is: Page 34.
Christ suffered the pains and sorrows for sin which we should. This
proposition (Sir confuter) if you take it indefinitlie as it lies; proves
nothing for you: you may do well to go to the University again, whence you
came before you were wise, and there learn to put quantity to your
propositions, that we may know when you speak of any thing, whether you
mean ALL or SOME: for if you mean here, that Christ suffered ALL that we
should, this proposition is an horrible blasphemy: then Christ suffered the
LOSS of Gods GRACE, SPIRIT, FAVOR, LIFE, and KINGDOM, for so should we;
then he was plunged into final desperation, irreuocable malediction, and
eternal condemnation; for so should we. [You are far from that frenzy, you
will say.] I hope so too; neither do I charge you with it; but if your
proposition be general you cannot avoid it; and therefore, after your loose
and trifling manner, you set down a doubtful assertion, that may serve for
all, or for part of y^ which we should have suffered. If you mean but part,
then your proposition proves no such thing, as you intend. For you would
feign from hence infer, that Christ suffered the pains of hell, which were
due to us; and if he suffered but part of that which we should, a wise
Christian will suppose any part, rather then the pains of hell; howbeit the
Apostle teaches me to say that 1 Cor. 15.
Christ died for our Sins according to the Scriptures, and that death was the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2.
He humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even to the death of the
cross. [That is no sufficient answer, you will say; because on the Cross
Esai. 53.
He sustained our sorrows, as Esaie said he should.] The words of Esaie are
not, as you would feign have them, he bare ALL our sorrows, for then he must
have sorrowed for the loss of gods grace, favor and kingdom, as I said
before; but the prophet says, he bare our sorrows, which may receive a
double construction, and either of them very religious and christian. The
first, whatsoever he felt or suffered it was ours, not his own, that is for
our sakes, and for our Sins. This the Prophet in the words following
confirms, He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruized for our
iniquities. The next is, he sustained our sorrows that is such weakness,
faintnes, and wearines, as are incident to our nature; and that the Prophet
confesses in the words before, He is a man full of sorrows, and has
experience of infirmities, even of such as naturally offend and afflict us.
But when the scripture fails you, you fly to similitudes of your own
making, and where Paul says, 1 Timot ^
Christ gave himself a ransom for all; you say, Page 3^
the Scripture speaking here after the common use, and custom of redeeming
captives taken in war does mean that Christ paid for us THE SAME PRICE which
else we should have paid. First who told you that the Scripture speaks here
after the common use of Enemies, since in our Salvation the son of God
interposed himself as a mediator with his father, to answer what the justice
of God would require at the hands of his son, for the pardoning of a servant,
that had offended? You and your friends cannot abide to hear, that the enemy
who had us in captivity should have any price for our deliverance; you
condemn that as a Manicheisme; and do you now for an advantage urge that the
enemy must have a price for his captive? Secondly the price that we should
have paid was eternal condemnation of body and soul into hell fire. If
Christ paid the same, look well least with seeking help from an enemy, you
light not on open blasphemy. Lastly to join with you in your own
similitude, is it not the common use in wars to redeem captivity with
money? The Captive himself is tied to perpetual imprisonment or servitude;
he that will ransom a prisoner is not bound to be a Prisoner himself, but
to yield such recompense in money or otherwise, as the conqueror shall
demand. So that even by your own comparison, it is evident, the son of GOD
in redeeming us was not tied to our captivity, but might yield his Father a
greater recompense for our absolution, then our condemnation would have
amounted unto.

Your second special folly (Sir Confuter) is grounded upon the words of
Saint Paul. Page.35.
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law being made a curse for us.
Whence you reason; It is vain and senseless to think that the Apostle
speaks here of two several kinds of curses. And if Christ sustained any
curse for us, what curse could it be? not the curse of the law? or what was
it? not the curse of God? If you ask to learn, you may be soon taught. If
you ask to brag, you may be soon cooled. The curse of God upon the sin of
man proceeds from the wrath of God against the sin of man; howbeit God
curses not only sinners, but other his creatures, with whom he is not
angry, but only because they should not serve the pride and lusts of the
wicked. When Adam transgressed* God cursed the earth for his sin in saying,
Genes, 3
Cursed is the earth for thy sake, thorns and thistles shall it bring thee.
For not only the souls and bodies of the wicked are cursed and consumed with
plagues resting in them, and on them; but all that they take in hand, and all
that belongth to them is accursed like wise. Deutero. 2^
If thou will not (says Moses) obey the voice of the Lord thy God to do all
his commandments, then all these curses shall come upon thee and overtake
thee. Cursed shall thy basket be, and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit
of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep. The Lord will send upon thee cursing in all that which
thou set thine hand to do, until thou be destroyed and perish, because
of the wickedness of thy works. The rest of GODS curses there numbered unto
the end of that Chapter, and laid upon body and soul, wife and children,
goods and lands, life and death of such as transgress; peruse (gentle Reader)
at thy le^^ure, and thou shall easily see, how far the curse of GOD in this
life pursues sinners; besides the horrible torments of the next life kept in
store for them. So that as I did in the wrath of God, I must in the curse of
God ask you (Sir Confuter) whether you mean that Christ suffered for us the
whole curse of the law, or part thereof? if you answer the whole; look in
that place which I now cited, how many kinds of curses there be reckned, which
never touched our Savior; besides the graunde curse which closes up all, and
continues for ever; Matthew. 25
Depart from me ye CVRSED into everlasting fire. If you say a part; then
prove you nothing with your hot and sharp spurs as you think, when you
say; what curse could it be? not the curse of the law? or what else? not the
curse of God? Christ suffered a part of that curse, which God by his own
mouth laid on Adam and all his posterity for sin. Romans 5*
By one man sin entered into the world (says Paul) and by sin death. he
also suffered other parts of the curse, which GOD by his Deuteronomy. 28
law threatened unto sinners, to wit verse 20.3^*
shame and TROVBLE, 33.
VVRONG and VIOLENCE, 48.
CAPTIVITY and MISERY, 48.
THIRST and NAKEDNESS, 65*
GRIEF and PAIN of body and mind. Besides, the very kind of death, to
which he submitted himself was accursed by special words in the law, Galat. 3
accursed is every one that hangs on the Tree. Now to verify the words of S.
Paul, that Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law due to our sins,
being made a curse for us; it suffices that the son of God, being equal
with his Father in glory and majesty, vouchsafed to undergo not all the
parts of our curse, but some parts thereof. Gods everlasting curse which is
most due to sin, I hope you will free him from. Gods spiritual curse, by
which he depriueth the wicked of his truth, of his grace and other gifts of
his spirit, you must likewise clear the son of GOD from. He cannot be
subjected to that part of Gods curse without apparent impiety. Take from him
truth, you make him a liar; take from him grace you charge him with a
reprobate mind; take from him the Spirit of GOD, you give place to Satan to
work in him as in the children of unbelief. I trust (Sir Refuter) you be
neither so wicked as to think, neither so desperate as to defend, that the
son of God might suffer any of these curses. Then have you boldly, but
falsely and lewdly concluded out of S. Paul, that he puts Page 40.
a part of the just curse of the law, thereby meaning the whole. Are you so
well acquainted with Saint Paul's mind, that of your own head, to uphold
your humorous fancy, you will urge his meaning without his words, to support
a manifest falsitie? The whole curse of the law contains infatuation of
mind, obduration of heart, desperation, damnation; and what not? did Paul
mean, that Christ was made these things for us? or could he have redeemed
us, if in these things he had been yoked with us? But that I think (Sir
Refuter,) you sin of ignorance, not meaning to maintain these blasphemies,
and yet including them within the largeness of your words, through the
weakness of your wit, I must by the duty which I owe to God, and his truth,
have given you other terms, then now I do; but I had rather fatherly warn you
to take heed of these ^^ies in time, least they bring the whole curse of God
upon your own sou^e, which you would so ^ame fasten on Christ's.

Notwithstanding your folly thus to presume without all proof upon the
Apostles meaning besides his words, you have a good conceit of your self, and
like a proper man you say, I urge then, Page 37.
let it be noted* Christ is said to be made a curse for us; and before I showed
this curse was Gods curse And again. Page 36.
The Scripture it self affirms, he did all that for us: therefore who
dares deny it? Who either man or Angel shall presume to say nay? You have
urged it, I have noted it, and so have many wise and good men more; and will
you hear what I conceive? Truly this; you have more need of Physic to cure
your brains, then of labor to rebate your arguments. So many, and those
special reasons, so proudly proposed, so weaklie performed, so ^alselie
concluded, did I never read as long as I have lived. Thou will think
perchance (christian Reader) I speak this to disgrace the encounterer, and so
to prejudice his cause with thee; mine heart God knows; but if thou be not
of the same mind with me before I end with his special reasons, as he
calls them, I much deceive my self; specially if thou thy self be
intelligent and indifferent.

I hope, though I vaunt not, as he does, there can be no doubt, but the curse
of God for sin contains these parts which I propose; to wit, the
external, corporal, spiritual, and eternal plagues and punishments,
wherewith God pursues the wicked that rebel against him. I count it as
clear, that neither the eternal, nor the true spiritual curse of God could
take hold on the soul of our Savior. For as the greatest blessings that God
gives us in this life, after he has by mercy pardoned our sins, are the
faith of his truth, to direct us, the strength of his grace, to assist us, the
earnest of his spirit to persuade our hearts of his fatherly clemency to us,
and to inflame us again with the love of his name, hope of his promises, and
desire of his kingdom; so the greatest curse for sin, that in this life may
befall men, is to have his holy spirit taken from them, with all his graces
and gifts, that any way tend to salvation, and to be given over into a
reprobate sense, that with blindness and hardness of heart, they may run
headlong to their own destruction. With these impieties and blasphemies, I
trust no Christian will burden the soul of our Savior; and yet these are the
true spiritual curses of God against sin. If then the soul of Christ were
always John. ^.
full of grace and truth, and the abundance of his spirit such, that John. ^.
we all receive of his fullness; If in the perfection of his holiness,
innocence and obedience there could be no defect; nor any fear or doubt in
that steadfast assurance of faith, hope and love, which our Savior always
retained; how could he being so fully and perpetually blessed of God, b^e
also truly accursed of him? The curse of God is not in words, but in deeds.
Then evidently saint Paul's meaning is and must be, that Christ, voluntarily
undertaking some part of the curse due to our sins, (for the whole he could
not undertake without reprobation and damnation;) not only discharged us of
the whole, but gave us the blessing of God promised to Abraham. And to this
end I brought the testimonies of saint Austen, Chrysostom, and others, fully
confirming that I said: to which you reply, as your custom is; Page: 35:
It is vain and senseless to think that the Apostle here speaks of two
several kinds of curses. Indeed it is vain and fruitless to reason with
him, that prefers his ignorant imagination, before the judgments of all the
learned, and ancient fathers in Christ's church; but Sir, your follies will
stick fast by you, when their expositions shall pass with all wise men for
current and good.

You quarrel as your manner is, with those parts of the curse, which I say
Christ endured. For where I proposed a SHAMEFVL, VVRONGFVL and PAINFVL death to
be that part of the curse, which Christ suffered for us; you skirre at every
one of these; And of the first you say: Page 38.
Will any man of common reason affirm that (to be openly hanged on a tree) was
all the curse that Christ bore for us? Nothing but the shame of the world,
because it was an ignominious death? Whether you account saint Austen, and
saint Chrysostom, men of common reason I know not; The Church this 1200.
years has taken them for reverend and learned fathers. You add, It is more
then absurd so to say. Judge thou (Christian reader) whether this Prater be
well in his wits, that in his ^renzie thus reprocheth, not only the fathers
of Christ's church, but even the Prophets and Apostles themselves, as men more
then absurd, and not of common reason. Moses from Gods mouth threatens such as
transgress the law, that God will send them Deuteronomy. 28. verse 20.
trouble and shame, and will make them a and ver. 37.
wonder, a proverb, and a common talk among all people. Esaias foreshewing
Christ's sufferings, reckons this not for one of the least: Esaias. 53.
He was despised, rejected and numbered among sinners; we did judge him plagued
and smitten of God, and turned our faces from him. David in the person of
Christ, complaining of the wrongs received at the time of his passion; puts
this as the first and the chiefest, Psalm. 22*
I am (as) a worm and not a man; a shame of men, and the contempt of the
people. All they that see me have me in derision; they make a mow, and nod
the head, saying, he trusted in God, let him deliver him, let him save him.
They gape upon me with their mouths. Saint Paul himself urges as much the
shame, as the pain of the cross; Heb. ^2.
Look to Jesus the author and finisher of your faith, who for the joy set
before him endured the cross and despised the SHAME. He endured such
contradiction of sinners least you should faint in your minds. How often does
God threaten shame and confusion of face to those that fall from him? How
earnestly does David every where pray against it? How truly does Daniel make
this confession to god? Daniel. ^*
O Lord to us belongs OPEN SHAME because we have sinned against thee; the
CVRSE is powered upon us written in the law of Moses; because of our sins,
Jerusalem and thy people are a REPROACH to all about us. If the scriptures were
not clear, that shame and reproach is a chief part of Gods curse against
sin, how many wise men and good men choose death before shame? What
generous nature does not more decline slandering then wounding? In common
reason to which you appeal, how can it be less wrong or grief, to whippe
the soul with reproaches, then the body with scourges? Uerily our Savior who
best knows the weight of both, gives like reward to both: Matt. 5.
Blessed are you when men revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you
for my sake, falselie; rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

As you shuffle with the shame, which our Savior suffered on the Cross, so
you do with his death; affirming that Death may Page 45.
in no sort here be called a curse, because death to the godly is no Page 44
Vide page 92
curse properly, nor punishment of sin, but a benefit and advantage. You
are too young a Doctor to control Saint Austen, whose words I have alleged
in the Treatise at large. His resolution is, that when Paul says, Christ was
made a curse for us, he meant Christ died for us. Idem est mortuus quod
maledictus, quoniam mors ipsa ex maledicto est. It is all one to say, Christ
died for us, and he was accursed for us; because death came from the curse.
This you deny; for that the godly after death go to heaven, which is rather
a benefit then a curse to them. Good Sir, it is no benefit of death it self,
but Christ's blessing after death, that departing this life, we go to heaven.
Did you encourage men to die, since of force for sin dwelling in their bodies
they must die; it were well said, that death is rest from their labors, and an
entrance into bliss, for so Christ has provided for his, when they go hence:
but if you will reason what death is in it self, you must resolve it to be a
part of Gods curse inflicted on Adam for sin, and from him naturally derived
to all his posterity; from which though our souls be exempted, and our bodies
shall be restored* yet it remains to this day a part of Adams punishment,
which can not be avoided, though it must not be feared, because Christ has
overthrown the force and fear thereof with his death. Rom 5.
By one man (says Paul meaning Adam) sin entered into the world, and by sin
death. I hope it entered not as a blessing; God does not use to bless sin:
but it entered as a part of the wages of sin, or curse for sin, and so it
does and shall continue, to the end. 1. Cor. 15
The last enemy that shall be destroyed (says Paul) is death; when this
mortal has put on immortality, then is death swallowed up in victory; till
then the sting of death is sin. If the death of the body be an enemy and
must be destroyed by Christ's second coming, then is it no blessing; for those
shall increase, when he appears in glory. Rom 8.
If Christ be in you (says Paul) the spirit is life for righteousness sake, the
body is dead because of sin. If sin be the cause of death yet seazing on
our bodies, it can be no blessing, that rises from so badde a cause; neither
could the resurrection of our bodies, which Christ has promised, and we expect
at the last day, be so great a joy as it is; if the corruption of our bodies
in the mean time were a blessing. Gods blessings be not contrary one to the
other. S. Austen learnedlie resolves this question in this sort. August. de
ciuitate dei. lib. 13. cap. 5.
Boni been moriuntur, quamuis mors sit malum. The godly die well, though death
be evil. August. contra Faustum. lib. 14. cap 3.
Mors hominis ex poena peccati est, quia ex peccato factum est vt moriatur. The
death of man's body comes from the punishment of sin, because sin brought
it to pass, that man dies. This conclusion in exact words Prosper collecteth
out of saint Austen. Prosper in sentent. ex August. (...)
Mors etiam p^orum poena peccati est. The corporal death even of the godly is
the punishment of sin. This collection to be true, S. Austen himself
confirms. August. de ciuitate dei lib. 13. cap. 4*
Si vero quom mouet, cur velipsam patiantur, si and ipsa poenapeccati est,
quorum per gratiam reatus aboletur tam ista quaestio in alio nostro opere, quod
inscripsimus de Baptismo paruulorum tractata ac soluta est. If it move any man,
why they, whose sin is abolished by grace, do yet suffer the death of the
body, if that death be a punishment of sin, that Question I have handled
and resolved in another work of mine, entitled of the baptism of infants.
The effect of his resolution here is this. Ibidem.
Per ineffabilem dei misericordiam and ipsa poena vitiorum transit in arma
virt^tis, and sit meritu^ iusti, etiam suppliciu^ peccatoris, NON QVIA MORS
BONVM ALIQVOD FACTA EST, QVAE ANTEA MALVM FVIT, sed tantam deus fidei
praestitit gratiam vt mors instrumentum fieret, per quod transiretur in vitam.
By the unspeakable mercy of God, the very wages of vice becomes an
instrument of virtue, and the punishment of a sinner is made the merit of the
righteous: not that death, WHICH BEFORE WAS EVIL, IS NOW BECOME ANY GOOD
THING, but God has showed so great favor to our faith, that death is the way
or mean by which we shall pass to life. And so concludes, that Ibidem cap. 5
Pie fideliterque tolerando auget meritum patientiae, non aufert vocabulum
poenae; By enduring (the death of the body) religiously and faithfully the
merit of patience is increased, but the name of the punishment is not altered.
And if death were now no part of the punishment of our sins, but a gain to
the godly as you would have it, by what means I pray you came it so to be?
Not by the resurrection of Christ conquering death, and changing the nature of
it? Then till Christ was risen, death was a punishment to the faithful
themselves; and consequently when Christ died for our sins, he took upon
him a part of our curse, which after he turned, as you say, into a blessing.
Chrysostom. in genesis Homil. 29.
Primus parens propter transgressionem mortis poenam intulit, verum
superceniens Christus haec omnia abstulit. Neque enim mors, vltra mors est, sed
nomen tantum habet mortis. Our first parent by his transgression brought in the
punishment of death: But Christ coming after took all away. For death is no
longer death, but has only the name of death, August. de ciuitate dei. lib.
10. cap. 24.
Ipsam mortem, quamuis esset poena peccati, pro nobis tamen sine peccato
Christus per soluit. Death it self, (says Austen) though it were the
punishment of sin, yet Christ that was without sin undertook it for our
sakes* And so for any thing you have yet said, or shall ever be able to say,
Saint Austens assertion, which I cited before, stands good; that because the
death of the body was a part of the curse inflicted upon Adams sin, Christ
undertaking that part of the curse for us, that is, dying in his body, loosed
us from the whole curse of the law.

Against Chrysostomes judgment, that not only death, but the very kind of
death which Christ died, was accursed by the very words of the law, saying,
accursed is he that hangs on a tree* you reply: Page 38.
Not every one that is hanged is cursed: for many innocents and martyrs are
hanged, who are most blessed; but every one that is justly hanged is
accursed, and so was Christ here Page 39.
condenmed by the just sentence of the law to pay his debts, for whom he had
willingly and advisedly undertaken. And so indeed he bare the true curse of
the law. Chrysostoms judgment is as I reported it. Chrysostom. in demonstrat.
quod Christus sit deu^. tom. 5.
Crux signum erat mortis maledictae, mortis omnium diffamatissimae. Hoc enim
solu^ mortis genus maledictioni erat obnoxium. The cross was a sign of a
cursed death, of a death most infamous. This only kind of death was
subjected to the curse. And again. Idem in epist. ad philip. ^er. 7*
Non quaeuis mors isti similis est, ista namque omnium videbatur esse
probrosissima, ista plena dedecore, ista maledicta. Propterea Iudaei satagebant
eum ista morte interimere, vt sinemo abstineret ab eo quod esset occisus,
abstineret tamen vel ideo, quod hoc pacto esset occisus. Not every death was
like to this. This seemed most reproachful, most shameful and accursed.
Therefore the Jews labored to put him to this kind of death, that if no man
would refuse him because he was killed, at least yet they should forsake him,
for that he died this vild kind of death. The kind of death which christ
submitted himself unto was a shameful, and a cursed kind of death; as for the
cause of christ's death, Chrysostom was far from thinking Christ was justly
hanged; he says Christ thus honored his father, Ibidem.
Non coactus, nec inuitus sed and hoc ex suae ipsius virtute; not constrained,
nor unwilling, but of his own virtue or humility. And the Apostle warranteth
Chrysostoms speech, for he says: Phil. 2.
Christ humbled himself, and was obedient to the death, even to the death of
the cross. But what warranteth your speech that Page 39.
Christ was hanged on the tree by the just sentence of the law? I had thought
he had suffered the 1. Pet. 3.
just for the unjust; and having no sin had been willingly, and by no
sentence of the law, hanged on a tree. Page* 39
Is it wrong ( you ask) for the law to lay the penalty on the surety, when
the debtor cannot discharge it? But if it be mere and true justice, and no
wrong, then was Christ by the just sentence of the law hanged on the tree, and
so he bare indeed the true curse of the law. Page 42.
For though God always loved and embraced Christ in regard of his own
innocent person, yet in another regard of our person, which he sustained, we
may say God HATED him, God CVRSED him. Ibidem.
Yea he took our person on him, and so became by our sins, SINFVLL, DEFILED,
HATEFVL, and ACCVRSED. Is this the holiness of your cause you have in hand, Sir
refuter* with a simple similitude against the scriptures, against the faith,
against the fathers, against the consciences of gods people, openly to
pronounce the eternal and everlasting son of God SINFVL, DEFILED, HATEFVL,
and accursed of his father, for that he took upon him the punishment of our
sins? Your similitude had need be sound, that shall bear the weight of these
words; if you fail, can you tell how deeply you come within the just
sentence of gods law, for opening your irreligious mouth against God, and his
son? but thereof anon.

In the mean while, because with scorning Chrysostom, you make way to your
unholy conceit, that Christ being truly accursed in soul for the guilt of man's
sin Page 35.
was justly hanged by the sentence of the law, and say it is VAIN and
SENSELESS to think the Apostle speaks there of two kinds of curses (as
Chrysostom affirms) but rather that Page 40
hanging on a tree is set down as a part for the whole execution of Gods just
curse, and argues the whole to be on Christ, let us see whether you, or
Chrysostom, he deceived. Galat ^
As many as are of the works of Gods law, are under the curse, (says Paul;)
for it is written, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the law, to do them. We shall agree I hope that
this is Gods curse, both temporal and eternal, laid on the bodies and souls
of sinners, for transgressing any part of Gods commandementes, proposed in his
law; and to this all that have sinned are subjected, because it is the
GENERAL curse, EXECVTED by God himself upon ALL sin committed, either in
deed, word, or thought. Galat. 3
From this curse (says Paul) Christ has redeemed us, being made a curse for
us, as it is written, Cursed is every one, that hangs on a tree. If this be
all one with the other, then every man that transgressed Gods law in thought,
word, or deed, was by the sentence of the law to be hanged on a f^ee. Show
that sentence in the law, and Chrysostom shall yield unto you; if you cannot,
then ha^ging on a tree is no necessary part of the general curse of God upon
all sinners, and consequently being no part of it, it is not all one with it,
neither can it argue the whole to have been in Christ. [ How stands the
Apostles reason then that Christ was made a curse?] where in sin there are
two things, the committing of it, and the revenging of it by God or man in
this life or the next; and magistrates had under Moses, as they have under
Christ, power given them from above Romans 13.
as Gods ministers to take vengeance (in this life) on him that does evil; the
Apostle knowing that Christ, though he committed no sin, was yet content to
bear the punishment due to sin in his body on the tree; and by his smart to
abolish our fault; cites a place out of Moses, where the Judicial and
corporal punishment of a man by death is not only called a curse, but
counted a satisfaction for sin, which being suffered the law had ended his
form upon the sufferer. And so concludes that Christ receiving a Judicial,
and corporal punishment of death for our sin, not only therein suffered the
curse, but satisfied the force of the law, and by that curse of his suffering
redeemed us from the curse of our transgressing. The place cited out of Moses
is this; Deuter. 21
if a man have committed an offense worthy of death, and is (by the law) to
die, and thou hang him on a tree: his body shall not remain all night on the
tree, but thou shall bury him the same day; for the curse of God is (already
laid or executed) on him that is hanged. This most apparently was a public
punishment executed by the magistrate upon the body of the offender; and
because by his open and shameful death, which Moses rightly calls the curse
of God, he had satisfied the sentence of the Judicial law, God commands no
farther reproach to be offered his body, in suffering it to hang in all men's
eyes any longer, but to be buried the same day; For that by his death the
curse of God ceased. The difference between these two curses is soon
perceived. Every sin received the first curse, whereof Paul spoke before;
few crimes received the judgment of this second kind of curse which was to
be hanged. The first was inflicted by God himself: the second was executed by
the magistrate. The first touched body and soul, in this life and the next;
the second ended with the death of the body. The first was committing of
sin, the second was suffering for sin. And therefore Chrysostomes
exposition is very true, when he says; Chrysostom. in ca. 3. ad Galat.
The people were obnoxious to another curse, which was this; Cursed is every
one, that continues not in that which is written in the book of the law, for
there was not one of them that had fulfilled the whole Law; but Christ
insteede of that, took upon him another curse, which said, cursed is every one
that hangs on the tree. He that should take away the first curse, must not
be subject to the same, but undertake an other in place thereof, and by that
dissolve the first. As if one being adjudged to die (for some crime) an other,
no way guilty of the same, but willing to die for him, should deliver him from
the punishment: So did Christ; not being subject to the curse of tra^sgression,
insteede thereof he took an other curse, and dissolved the curse that lay on
them.

[Before a man can be accursed by his death, he must, you say, be justly
hanged; for many Innocents and martyrs are hanged who are most blessed.]
Innocents and martyrs, be their souls never so blessed, may bear in their
bodies a shameful death, as Christ did in his* and that is a kind of
corporal curse, though by men unjustly inflicted, even as death in the godly
is a remnant of Gods curse upon sin, though their souls be blessed before
and after death. Yea the word KALAL whence the Hebrews derive that which with
them signifies a curse, notes also to make vilde and contemptible, as if
shame, reproach, and contempt were the greatest outward curse, that could
befall any man in this life. The cause why we suffer it, shall make it just
or unjust; but we must call things by those names, which GOD first allotted
them. Now death, shame, wrong, reproach, and such like, God ordained at first
to be punishments of sin, and so parts of the curse due to sin. If we
suffer at men's hands for piety, that which God appointed to be the wages of
iniquity, so we be patient and willing to abide the trial, which is
righteous with God, though injurious from men, the name is not altered, but the
reward increased. Yea God it is, that causes judgment to begin at his own
house oftentimes, by the hands of persecutors; he does us right, when men do
us wrong; and deals not with us according to our sins in the greatest
wrongs that can be done us. Therefore martyrs and innocents may do well to
remember, that God has cause enough, though man have none; and so submit
themselves as worthy of worse from Gods hands. But none of these things may
be said of our Savior, who alone among all the children of men wanted sin,
and suffered wrong; and therefore his punishments with God were just, not by
his deserving, but by his desiring to suffer for man. How then comes it to
pass, that martyrs, which are sinners before God, are unjustly hanged,
because they deserve no such thing at men's hands; and Christ who was most
innocent before men, and most righteous before God, you will needs have to be
justly hanged?

[ The suerty (you say) by his suertiship is a debtor to the creditor and to
the law; and so Christ, though most innocent in himself, yet was he justly
hanged, as our surety, by the just sentence of the law.] You mistake, Sir
Confuter, as well the sentence of the law, as the suertiship of Christ. For
though man's law permit, which is the rule of charity, that men should bear
each others burdens, and undertake one for an other in money matters, and such
like things which God leaves in each man's will and power; yet tell me I pray,
what law, Gods or man's, permits a murderer or like offender to be spared,
and an other, that is willing, to be hanged in his steed? I think man's law
will allow you no such suertiship, I am sure Gods law will not. Ezech. 18
As I live, says the Lord, the soul that sins, that soul shall die. The
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. He shall have then no
suerties to die for him, much less shall his suertie be compelled to die by
the sentence of the law. Their money men may give away; but their lives they
may not, till God call for them; and if not their lives, much less their
souls by any sentence of the law. The son of God did not by LAW, but by
LOVE interpose himself to bear our sins; John 3.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Yea
Galat. 2
the son of God loved us, and gave himself for us, not by any obligation to
the law, for he was above the law, and could not be bound by the law; and
we were condemned by the sentence of the law, and not put to find suerties.
The eternal wisdom and counsel of God then out of his inestimable love
toward us, without the law, and before the law decreed, as to create us, so
to redeem us, by Christ his son. And the son not as debtour to any, nor
for any, but of his good will and favor toward us, offered himself to suffer
for us whatsoever the justice of his father would impose. Wherein he became not
a Suertie bound to the law; but a Mediator to God, and a Redeemer of man.
Suerties that stand bound and must pay the debt, may not look to be
Mediators; and he that redeemeth a prisoner from the enemy is not bound, but
content so to do. And that the death of Christ should be paid as a debt to
the law whereto Christ was bound, is to me a strange position. I took
Christ's sufferings all this while for a voluntary oblation to God, and not
for a due obligation to the law, and himself to be a mediator, not a
debtour; his death I reckned to be a richer offer, then man could owe, and a
greater price then the law could exact. And therefore the new testament of
mercy, grace, and glory was made by his blood, which are other manner of
purchases, then the due payment of man's debt. How could that be due unto the
law, which overthrew the law? Sinners, such as we are, were to die by the
law; but that the son of God should die for us, what law did or could
require that at his hands? you shall do well therefore to leave these
^angerous discourses, and learn to say with the scripture and fathers, that
love, not law; desire, not debt; mercy, not necessity brought the son of God
from his throne in heaven, to his cross on earth.

[Such was the sentence of the law, you will say, that without death he could
not redeem us.] Naie such was his love, you should say, that even with his
death he would redeem us. Greg. mora^ lib. 20. cap. 2^*
Cum posset nobis etiam non moriendo succurrere, subuenire tamen moriendo
hominibus voluit: quia nos videlicet minus amasset nisi and vulnera nostra
susciperet, nec vim suae dilectionis nobis ostenderet, nisi hoc quod a nobis
tolleret, ad tempus ipse sustineret. Passibiles quippe mortalesque nos reperit,
and qui nos existere fecit ex nihilo, reuocare etiam sine sua morte potuit a
passione. Sed vt quanta esset virtus Compassionis ostenderet, fieri pro nobis
dignatus est, quod esse nos voluit, vt in semetipso temporaliter mortem
susciperet, quam a nobis in perpetuum fugaret. Christ when he might have
succored us without dying, would rather help man by dying (says Gregory:)
because he had loved us less, if he had not taken to himself our wounds,
neither had he showed us the strength of his love, unless he had for a time
sustained that, from which he delivered us. He found us miserable and
mortal; yet he that made us of nothing might have recalled us from our
misery without his own death. But that he might declare how great the
virtue of Compassion is, he vouchsafed to be that, which he appointed us to
be, that receiving a temporal death in himself, he might chase it from us
for ever. August. de Trinitate lib. 13. cap. 10
Those (says Austen) that ask, did GOD so want means to deliver men from
the misery of this mortality, that he would have his only begotten son
to be made a mortal man, and to suffer death; It is not enough so to refute
that we show this way to be good and agreeable to the divine excellency,
whereby God vouchsafed to deliver us by the Mediator of God and man Christ
Jesus, verum etiam vt ostendamus NON ALIVM MODVM POSSIBILEM DEO DEFVISSE, cuius
potestati cuncta aequaliter sub iacent, sed sanandae nostrae miseriae
conuenientiorem alium modum non fuisse, nec esse oportuisse; but also that we
show God VVANTED NOT OTHER MEANS, to whose power all things are subject, but
that neither there was, nor could be a more convenient way to heal our
misery. For what was so needful to raise up our hope, and to free men's minds
from despairing immortality, being already dejected by the condition of their
mortality, as to make evident show unto us, how much God esteemed us, and how
much he loved us? whereof what plainer or perfiter proof could be made, then
that the son of God, remaining that he was, would take from us and for us
that which he was not, and vouchsafe to be amongst us: and first without any
deserte of his to bear our miseries, and upon us, then believing how greatly
God loved us, and hoping where before we despaired, to bestow without all
merit of ours, yea when we deserved evil at his hands, the gifts of his
grace, with bounty no way provoked by us. And so Ambrose. Ambros. de fide
resurrec^.
By one man's death the world was redeemed. Christ might, if he would, have
refrained from death; but he neither refused death as unprofitable, neither
could he have saved us any better way then by dying. So that no legal
necessity, much less Judicial severity, brought Christ to his Cross, but
to teach us obedience to God by his example, to demonstrato his love to us by
refusing nothing for our sakes, and to declare his own power, whose weakness
was stronger then all his and our enemies, and to strengthen our patience, and
give us comfort in all the troubles of this life, he chose the paynefull and
shameful death of the Cross, and there showed so perfitte a pattern of
obedience, innocence, patience, that the Angels themselves did admire it.

So far you make Christ suertie for us that in taking Page 4^.
our person on him, he became by our sin sinful, defiled, hateful and
accoursed.Similitudes, if you suck nothing from them but that which is
agreeable to ye truth, in teaching may be tolerated; in concluding they will
halt. That Christ is Hebre. 7
a suerty, we find it once mentioned in the scriptures; but not to ye law to
pay our debtes, but Hebre. 7
of a better testament, even of the new covenant of grace established in his
blood, whereof he is also the mediator and priest. Now he died for us, not as a
suerty bound to ye law, but as a mediator to God for us, he interposed himself
of his own accord, to yield such recompense unto his father, as he should be
pleased to accept for us. If you will needs use similitudes, use rather the
similitude of a mediator, and Redeemer, which the scriptures often call him,
then of a suerty; thereby to bind him not only to suffer the pains of hell in
our steed, but also to defile him with our sins and make him hateful to God
by our curse. No similitudes can prove Christ in taking our person on him to
be SINNEFVLL, DEFILED, HATEFVL, and ACCVRSED; and therefore your unclean mouth,
and vncleaner heart, that thus speak, and think of the son of God, are
worthier of castigation, then of refutation. I know you will pretend the
Apostles words, 2. Cor. 5
God made him sin for us that knew no sin; but howsoever some late writers
turn sin into sinner, and thence give cause of these and the like speeches,
the church of God from the beginning has warily declined such irreuerent
words, and yet plainly confess the truth. That God MADE HIM SIN, has two
good and approved senses; one that he made him a sacrifice for sin, and so
the clenser of sin, and no way defiled by our sin: the other, that he
punished our sins in him, and used him as he does sinners. Aug. de verbis
do. secund. Johan. sermon. 48
They that know (says Austen) the scriptures of the old testament,
acknowledge this that I say. Not once, but often and very often it is found;
Sacrifices for sins, are called sins. Then him that knew no sin God made
sin for us, that is a sacrifice for sin. Christ was made sin in that he
was offered to abolish sin. And again, Idem de verbis Apostoli. sermon. 7.
peccatum vocabatur in lege sacrificium pro peccato, assidue lex hoc
commemorat, non semel, non iterum, sed saepissime. Tale peccatum erat Christus.
Peccatum non habebat, and peccatum erat; peccatum erat, quia sacrificium pro
peccato. The sacrifice for sin is in the law called sin. The law still so
uses the word, not once, nor twice, but very often. Such a sin was Christ,
he had no sin, and yet he was sin. He was sin, because he was the
sacrifice for sin. So Ambrose. Ambros in 2. Corinthians. ca. 5
Because Christ was offered for sin, worthily is he said to be made sin,
because in the law the sacrifice that is offered for sin is called sin.
This way if you conster S. Paul's words, they conclude directly against your
irreligious supposition. For if Christ when he took us into his body, did
cleanse our sins by the offering of himself; he became not defiled by our
sins. He did not cleanse us that was defiled by us. Howsoever you take those
words; Heb. ^
Such an high priest it became us to have (says the Apostle) as was holy,
harmless, UNDEFILED, SEPARATE from sinners. If the Priest were defiled, the
sacrifice could not be accepted. If Christ were separate from sinners, then was
he not polluted by sinners. He took our sins unto him, not to draw any
pollution from them, but to make ye purgation of them. He that could cleanse us
from our sins, how much more could he keep himself from being defiled
with our sins? If we follow the other sense of S. Paul's words, that Christ
was made sin for us, that is the punishment of our sin, we must take heed
that we bring him not within the guiltiness of our sins, as we do within
the punishment of our sins. August. (...) Faus^um. lib. 1^ cap. 4
Suscepit Christus sine rea^u supplicium nostrum, vt inde solueret reatum
nostrum, and siuiret etiam supplicium nostrum. Christ undertook (says Austen)
our punishment without our guilt, that so he might remit our guilt, and end
our pain. Cyprian d^ passion^ Christi.
Christ (says Cyprian) endured by Moses and his own Apostle to be called a
curse, and sin, pro similitudine poenae, non culpae, for the likeness of the
pain, not of the fault. Bernard in canti^. sermon 2^
Dilexit (nos Christus) dulciter, sapienter, fortiter. Dulce nempe dixerim,
quod carnem induit; cautum, quod culpam cauit: forte, quod mortem sustinuit.
Christ (says Bernard, loved us sweetly, wisely, strongly. Sweetly in
that he took our flesh; wisely, in that he shunned our guiltiness;
strong^ie, in that he suffered death for us. If Christ took the pain, but not
the guilt of our sins, how came he to be defiled by our sins? It must
needs be either in ioining and uniting himself unto us, or in answering and
suffering for us. Our union with Christ does sanctify us, it defiles not him.
We are as near joined to Christ now reigning in heaven, as we were to Christ
suffering on the Cross. As we died with him then in the body of his flesh,
Ephe^^
so we sit together with him in heavenly things. But our union and
communion now, though we be sinful and mortal, does no way defile him, no
more did it then, when he suffered for us. If you say our sins were imputed
unto him, when he was crucified for them; that increases the perfection of his
love, it argues not any pollution of his soul. To die for wicked men, did
not touch him with any taint of our sins, but Romans 5.
GOD (says the Apostle) sets out his love toward us in this, that whiles
we were yet sinners Christ died for us. The just therefore did die for the
unjust, and was no partner of our injustice; he that saved us from our sins,
did not defile himself with them. And where all this is grounded upon a
simple similitude, that a suertie by undertaking for a debtour, makes the debt
his own, though he never borrowed the money; it is easily and truly
answered, that Christ did not undertake we should not sin, nor that we
should pay the debt which we did owe; but when we had sinned, and were able
no way to answer the justice of GOD, but by our everlasting destruction of
body and soul; it pleased the son of God to interpose himself, and no way
bound to us, or for us, to entreat his father f that in his own person he
might make recompense for our sins; and so as a Mediator allowed of God, he
took our nature: and freely, not indebted; willingly, not constrained;
Ephesians. 5.
He gave himself for us a sacrifice of a sweet savor unto God. As if the
whole people of any land rebelling against their King, and being subdued and
ready to be destroyed, the Kings son (loath to see his fathers kingdom
dispeopled, and so many wretched men, women, and children put to fire and
sword) should importune his father at his request to be gracious unto them,
and to lay on him, though he be his only son, what chasticement the
father in his wisdom and justice shall think fit for the repressing of the
like outrage hereafter: may any of those subjects without extreme
ingratitude, and intolerable contumely reproach the Kings son, when he
suffers for their sakes, that he is guilty of their treason, and both
DEFILED with it, and HATEFVLL for it? I will not apply, because it will press
you too far; but as mine own persuasion is, that no such sinful and
hateful words have, or should be used in the Church of God to the dishonor
of his son; so my counsel to the sober and wise reader, is, to stop his
ears, and shut his eyes against such defiled and accursed speeches.

You proceed to another proof, and where the Apostle says, Christ spoiled
Principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over
them; upon these words you infer. Page 45.
These principalities are the devils; therefore it is certain Christ FELT THEM
to be the very instruments that VVROVGHT THE VERY EFFECTS of Gods wrath UPON
HIM.This is the first place where you specify any effect of Gods wrath
against Christ's soul (for you will have the soul of Christ properly and
immediately to suffer the effects of Gods wrath;) and that you prove
learnedlie and wisely like your self. The devils have nothing to do with the
souls of men, but either to tempt them to work in them, or to torment them.
To tempt is to try how fast ye saints stand in the fear and love of God. And
for that cause the wisdom of god has from the beginning suffered all his
saints, his own son not excepted to be tempted of satan. For Christ could
not be tempted by the corruption of his heart as we are, but by Satan's voice,
or by Satan's members. Of us James says James. ^
Every man is tempted, when he is entised and drawn away by his own
concupiscence. Concupiscence there was none in Christ. He had no law in his
flesh rebelling against the law of his mind, as we have; It is in us the
rage of original sin from which he was free, and therefore he could not be
tempted but by the ear, as he was in ye desert by satan himself, and by Satan's
members all the time of his abode on earth. In the hearts of men when ye devil
prevails with temptation there he works, leading such as consent and yield
unto him into all wickedness, even with greediness: So (...). 2.
he works in the children of disobedience, as the Apostle testifies. This
can have no place in Christ^ because P^^. 2.
he did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth. (...) 3.
He that commits sin (says saint John) is of the devil, and for this
purpose appeared the son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the
devil. Then since inward temptation by the heart Christ could have none, and
outward temptation by the mouths and hands of the wicked is no effect of Gods
wrath, but rather a trial of Gods gifts and graces bestowed on us; It
remains that if Christ felt the devils as the very instruments that wrong he
the very effects of Gods wrath upon him, that is upon his soul, ( for that
part of Christ you say must properly and immediateli^ feel the wrath of God)
it rests I say by your own words ye Christ FELT the DEVILS TORMENTING HIS
SOVLE. And indeed for so much as in executing the true pains of hell, and of
the damned, God has none other instruments but devils, you cannot defend that
Christ suffered the pains of hell, but you must grant that Christ felt the
devils, as instruments executing those pains on his soul. Now the body of
man they may torment with touching, as they did Jobs; the soul they can not,
but by possessing it. For they can not work but where they are, and therefore
they must possess the soul which they torment. Is not here (Christian Reader)
an wholesome clearke, and an holy cause, that conclude^ Christ's soul was
possessed and tormented of devils on the Cross? And the proof is as
ridiculous, as the position is impious. Christ Philip ^.
spoiled principalities and powers, and openly triumphed over them, ergo (say
you) he "felt them the instruments of Gods wrath, by tormenting his soul. If
your learning and Logic serve you so well, you may proceed Doctor in do^age
when you will. For my part (christian Reader) I will give none other answer to
these lewd and wicked absurdities, but that which Jacob said to Simeon and
Le^i; Gen 49.
Into their secret my soul shall not come. To strengthen thee, thou may
remember, what Peter said of Christ. Acts. 10.
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost, and with power to heal
all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him; or else what
Christ said of himself, John. 14
The prince of this world comes, and has naught in me; or at least what the
devils themselves said to Christ; Matt. 8.
Jesus the son of God WHAT HAVE WE TO DO WITH THEE? Art thou come to
torment us before the time? And so in the Gospel of saint Luke, the Luke 8
soul spirit when he saw Jesus cried out, what have I to do with thee, Jesus
the son of God most high? I beseech thee torment me not.

[But perchance I mistake him.] would God there were so much grace in him, as
to revoke it, or refuse it; I would gladly confess mine error in mistaking
his words: but what if he go on from bad to worse? What if he heapeth up
reasons as he thinks, but indeed trifles void of sense and reason to
confirm the same? Page 45
This reason will prove the same ( says he) taken from the less to the more.
Page 46.
Thus do the members of Christ suffer. Therefore of necessity Christ our head
suffered the like. Yea to the Hebrews he shows a reason which can never be
refuted by the wit of man. Page 47
Christ succored us not, but wherein he had experience of our temptations and
infirimities: but he succoureth us even in these our temptations of feeling the
terrors of God and the sorrows of hell. Therefore he himself had experience
of the same. Pa. 48. and 49
Add hereunto that of all absurdities, this is the greatest, that mere men
should suffer more deeply and bitterly then Christ did. You have more words
then wit (Sir Confuter) that propose these childish arguments for invincible
reasons. Your self shall see the weakness of them. Page 46.
What soever the members of Christ, say you, did or shall suffer, of necessity
Christ our head suffered the like. Mean you in body? or in soul? or in both?
If in body, th^n Christ had his eyes put out, for so had Sampson; he was
swalowed up by a whale, for so was Jonas; he was cast into a burning furnace,
for so were Sidrac, Mishac, and Abednego; he was stoned to death, for so were
Naboth, Steven, and others. You mean not in body; mean you then in soul?
Inward assaults of error, lust and sin Christ never had. He was ^ree from
all conflicts of heart, that rise in us from the root or remorse of sin;
that increase with weakness of faith, want of grace, and quenching of Gods
spirit. The terrors of mind which we feel through conscience of our
unworthiness, ignorance of Gods counsel, and distrust of Gods favor he
never felt: his faith admitted no doubting, his love excluded all fearing, his
hope rejected all despairing. So that how you should make a falser
proposition, and more repugnant to the Apostles words which you allege then
this which you have made, I by no means can conceive. He was tempted in all
things a like except sin. Then neither the roots, parts, nor fruits of
sin must be in him. But the Apostle that excepteth sin, excepteth all
sinful adherentes. The punishment of sin which proceeds from the justice
of GOD, and is no sin, that Christ might and did bear; but in no wise those
terrors and fears of conscience which proceed from sin, and augment sin,
as doubting, distrusting, despairing, in which GOD reuengeth sin with sin;
these must be far from Christ, unless we will wrappe him within the
snares of our sins. The fear of Gods Majesty armed with mighty power to
revenge sin, is profitable to keep us from sin; therein Christ may
communicate with us, though not to that end, ^or he could not sin; but
fearing, doubting, or distrusting that God will for our manifold sins cast us
from his presence, and condemn us to hell, comes in us from the guiltiness
of conscience and weakness of faith and hope, which in Christ neither had,
nor could have any place.

[ But Page 47.
the Apostle ( you say) shows a reason, which can never be refuted by the
wit of man. Christ succored us not, but wherein he had experience of our
temptations.] Are those words in the Apostle? No (you will say) but collected
from the Apostles words, where he says Heb. ^.
In that Christ suffered being tempted he can help those that are tempted.
Hence you conclude upon your own warrant, that Christ can succor us in no
temptation but whereof himself had first experience; and this you proclaim to
be irrefutable. Such lips such lettice; such doctors such divinity. Your
collection, Sir Refuter, is not only far different from the Apostles
words, but evidently repugnant to the christian faith and truth. The Apostle
gives not here the cause why Christ is able to help us in our miseries and
necessities, for he is able in that he is God to do what he will; but he
shows that our high Priest is Heb. 2. ver^ ^7
faithful and merciful, that is willing and ready to hear us, and help us
in all our afflictions and troubles, for so much as in his own person he
would feel our temptations and infirmities, that he might be the better able
to help us in having more compassion on us. And this is that the Apostle says
in the fourth chapter of this Epistle: Heb. ^.
We have not an high Priest, which can not be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things (or thoroughly) tempted alike except sin.
So that his sufferinges made him the more merciful and faithful; because he
knows best as well our natural infirmities, as our manifold miseries.

This for the sense of the Apostle, now to the truth of your collection.
CHRIST SVCCOVRETH US NOT, but wherein he has felt the same. Mean you Christ
is not able or not willing? For you say, he succoureth us not. To say he is
not able, is blasphemy; because he is God, and God I hope can succor us in
all our miseries, without suffering those things which we do. To say he will
not (though the Apostles word be (...), he is able) is as false in it self,
and as injurious to Christ. For then Christ will never help any man that is
sick, because he never felt any disease of body, nor any whose bones are
broken, because his were whole: nor any Martyr that burns in fire, because
he died on the cross;^ the blind, deaf, dumb, lame, and a thousand such
like Christ will never hear, nor help, because he suffered not the same. [You
speak of ghostly temptations, you will say, not of bodily afflictions.]
Saint Paul speaks of both, and Christ had experience of both; and therefore
if your collection be false and absurd in the one, it will never be sound and
assured in the other. But come to your own pitch. Will Christ deliver no man
from blindness and hardness of heart, because he never endured either? Will
he not aid us to repress the lusts of our ^lesh, because he never was tempted
with them? Will he not help our unbelief, because his faith was always
strong? Will he not save any from desperation, because he never despaired?
Will he not cure frenzy, and fury, because he was never out of his wits?
Neither did he, nor will he cast out Devils, because himself was not
possessed? Is this the reason that cannot be refuted by man's wit which
every child may presently controlle? In deed you speak truer then you are
ware of, if your devise may be received. For you do not stick to defile
Christ with our sins, to astonish and amaze all the parts and powers of his
mind, to torment him with Devils, and in the end to adiudge him to the death
of the soul, which has in it blindness and hardness of heart, infidelity,
and what not? Yea it is with you: Page 48.
of all absurdities the greatest, that mere men, although they be reprobates,
should suffer more deeply then Christ did, Page 83
For Gods justice, say you, should be as severe on Christ, as on any
reprobate, and yet they suffer reprobation, desperation, damnation.

From hence you go to another of your holy mysteries; and as if you had not
done the Lord of glory wrong enough with these irreuerent and irreligious
speeches, you take from him in his passion at your pleasure, not only his
virtues and graces, but even his sense, memory and understanding, and leave
him often times when you list your selves, Page 45.
amazed, astonished, and forgetful of himself for fear, yea so distempered,
disturbed, distracted, Page 53.
overwhelmed and ALL CONFOVNDED in his whole humanity, both in all the powers
of his soul and senses of his body, that he knew not what he said or did.God
grant, (Sir Refuter) you be well in your wits, that deprive the Savior of the
world when you will, of all sense, memory, and understanding. [The
evangelists, you will say, in express words affirm that Christ in the garden
was Mark. 14.
astonished Math. 26.
and grievously perplexed.] Have you the skill, when the scriptures say, that
Christ began to be astonished and perplexed, to stretch ye beginning to the
highest degree of all astonishment that may light on the Reprobate in this
life, or the damned in the next? when the holy ghost touches a natural
infirmity common to Christ with all the godly in the like cases, does your
conscience serve you to make of that not only a general and total distemper,
but an Infernal confusion of all the powers of his soul, and senses of his
body? had you consulted S. Ierom, he would have taught you an other lesson.
Ierom. i^ Matthew. ca. 26^
Dominus vt veritatem probaret assumpti hominis, vere quidem contristatus est;
sed ne passio in animo eius dominaretur per propassionem caepit contristari.
Aliud est enim contristari, aliud incipere contristari, and The Lord to show
himself a true man, was sorrowful in very deed, not that any passion
ouerswaied his mind, but he began to be touched with the affection of sorrow.
It is one thing to be sorrowful, and an other to begin to be sorrowful; his
sorrow was not for any fear to suffer, since he came of purpose to suffer, and
reproved Peter as too fearful, but for that most wretched Judas, and the
weakness of all his Apostles, and the reiection of the whole nation of the
Jews, and the miserable destruction of Jerusalem. And if heretics do
interpret this sorrow of heart, not for our Saviors affection toward them
that should perish, but for a perturbation of mind, let them answer me, how
they expound that which Ezechiel speaks in the person of God, and in all
these things thou did make me sorrowful. Saint Jerome says, the words
enforce no more, then that Christ began to be sorrowful and perplexed, and if
any man stretch them farther he gives him the note of an heretic; and
though I refrain that word because I hope you do it of ignorance and not of
malice, yet I cannot excuse you from a dangerous error, and that in four
special points. First you mistake the cause whence this fear arose;
secondly you extend it farther then in truth you should; thirdly you
continue it longer then with any warrant you may; and fourthlie by pretense
thereof you challenge Christ's prayers in the garden not only with want of
good memory, but with flat repugnancie to the known will of God; which is
evident sin,

Concerning the first I am resolved, as in the treatise before I have
specified, Vide page 17
that the cause of Christ's agony, could not proceed, but from his submission
to the majesty of God sitting in judgment, or from his compassion on man's
misery, or from both. You will have it proceed from Page 80
the intolerable horrors of Gods fiery wrath equal to hell; And where Cain
said, The horror of my sin is heavier then I can bear, you doubt not but
Page 81.
Christ as touching the vehemency of the pain, was as sharply touched even
as the Reprobates themselves, yea if it may be, more extraordinarily. You that
are so well acquainted with the horrors of the Reprobate for their sins, that
you dare attribute them to Christ, can you tell what they are? is it
speculation that you speak of, or experience; that you dare thus subject the
son of God to the same terrors and horrors of conscience, which namely Cain
as you say, and other reprobates have felt? I pray you, Sir, in so weighty
matters as may amounte to heresy and open blasphemy, play not with general
terms, so as neither you understand your self, nor any man else can
conceive your meaning. The terrors of ^he wicked in this life we can
conjecture, you can perhaps lively describe them, but for ought that we
learn by the scriptures they are such, as without horrible impiety you cannot
ascribe unto the Savior of the world. Remorse of sin committed, vexing and
gnawing the conscience, is the first of their pains, which suffers them
night nor day to take any test. Secondly, the fear that God, whom they
have despised, has likewise rejected them and is become their enemy, and
therefore from him they look for nothing, but the just vengeance of their
sins both in this life and the next, so pursues them, that they tremble and
sly when no man follows them. Thirdly the grief to forsee themselves
excluded from the fellowship of that joy and bliss, which is provided for the
saints of GOD, which Chrysostom says is far more bitter then the pain of
hell, does make them sink for sorrow. Lastly the continual terror of that
dreadful judgment which shall be pronounced, of that horrible confusion which
then shall ouerwhelme them; and of those eternal and intolerable flames of
fire in which they shall burn; the very terror I say and horror thereof
does so afflict and torment them, as if they presently felt it. More words
may be used, and perhaps more vehement to amplify their pain; but these are
the parts and causes of that fear and horror, which pursues the wicked for
their heinous offenses. Can any of these, (Sir Refuter,) be applied to
Christ? Dare you but offer so much as the mention of the least of them to be
found in the son of GOD? I think you bare not; I hope you will not. What
means then this matching of Christ with Cain? yea this touching of Christ
deeper then any of the Reprobate? In horror and pain you say, Page 77.
Christ was like them who be separated in deed from the grace and love of God,
yet himself never separated, but always most entirely beloved. The horror
and pain, which the Reprobate here feel, rises from the remorse of their
own conscience, and from the distrust and fear of their own hearts; which
pursues them even in this life before judgment. The execution of his terrible
vengeance indeed God has reserved to the next life. The greatest terror that
the Apostle notes in the wicked here in this world is, Hebre. 10
a fearful expectation of judgment and of burning fire which shall devour the
adversaries. What horror then like the reprobate could the conscience of
Christ feel, that had no remorse, distrust, or fear of any such thing as
they have, but was assured and secured of Gods everlasting favor, and love in
the highest degree? was there pain without horror and fear in the soul of
Christ? if you mean the pain that is consequent to our natural affections,
as to sorrow and fear, you say nothing to the purpose. Saint John says 1.
John. 4
timor habet poenam; Fear has in it pain, and so has sorrow, even as hope
has joy; Romans 12.
Rejoice in hope; but this is not the pain which the Reprobate feel, much
less which the damned suffer; I trust their pain is more then a natural
oppressing and afflicting of the heart with humane fear and sorrow. And
therefore if I conceive any thing, you miss the truth very much, Sir
Confuter, when you say that Christ was touched in horror and pain as
deeply as the Reprobates are; and yet your conceit reaches farther. For you
defend that he suffered as much as the damned in hell, which is more then the
reprobates do in earth, howsoever to show your learning you make hell and
heaven here on earth. For my self (Christian Reader) whence I think, the
astonishment of Christ in the garden might rise, thou have it in the treatise
before, I shall not need to repeat it again.

In like manner you extend Christ's agony too far; for where it was an agony
of mind, which did not bereave him neither of sense, memory, nor
understanding, you have brought us a fardell of phrases, to express that all
the senses of his body, and all the powers of his soul were amazed,
astonished, distempered, disturbed, distracted, forgetful, overwhelmed, and
all confounded; and you think you never have words enough to express your
folly, in dreaming of the greatest astonishment that may be, because the
scripture says, he began to beastonished. But Sir, how prove you this you
say? as in fears and sorrows there be di^ers degrees; so are there likewise
in astonishme^ts. To be astonished is to join fear with admiration, which
draws the mind so wholly to think on some special thing above our reach,
that during the time we turn not our selves to any other cogitation. Even as
the eye, if it be bent intentiuelie to behold any thing, for that present it
discerns nothing else: So fares it with ye soul, if she wholly addict her
self to think on any matter, she is amused; if it be more then she
conceaueth, or more fearful then she well indureth, she is amazed, or
astonished; but not of necessity so, that she loses either sense or memory;
only for that time she conuerteth neither to any other object. The present
beholding of the divine majesty sitting in judgment; and of his justice armed
with infinite power to revenge the sins of men, might justly astonish the
humane soul of Christ; seeing the rewithal how mightily God was provoked by
the manifold and wilful transgressions of men; but this religious
astonishment, though it might for a season suspend all other thoughts in our
Savior, yet is there no need it should deprive him of understanding, sense
or memory. When Paul says Philip. 2
work your salvation with fear and trembling, does he mean they should want
memory or understanding? When Moses received the law from God, Hebre. 1^
so terrible was the sight that he said, I tremble and quake. Was Moses (...)
void of sense or reason at that present? Psalm. 119.
An horrible terror (says David) has taken me for the ungodly that forsake
thy law. Was David for their sakes besides himself, and all confounded in
body and soul, as you speak here of Christ? Our whole conversation should
be as Paul professes of himself, when he says, I 1 Cor. 2
was among you with much trembling and fear. Should therefore Christians be
always besides themselves? [ Page 61.
Christ often prayed unto his Father, you say, and then presented himself
before the Majesty of God; and yet we do not read that ever he was vexed,
terrified, and amazed in so doing.] Sir Refuter, if your understanding and
memory be not lost, I told you that the humane nature of Christ presented it
self before the majesty of God in judgment, there to suffer man
everlastingly to perish, whom he dearly loved, or to undertake in his own
person that burden, which the justice of God, displeased with our sins,
should lay upon him. And if you do not think this a cause sufficient for the
manhood of Christ to fear and tremble, yea for the time to be astonished at
the number of our sins, and terror of Gods vengeance, provided for our
eternal destruction both of body and soul, you be so deep in your hellish
pains, that your wits and senses are confounded. Absurdities and contrarieties
are so rife with you, that you think other men can hardly avoid them; but
first understand your own, and then you shall the better charge others.

After you have spent the whole strength of your small eloquence and less
intelligence, to infer and amplify the most Page 73.
wonderful and piteous agonies, fears, sorrows, miseries, outcries, tears,
astonishment, forgetfulness, and confusion of the powers of nature with which
the sense of Gods wrath afflicted, distracted, amazed, overwhelmed, and all
confounded our Savior in his whole humanity; You suddenly, even in the
twinkling of an eye free him from all, and set him clear, as if all this had
been but a dream. For upon Christ's speaking of these words, Matthew. 26.
Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; you infer, Page.57
if Christ had thus prayed advisedly and with good memory, against the known
will of God he had sinned.And in the words presently following without stay
or pause between, yet not my will, but thine be done, you imagine that
Christ, Page 71.
as it were coming suddenly to himself quickly controled his former words.
And thus when it pleases you, you put the son of God into Page 73
a wonderful and piteous confusion and forgetfulness of all the powers and
parts of his body and soul; and least you should be convinced of a
manifest, and irreligious untruth, in the very nicke of the next word,
which Christ spoke with the same breath, you restore him to his perfect senses,
and discharge him from your hellish confusion and pains. But good Sir, if it
were so unsupportable and intolerable a burden, and confusion as you dream of,
how came our Savior to be so lightly and quickly rid of it, as if there
had been no such thing? was that heavy and fiery wrath of GOD against our
sins equal to hell so soon quenched? or was the son of God no longer able
to endure it? Page 48.
Of all absurdities (your self being judge, for it is your position) this is
the greatest, that mere men should suffer more deeply then Christ. Then if
Cain endured this all his life long, if Saul and Judas had no intermission of
their pain, if the damned in hell, (from whom you fetch your pattern) do
everlastingly suffer it, how comes it to pass, that after you have so
hotly stirred for it, you are so soon weary of it? will you make us believe,
that Christ's obedience and patience was tried with a touch of this hellish
pain, and so an end? or will you return it as often as please you? and if
this cup did so quickly pass from our Savior, how did he then pray
against the known will of God; which is an other of your foundations, when as,
in the uttering of these words, the cup did pass from him, by your own
confession? In like sort to excuse Christ from sin, Page 50
in praying against the will of his Father, you cast him into a wonderful
confusion and forgetfulness of all the powers of his soul, and senses of his
body: and in the same page, for an other advantage, you avouch that in that
prayer, Christ Page 59.
PERFECTLY KNEVV the dominion of death should not hold him. Were all the
powers of his soul overwhelmed and all confounded, and yet did he even in that
whole confusion of sense, memory, and understanding PERFECTLY KNOW the
dominion of death should not hold him? can a man have his knowledge and
memory all confounded and overwhelmed, and yet retain PERFECT KNOWLEDGE?
could Christ forget his fathers will in that prayer through astonishment, and
in the speaking of the words remember he prayed amiss, and in the next word
quickly correct himself? Surely these be conceits answerable to your cause;
and devices fit for your divinity; But (Sir Refuter,) let pass your dreams,
and show us your proofs, that Christ prayed against the known will of his
father, which you make the groundwork of this confusion: and when you have so
done, then prove that your hellish pain was the cause of this astonishment.
Many things might astonish our Savior for the time, besides the pains of
hell; and in that astonishment, if Christ had spoken he knew not what (which I
believe not) as Lucae. 9
Peter did when he saw his glory in the mountain, it had been a defect in
nature, and no contempt of Gods counsel, much less such an infernal
confusion as you describe.

[ It is manifest (you say) that Christ Page 59
in plain words prayed contrary to Gods known will:] It is more manifest that
you know not what you say. How could he pray against his Fathers will that
prayed e^preslie with this condition, Lucae. 22.
o Father IF THOU VVILT take away this cup from me. [That is a correction
after the prayer (you will say) and no condition in the prayer.] Are you so
captious against Christ, that you will not supply one Evangelist with an
other? Mat. 26.
Luke and Mat. 26.
Matthew put a plain condition unto the prayer of Christ; the one saying,
father if thou will; the other, father if it be possible, that is to stand with
thy will, and man's salua^ion. And though Mark omit the condition in the tenor
of the prayer, yet does he fu^^ie express his meaning to be al one with the
rest. For t^us he says of our Savior, Mark. 14.
he fell down on the ground, and prayed that IF IT WERE POSSIBLE, that
hour might pass from him. So that all three Evangelists concur, that
Christ prayed not only with a reservation of his fathers will, but annexed
that condition unto his prayer; and therefore in all men's eyes save yours, he
prayed not in plain words contrary to Gods known will. And this erroneous
and contumelious position you set down to the world, as the chiefest
fortress of your hellish pains, wherein you plainly wrest the scriptures from
their express words. [But S. John, you will say, reports Christ's (...) to
be simply made, John. 1^
Father, save me from this hour.] Saint John speaks of an other time and
place; and his words import a deliberation of two parts proposed by our
Savior, with his resolution in the end; what shall I say? Father deliver me
from this hour; that is, shall I say deliver me from this hour? but
therefore came I into this hour. Father glorify thy name. Chrysostom thus
expounds Christ's words: Chrysostom. in Joan. Homil. 66
NON DICO libera me ex hac hora, sed pater glorifica nomen tuum. I SAY NOT,
deliver me from this hour, but father glorify thy name. And so does
Epiphanius. Epiphan. lib. 2 Haerel 69.
Quid dicam pater? serua me ex hac hora, hoc inquit dicam? at propterea veni in
hanc horam. What shall I say? Father save me from this hour? shall I say
so? but therefore came I into this hour. But what better expositor can we
have then Saint Paul, who plainly says that Christ in making this prayer was
heard, and Hebre. 5.
delivered from that he feared. He prayed not against the known will of God,
whose prayers God heard and performed. And where you fly to this hellish
confusion to save Christ from sin; by pretending to clear him from sin,
you charge him rather with sin. For the prayer which is not made in faith is
sin. Now can the heart be assured it shall receive that it asks at Gods
hands, if it be neither directed to ask according to the will of God, nor
prepared to ask with that devotion which is fit for God? So that when you make
Christ to triple his prayers with vehement tears and cries, and still
repugnant to the will of God, you challenge the son of God with open sin,
from which you would seem to excuse him. And as for your double relapse into
the same astonishment still, when Christ was twice clear from it, it is a
foolish device of your idle brains, as if the Lord no sooner returned to his
prayers, but your hellish confusion did wait at his heels, to interrupt and
ouerwhelm him; and within six words again to leave him. If your cause be
holy, jest not thus prophanelie with the son of God, nor bereave him of his
wits, when you think good. If it were a necessary effect of Gods wrath, then
after it lighted on our Savior in the garden, it must continue till man was
redeemed, and Gods wrath appeased, which was not done but by the death of
Christ. And therefore make your choice: either let the wrath of God cease in
the garden, when Christ ended his prayers; or if that still continued to ^he
death, let also this astonishment still continue, or at least be no necessary
effect of Gods wrath. One of these you must take, take which you will; the rest
will serve to subvert your tower of Babell.

[I do you wrong, you will say, to call your opinion the tower of Confusion;]
you do your self wrong (Sir Refuter) in the chiefest point of Christian
religion to leave the faith confessed by the whole Church of Christ for these
1500. years, and to walk in such ambiguities, and absurdities as your self
do not understand. For I pray you, Sir, this wonderful confusion and
astonishment in all powers of the soul, and senses of the body, is it a
necessary consequent to the wrath of GOD, or no? If it be, Page 54.
(for you say, Christ could not but sink, and be confounded under that
burden) how comes it to pass, that the reprobate and desperate, feeling the
sense of GODS wrath upon them, do not loose their wits, and senses as Christ
by your assertion did? will you affirm they are astonished and all confounded
as Christ was? then if you excuse Christ from sin, in dis^iking and declining
his Fathers known will, because he was astonished; you must likewise excuse
all the wicked and Reprobate from their sins, after they once feel the sense
of Gods wrath, because they cannot but be astonished and confounded under that
burden? Again, could Christ not sin, whiles he felt the wrath of God
upon him, because he was astonished? Ergo neither could he merit all that
while, and so neither his obedience, patience, humility, nor charity could
have any place, or use, so long as the sense of GODS wrath dured. Have you not
devised us a goodly sense of Gods wrath, that shall exclude Christ Jesus from
the exercise of all his graces, virtues. and merits? This palpable absurdity
you think to skippe, (Sir Refuter,) but your wit is too weak, or your cause
not good; it will not be. [ Page.57.
If a man in distress fall a sleep, say you, or be astonished with some
violent blow on the head, in such an one there is no decaie of faith, nor of
obedience, nor of patience, nor of love; even so in Christ there was no defect
of grace, but an infirmity of nature.] Was Christ a sleep or in a swoune?
astonished you think, he was. Was he so astonished that his senses were taken
from him? did he not walk? did he not speak? did he not pray? why then
compare you this to a sleep or a swoune; whereas in Christ was neither? and
though you plainly fail in your comparison; yet, were it so, as you would
have it, for your life you cannot avoid my conclusion. For a man in a sleep
or a swoune, though he loose not the habit of faith and patience, obedience
and love, yet has he no use of them for that time; much less does he serve
God with them. But Christ Jesus by all his sufferinges must merit, which a man
a sleep or amazed cannot do, And therefore remember, (Sir Refuter) this
reason amongst the rest is yet vnanswerd; and I think will somewhat trouble your
brains before it be answered. All that Christ suffered for our Redemption
was, and must be, meritorious with God. But the suffering of hell pains,
which astonish and confound all the powers of the soul, and senses of the
body, neither was, nor could be meritorious with God; Christ therefore did
not suffer such hellish pains as did confound and astonish all the powers of
his soul and senses of his body. And thus, by your amazed position, you have
wholly confounded your own opinion.

Thou have heard (good Reader) a number of the Refuters special follies; I
have some few more to trouble thee with, and so I will leave him to his holy
cause, and thee to the mercies of God. To show himself learned as well in the
Greek tongue, as in philosophy, he undertakes an other reason that I made,
and sporteth himself somewhat handsomely with it. Out of the fifth to the
Hebrews where the Apostle says, Hebre. 5
Christ in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong cries and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was
heard in that he feared, or delivered from his fear; I collected two things.
First that Christ in his prayers made in ye garden (for to those the Apostle
points) did but fear, and not as then suffer that he feared. The next, he
was delivered from his fear; and consequently never came to suffer that from
which he was delivered. This Confuter replieth, as he thinks, very
soundly, and very sufficiently. Thou shall hear the whole. My reason he
makes to be this. Page 74.
That wherein Christ was heard and delivered from by prayer, he feared but
felt not. But Christ was heard and delivered by prayer from the wrath which he
feared, therefore he felt it not. His answer is. Ibidem.
Nay even therefore he felt it. We deny therefore the first proposition. For
he was in some sense of it, when he prayed against it, and was heard. He had
then some foretast but the extremity came after, which he before feared. And
finally he being in all this was heard (as the very word ((...)) seems to
import) and delivered from it, that is at least, not before he had felt it.
Again very the fearing of Gods wrath is a true feeling, I say not a full
feeling, but a true feeling: but it is granted that now in this Agony he
feared the wrath of God: Therefore he truly felt it. Therefore the Question
is granted. You wrote this in the morning, Sir Refuter, when you were fresh and
fasting, it is so short and sharp; but be like it was dark, or your eyes were
dull you could not see neither what I said, nor what your self say. Vide Page
29.
The force of my reason consisted in this, that where fear goes before
suffering, and is no longer called fear when suffering comes; if Christ at
the time of his prayers in the garden were delivered from his fear, much more
from any suffering of that he feared. And since by your own positions you
affirm he feared in his agony the pains of hell; I concluded he suffered
them not. Let us now see how you impugn this reason. You first change
suffering into seeling, and because the soul in all her affections has a kind
of feeling, you infer, naie therefore Christ felt it. Your manner is too
shrowde your self with general and ambiguous words that may signify any
thing, and then you show your learning in speaking you know not what. But use
the word suffering which I did, or take feeling for suffering, in which sense
it may stand; and then see how absurdlie and falsely you take my reason at
this rebound. For then you must say. Fearing is a kind of feeling, Christ
feared the pains of hell, ergo Christ suffered them; and so by your logic
whosoever fears captivity or death, is a captive, and dead; and he that
fears to loose his purse, has lost it; yea he that fears to offend God,
does offend him; and he that fears to be an heretic, is an heretic. I
thought though your divinity had not, yet your Philosophy could have served
you to understand; that Cicero^ Tuscul. qu^est. lib. 4
metus est mali impendentis, aegritudo praesentis; fear is of an evil
approaching; grief or pain, of an evil present. If you scorn philosophers,
whom for the propriety of words, you prefer before all the divines in the
world, as anon shall appear^; Lactantius tells you, that of Lactant^ de vero
cultu. li. 6. ca. 14
Desire, joy, fear and sorrow, the two first (desire and joy) are for good
things approaching or present: the two last (fear and sorrow) for evil
likewise approaching or present. S. Ambrose will teach you that, Ambros. de
Jacob et beata vita li 1. ca 2.
ante dolorem est. timor, post dolorem tristitia: fear is before grief or
pain; after pain follows heaviness. And likewise Gregory, Gregor. moral.
li. 9. cap. 39.
In his vitae tormentis, timor dolorem habet, dolor timorem non habet, quia
nequa quam mentem metus cruciat, cum pati iam caeperit, quod metuebat. In the
torments in this life fear has some grief, but grief has no fear; because
fear does not afflict the mind, when a man once suffers that, which he
feared. This were enough to make my argument good, but it has yet more strengh
from the Apostles words: Christ praying in the garden was heard from his fear;
that is was delivered from his fear. Now is a man delivered from his fear by
suffering that he feared? So we jest with men, when we will give them their
deserts, and let them stand no longer in suspense; but God so iested not with
his son, as to rid him from his fear, by present punishment. God therefore
heard Christ's prayer and delivered him from his fear, when as yet he did not
suffer it; and being delivered from it in the garden, how came he to suffer it
more extremely on the Cross? For you say, Page 74.
Christ was in some sense of it, when he prayed against it, he had then some
fortaste of it, but the extremity came after, which he before feared. Sir
confuter, if you can jest and gybe thus with the Apostles words, I must leave
you as lacking both conscience and common sense; and so will all yt be godly.
Christ praying in the garden was delivered from his fear, says Paul; that is
say you, after he had suffered on the "Cross, the extremity of that which he
before feared. So the^ for Christ to be delivered, from that he feared, was (by
your construction) to suffer the extremity of that he feared. Will you that
God send you such deliverance in the time of need, that so profanely play with
the deliverance of his son? [Hee was delivered you will say, from the
continuance of it?] No (good Sir) Christ never feared the pains of hell should
continue on him after death; it is horrible blasphemy so to think; and unto
death you say they continued. How was he then delivered from his fear? or have
you so soon forgotten your own words, if you regard not mine? Page 5^.
It is absurd to say he prayed in fear against that which he perfectly knew
should never come unto him, namely that the Dominion of Death should hold him.
If the dominion of death should not hold his body, much less should hell hold
his soul.

[But the Greek word, (...), you say, seems to import a deliverance after
Christ was in that he feared: (...), Page 63.
He was heard being in it.] As is your divinity, Sir confuter, so is your
Greek. For if Christ were heard; then God did hear him; and so if (...)
joined to the passive of (...) signify that Christ was heard being in the
pains of hell; then (...), joined to the Active, and referred to God, must
likewise import that God being in ye same pains did hear him. Have you not
brought us a learned observation out of your Greek store, that God which
heard, and Christ that was heard, were both in the pains of hell? But indeed
(...) is to hearken unto, as we do when we bend our ear to another speech;
and (...) is harkned unto or heard. The word is five times used in the new
testament, but in the Septuagint nothing more frequent to signify that we
harken to Gods voice when we obey him, and God harkneth to our voice, when he
grants our prayers. Fear not says the Angel to Zachary (...), thy prayer
is heard, Lucae. ^^^
thy wise Elizabeth shall bring thee a son, Act: 10^
So the Angel to Cornelius, (...) thy prayer is heard 1 Cor: 14
with strange toonges will I speak to this people, says the Lord, (...), and
neither so will they harken unto me. The wise man in like manner, Eccles^ 3^
(...), he that harkeneth unto the Lord, gives rest to his mother. And the
Septuagint, When thou praiest, says Eliphas in the book of Job, Iob^ 22:
(...), God will hear thee, Psalm. 55
Early, says David to God, (...), shall thou hear my voice. So in Esaie,
Esa. 59.
the ear of the Lord is not shut, (...) not to hear. Infinite examples
might be brought to the same end, but these are sufficient to convince your
ignorant mistaking of the Greek tongue; yet the Question you say is granted.
Page 74.
For fearing is a true feeling, and if Christ feared the wrath of God, ergo he
felt it. You reckon a pace when you reckon alone, but when you come for
allowance you will lack a fair deal of your reckning. If fearing wore
suffering, which is most absurd; if there were no kind of fear, but your
amazed and all confounded fear, as there be more other kinds of fears; if
there were noe more parts of the wrath of God, but hell pains, as there be
sundry more; if no man might fear but for himself, as in charity we may,
and in duty we ought to fear for others, and Christ in love might and did for
us; then had you some hope, that he which grants the one, would admit the
other: but if this be all you can say, that fear is a kind of feeling, I am
as far from granting the Question, as I was in the first beginning. For
though you dally with doubtful words, and think it enough to catch here and
there at a likelihood, my course is not so. Indeed out of these words I
reasoned upon your own principles: and supposing it for the time to be true
which on this place some avouch, that Christ feared the pains of hell, I
concluded, if Christ were delivered from fearing, he was certainly delivered
from suffering the pains of hell. And before you answer the argument, you
triumph as if the Question were granted. But Sir remember it is the suffering
of hell pains that we talk of, and not of a Metaphorical kind of feeling;
which you substitute in steed thereof. Again all the effects of Gods wrath
Christ did not feel, nor fear, as namely, neither reprobation, nor
desperation, nor eternal damnation, which is the chiefest and sharpest effect
of Gods just wrath against sin. Some parts thereof if he did fear, and so
in affection feel, how does it follow he felt or feared hell pains?
Thirdly, he did sustain as well our person, as our cause; he had not only
compassion on us, but conjunction with us; and in that respect as our head he
might worthily fear the everlasting destruction of his body, if he did not
interpose himself, and auert Gods wrath from them, by healing them with his
own stripes, and bearing their sins in his own body. Fourthlie he might
fear the power of Gods wrath, able to punish even the body of Christ with
far more smart, then his humane flesh was able to endure. Lastly, he might
carefully shun and decline both our sin and the wages of our sin, which
is eternal death with a religious fear, as content to redeem us, but not to
destroy both himself and us.

And this comes nearest the signification of the Greek word there used,
which is no confused or amazed fear, such as you would cunningly convey
under the name of a Page 74.
perplexed fear, but a careful and diligent regard to beware and decline
that, which we mislike or doubt. And therefore (...) is not only one that
fears God by taking good care not to displease him, but a circumspect and
wary man in other things; and (...) is circumspection and wariness in
private or public affairs, as well as Religion to GOD. Now because the
bolder men are, the sooner they adventure on any thing, and the more
fearful, the more heed they take what they do; (...) by consequent
signifies an inclination rather to fear, then presumption; but it is less
then (...), which is the usual word in Greek for fear, as may plainly be
proved by Plutarch in his Treatise of Moral virtue; where, noting how men
cover vicious affections under the names of virtues, he says, Plutarch. de
virtute moral.
(...); They call blushing reverence; mirth gladness, and fear wariness,
Euripides in the person of Eteocles king of Thebes, says, Euripid. in
Phaeniss.
(...), Circumspect care is the most profitable Goddess. And where you quote
the 23. of the Acts for proof of your conseit, the place is rather against you
then with you. For when the Council dissented about Paul, and some tumult
began to arise, the Acts. 23.
Tribune doubting least some hurt might happen unto Paul then his prisoner,
prevented it, and sent his soldiers to take him a way from the midst of the
throng. This fear of the tribune was for another man, not for himself,
neither was a perplexed or amazed fear, but a doubt forecasting the worst, and
preventing it. So is it written of Noah, that being admonished by God of the
flood which should come upon the world, by says Heb. 11.
(...), fearing, declining and preventing (what God had threatened to others) he
made ready the Arc, for the saving of his household. This could be no distrust
full fear, what should befall him and his house; for his faith is commended by
the Apostle in preparing the Arc, for the safety of himself and his children;
but he shunned that which he saw would light on others; and that the scripture
there calls (...). The rest that may concern Christ's prayer in the garden,
or might occasion that agony which there he showed, thou have (gentle Reader)
in the Vide page 17
treatise before; which I will not here resume, least I weary thee with over
much tediousness.

For a farewell to his special reasons, the Confuter has reserved matters of
most special moment to the last: and because they are weighty and need good
proof, he has searched the bottom of his study, and shows us here the
depth as well of his reading, as understanding. Out of the Epistle to the
Hebrews he cites these words; Heb. 2.
Christ through death abolished him that had the power of death, that is the
Devil. From hence he reasons thus. Page 77
Surely the word DEATH has the same meaning in both places: very fond it
were to take it here otherwise. Now it is questionless, in this latter place,
death signifies the death of the soul, the torments and sorrows of the
damned, which are separated from the life of God: of which death the Devil is
said to have the power and execution. Therefore in the former place death
signifies so to, even the death of the soul, that is the torments and
sorrows due to the damned, and Page 75.
consequently Christ suffered the death of the soul. And because this reason
will seem altogether unreasonable and harsh in the ears of some, to say the
least of it, let them soberlie consider it, and it is most true and evident: Or
if this will not persuade men to believe that Christ died the death of the
soul, Page 7^
men living being surprised with grievous sorrows and pains, will say ( as
Terence witnesses, occidi, perij, interij) they die, they perish. So likewise
the death of the soul sometimes may be understood and that most sitlie for
the pains and sufferinges of Gods wrath, Page 77.
which always accompany them that are separated from the grace and love of
God. And if Terence be not authority sufficient, Saint Peter against whom
lies no exception, Page 78.
says, that Christ in his suffering for us was done to death in the flesh, but
made alive by the spirit. And in the Scripture whenever the flesh and the
spirit are opposed together, Page 75.
the flesh is always Christ's whole humanity, I say not his body only,
but his soul also. From hence now it follows, that Christ's soul also
died, and was crucified according to the death and crucifying, which souls are
subject unto, and capable of. I have (Christian Reader) neither perverted the
reasons, nor pared the authorities, on which this Confuter groundeth his
conclusion, that Christ died the death of the soul, and that Christ's soul was
also crucified as well as his body; I have only set them together, that
thou may with one view behold both the deepnes and soundness of this
vpstart writer; and in thy secret and upright judgment, is it not patience
enough to hear and endure a two legged creature to talk in this sort without
all learning, religion or discretion, controlling all the fathers as fools,
for thinking otherwise then he does, commanding the Scriptures pretor-like,
to serve his ignorant and lewd assertions, and esteeming none to be sober or
considerate, except they confess his shameful absurdities to be most true
and evident? But I have not learned nor used to give reuiling speeches, the
Lord reprove his folly. Though it be not worth the answering, yet for their
sakes that be simple, I will not refuse to speak to it, and to let them see
what difference there is betwixt truth and error.

Your maine reason (Sir Refuter) is this, in these words of the Apostle,
Christ through death abolished the devil that had power of death. This word
DEATH (say you) has the same meaning in both places, the proof you make for
it is this, very fond it were to take it here otherwise. Your assumption is,
but death in the latter place questionless signifies the death of the soul;
Therefore Christ died the death of the soul. It were as easy for me to say,
it is not so; as for you to say, it is so; but that course which you hold is
but prating of every thing, it is no proouing of any thing. How many kinds
of death there are, we shall better learn by the grave father Saint Austen,
then by the young lovers in Terence: August. sermon. ^29.
Dicitur mors prima, dicitur and secunda. Primae mortis duae sunt parts, vna
qua peccatrix anima per culpam discessit a creatore suo: altera qua indicante
Deo exclusa est per poenam a corpore suo. Mors autem secunda ipsa est corporis
and animae punitio sempiterna. There is a first death and a second Death. Of
the first death there be two parts: one, when the sinful soul by offending
departed from her Creator; the other whereby the soul for her punishment was
excluded from her body by Gods justice. The second death is the everlasting
torment of body and soul. The same parts and kinds of death are often
repeated by him in his 13. book de ciuitate Dei; as namely, August. de
ciuitate dei. lib. 13. cap. ^.
Mors animae fit cum eam deserit Deus, sicut corporis cum id deserit anima.
Ergo vtriusque rei, id est totius hominis mors est, cum anima a Deo deserta
deserit corpus. Ita enim nec ipsa vixit ex deo, nec corpus ex ipsa. Huiusmodi
autem totius hominis mortem illa sequitur quam secundam mortem diuinorum
eloquiorum appellat authoritas. Nam illa poena vltima and sempiterna recte mors
animae dicitur. The death of the soul is, when God forsakes her, as the death
of the body is, when the soul forsakes the body. So ye death of both, that
is of the whole man is when the soul forsaken of God forsakes her body. For
so neither she lives by God, nor the body by her. This death of the whole
man, that other death follows; which the divine scriptures call the second
death, for that last and everlasting punishment is rightly called the death of
the soul. Here are three kinds of death; sin which separateth us from God,
bodily death, which separateth the soul from the body, and eternal damnation
which tormenteth body and soul for ever. In the Apostles words to the Hebrews,
that Christ through death abolished ye devil that had power of death; you will
by no means have the death of the body intended; that is a benefit and gain
to the godly. Then of sin and eternal damnation the devil must be said to
have power, and indeed so he has. For he is the perswader and leader to
sin, and the executioner and tormentor in damnation. And so by your divinity
Christ must sin, and be everlastingly condemned to hell fire, before he can
abolish the Devil that has power of both these. For he must abolish him, by
the same kind of death, whereof he has power. Look, Sir Refuter, what an
wholesome exposition of the Apostles words you have made us, which the devil
himself durst not adventure, it is so blasphemous. God forbid you will say,
this should be any part of your meaning. But if such be your ignorant
rashness, that you will so expound scriptures, as these consequents shall
necessary follow, you must leave writing, and fall to learning an other
while, till you be able to foresee what may justly be inferred upon your
positions. Deaths of the soul there are none mentioned in any Scripture, or
father, but sin and eternal damnation. Leave the patheticall, hyperbolicall
and metaphorical phrases of Terence, to boys in the Grammar school, speak
at least like a divine, though you be none. If your cause be so holy a truth
as you talk of, it has both foundation and approbation in the Scriptures. You
shall not need to run to heathen Poets to prove that the Savior of the
world died the death of the soul. What the death of the soul is, what
consequentes it has, and what maine and most sufficient reasons there are,
why Christ neither did, nor might die the death of the soul, thou have (good
Reader) before in the Treatise it self: if this fumbler either will skippe
them, or can not answer them, I must not repeat them as often as he will
neglect them. Vide page 73.
Yet to ease thee of going back, I will here give thee the effect thereof.

The life and death of the soul is in many hundred places learnedlie and
truly vouched and proved by Saint Austen, August. in Johan. tract. 47.
Mori carni tuae est amittere vitam suam; mori animae tuae est amittere vitam
suam. Vita carnis tuae anima tua, vitae animae tuae Deus tuus. Quomodo moritur
caro amissa anima, quae vita eius est; sic moritur anima amisso Deo, qui vita
est eius. For thy body to die, is to loose his life; and for thy soul to die,
is to loose her life. The life of thy body is thy soul. The life of thy soul
is thy God. As the body dies when the soul is departed, which is his life;
so the soul dies when God is departed which is her life. And again. August.
de verbis Apost. sermon. 30.
Quomodo ergo mortua est anima de qua viuit corpus? Audi ergo and disce* corpus
hominis creatura Dei est, and anima hominis creatura dei est. De anima deus
viuificat carnem, ipsam autem animam viuificat de seipso, non de seipsa. Vita
ergo corporis anima est, vita animae Deus est: moritur corpus cum recedit
anima, moritur ergo anima si recedit Deus. Carnem iacentem sine anima vides;
animam miseram sine Deo videre non potes? Creed ergo, adhibe oculos fidei. How
dies the soul then by which the body lives? Hearken and learn. The body
of man is the creature of God, and so is the soul. By the soul God gives
life to the flesh, but the soul her self God quickens by himself, and not
by herself. The life of the body then is the soul, the life of the soul is
God. The body dies when the soul departs, ergo the soul dies if God
depart from her. Thou see the flesh lying dead without a soul, and can
thou not see the soul wretched without God? Believe then, and open the eyes of
faith. And speaking of the particular consequents to the life and death of the
soul, the same father says: August. in Johan. tract. 19.
Quomodo cum anima est in corpore, praestat illi vigorem, decorem, mobilitatem;
Sic cum vita eius Deus est in ipsa, praestat illi sapientiam, pietatem,
iustitiam, charitatem; veniente itaque verbo and audientibus infuso resurgit
anima a morte sua ad vitam suam, hoc est ab iniquitate, ab insipientia, ab
impietate, ad Deum suum qui est illi sapientia, iustitia, charitas. As when the
soul is in the body, she gives vigor, comeliness and motion to the body;
so when God her life is in the soul, he gives her wisdom, piety,
righteousness and charity. The word (of God) then sounding and infused to
the hearers, the soul rises from her death to her life, that is from
iniquity, folly, and impiety, to her God, who is to her wisdom,
righteousness, and charity. If this were not plain enough; the Scriptures
themselves are so evident, that no man can mistake the life of the soul,
except he will purposelie blind himself, least he should come to the
knowledge of the truth. For the son of God is John. 1.
life, and coming down from heaven, John. 6.
gave life to the world, John. 5.
quickening whom he would John. 7.
with the waters of life, that is by the Romans ^.
spirit of life, yea John 6.
whosoever believes, and John 15
abides in him, has life and bears fruit in him. For the just shall Galat.
3.
live by faith, and he that dwells in 1. John 4.
love, dwells in God, and God in him, for God is love. So that not only
Christ is our life, 1. John. 5.
and he that has the son has life, but Colos. 3.
with him, and in him, always was, and always will be, the Revel. 22.
fountain of life, which never did nor can dry up; how then could Christ die
the death of the soul, whose soul was personally united, unto the word that
was life in it self? And if the grace and spirit of God in us, make us live
by God, and in God; if faith and love knitte men to the life of God; how
could the soul of Christ always full of grace and truth, always full of
faith and love, and of the holy Ghost, be dead?

[But this Refuter means another death of the soul.] What his meaning is, is
not material, but whether he mean truth or no. If he will frame us a monster
in christian religion, what have I to do with that, but to detest it? There is
another death after this life, mentioned both in scriptures and fathers, which
is the second death. But I hope this Confuter will eat and sleep upon the
cause before he wrappe our Savior within everlasting damnation. That is, a
death in deed from which God bless and save us all. They must needs be good
Christians that labor to bring Christ's soul within the compass of the
second death. August in psa. 43.
Haec mortalitas est vmbra mortis; vera mors est damnatio cum Diabolo. Our
death is here but a shadow of death; the true death indeed is damnation with
the devil, says Austen. And again Idem in Johan. tract. 43
Quid est istamors? Est relictio corporis, depositio sarcinae grauis: mors
secunda, mors aeterna, mors gehennarum, mors damnationis cum Diabolo, ipsa est
vera mors: What is this death? It is the leaving of the body, and the laying
down of an heavier burden; for the second death, the death that is eternal,
the death of hell, the death of condemnation with the Devil, that is the true
death. Which of these two deaths of the souls, you will have the soul of
Christ subjected unto, you must tell us, (Sir Refuter,) if you will needs have
him die the death of the soul; and the choice is so good, that take which you
will, you in^ur heinous and horrible blasphemy. I wish you to be better
advised, then to proceed to the defense of so wilful a frenzy. As for new
deaths of the soul*, you have no commission to invent any; show what
scripture or Father spoke it before you, or you must give the godly leave to
think you no fit founder of a new faith. S. Austen was of opinion that no
Christian durst avouch that Christ died the death of the soul, Ide^ epist. 99
Nam quod Jesus anima mortificatus fuerat, quis audcat dicere, cum mors animae
non sit nisi peccatum, a quo ille omnino immunis fuit? That Christ was dead in
soul WHO DARES AFFIRM IT, whereas the death of the soul (in this life) is
nothing but sin, from which he was altogether free? you not only avouch
it, but you think no man sober that will not consent to it. But you did well
to prophecy of this conceit of yours, that it would seem harsh and
altogether unreasonable in the ears of some, to^ say the least of it; In the
ears of all that be wise and learned it will sound worse, for it is a flat
repugnancie not only to all the Fathere, but even to the christian faith, that
Christ died as well in soul as in body; and as mean a man as I am, I think
I shall be able to make that good which I say. For if the soul of Christ
were always perfectly united unto life, fully possessed of life, and
abundantly able to give life, tell me I pray you how it may stand with the
truth of the scriptures, that the same soul was for any time dead? you may
even as well defend that Christ sinned, as that his soul died, for the death
of the soul is sin in this life, and damnation in the next. Aug. epist. 99
Certe anima Christi nulla mortificata peccato vel damnatione punita est,
quibus duabus causis mors animae intelligi potest: Surely the soul of Christ
was dead with no sin, nor punished with any damnation, which are the two
ways that the death of the soul may be possibly conceived.

[ The death of the soul, say you, Page 77.
may be understood, and that most fitly, for the pains and sufferings of Gods
wrath, which always as company them that are separated from the grace and love
of God. This death of the soul ye affirm Christ suffered; yet he himself
never separated, but most entirely beloved, yea most Page 42
holy, most innocent, and most blessed.] You contradict, (Sir Refuter,) not
only the scriptures and fathers, but even your self in one and the same
sentence, and reele like a man whose brains are not steadie. Ambros. de fide
resurrect.
Secundum scripturas triplicem esse mortem accepimus. Vna est cum morimur
peccato, deo viuimus. Beata mors quae a mortali nos separat, immortali
conseruat. Alia mors est vitae excessus cum anima nexu corporis liberatur.
Tertia mors est de qua dictum est, anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur. Ea
morte non solum caro sed etiam anima moritur; haec mors non est perfunctio
huius vitae, sed lapsus erroris. By the scriptures (says Ambrose) we learn
there is a triple death. One when we die to sin and live to God. This is a
blessed death, which seuereth us from that which is mortal, and ioineth us to
that which is immortal. The second is the departure out of this life, when the
soul is delivered from the bands of her body. The third death is that of
which it is written; the soul that sins, shall die; this death dies not
only the flesh, but the soul also; for it is not the ending of this life,
but the running into error. Ibidem.
The first is the life of the soul, and the death of sin; which is
SPIRITVALL. The second is the ceasing of this life which is NATVRALL; the
third is not only sin but destruction, which is PENAL. Which of these
agrees to Christ, Ambrose himself will tell you. Ibidem*
Quid est Christus nisi mors corporis, spiritus vitae? What is Christ but the
death of the body, and the Spirit of life? Then Christ died not the death of
the soul, for the spirit of life cannot die, unless you will make life it
self to be death. Yea, they which in this world die the death of the soul
are separated from Christ, for did they abide in him, they should abide in
life; he is John. 14
the way, the truth, and (not only living, but) life it self; This
testimony our Savior gives of himself, John. ^^
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in me has eternal
life. If they cannot die the death of the soul, which believe in Christ, how
mush less can Christ himself die that death? And here, (Sir Refuter) you
broch so gross and palpable an error, that women and children will deride
you. For if the torments of hell and pains of the damned do always accompany
them that are separated from the grace and love of God, how many hundred
thousand thousands of all sorts, sexes, and ages in all kingdoms and
countries should be disturbed, distracted, and confounded in all the powers
of their souls and senses of their body? where are the Romans ^^
riches of Gods bounteousnesse, patience and long suffering which the Apostle
so highly commends, as leading unto repentance? How could Abraham with any
truth say to the rich man in hell; Lucae. 16.
Son remember thou in thy life time receauedst thy good things and Lazarus
pains; where if your position be true, the pains of Lazarus could not be
comparable to the torments and pains that ALVVAIES ACCOMPANY the wicked? I
assure thee (christian Reader) a man could not with fewer and foolisher words
then these, more cross the whole tenor of the scriptures. For the wicked here
in this life abound with all wealth, ease, and prosperity, insomuch that many
of the godly have been and still are offended with it. Read the 72. Psalm,
and see whether these intolerable and horrible fears, sorrows, pains, and
torments of hell and the damned, do always accompany them here in this
life. Psalm. 7^
My feet were almost gone (says David) when I saw the peace of the wicked.
There are no bands in their death, they are Iustie and strong, they are not in
trouble, nor plagued with other men, their eyes stand out for fastness, they
have more then their heart can wish. Lo these are the wicked, yet PROSPER THEY
ALVVAIE, and increase in riches. This was too hard for me till I went into the
sanctuary of God, then I understood their end. So that God Romans 9
with much patience suffers the vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction,
who according to their hard and impenitent hearts, Romans 2
heap up wrath upon themselves against the day of the declaration of the just
judgment of God, whose sudden destruction is then nearest, when they shall
say 1. Thessa. 5
peace and safety.

And what marvel you cross the scriptures in confounding the wrath of God to
come with the wrath of God present in this life; when you do not see your own
words to be contrary one to the other? For if Christ died the death of the
soul, which is Ephesians. 2
an alienation from the life of God, how was he never separated, but always
entirely beloved and most blessed? If he were never separated from the life of
God, how came he to die the death of the soul, which must needs be a
separation for the time from God, unless you can match light and darkness,
death and life together, and make the one to be the other, and both to cleave
to God himself? But what cannot you do, that can make the pains of the
damned, and torments of hell the only true and perfectly accepted sacrifice
to God? These are your words. ^age.68.
Such a sorrow indeed of a broken and contrite heart is the only true and
perfectly accepted sacrifice to God, and is in effect nothing but what we
affirm. You affirm that Christ died the death of the soul, which you
interpret to be such Page 77.
pains and sufferings of Gods wrath, as always accompany them that are
separated from the grace and love of God: You affirm that Christ suffered Page
73.
wonderful and piteous astonishment, forgetfulness and confusion of the
powers of nature, even of Page 53.
all the powers of his soul and senses of his body, yea he Page 45.
felt the very devils as the instruments, that wrought the very effects of
Gods wrath upon him; and though the Page 80.
wicked oftentimes find far more intolerable horror of their sins then any
other, yet you doubt not, but Page 81.
Christ as touching the vehemency of pain, was as sharply touched even as the
Reprobate themselves, yea, if it may be, more extraordinarily. All this you
affirm, and by your own words, all this is the ONLY TRVE, and perfectly
accepted sacrifice to God. So then whosoever feels not all this, has no
broken nor contrite heart, nor any longer then he feels these hellish
torments in his soul. And if this be the ONLY TRVE sacrifice to God, I will
not ask what shall become of the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, but
how unhappy are the godly that at any time are free from the pains of the
damned, and from the torments of hell, since the suffering thereof is the ONLY
TRVE and perfectly accepted sacrifice to God? 2. Corin. 7
Godly sorrow, says the Apostle, causes repentance unto salvation; those
words please you not; such Page 45 in margin.
hellish sorrows, and intolerable horrors as the Reprobate themselves feel,
yea as the damned do suffer, this say you is the ONIY TRVE and accepted
sacrifice to God. You must have other sacrifices, and those accepted, before
you come to heaven; or else the Reprobate and damned will be there as soon as
you: God send you his grace, and grant your wits and senses be not distempered
and distracted; you talk so much of hellish pains, and torments executed by
devils, as the only true sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart.

The Apostles words, whereon you first grounded this odious" assertion, have
no such intention, as you imagine. By death Christ conquered him that had power
of death that is the Devil. Ask the simplest child yt is catechized in your
charge, if you have any, what death Christ died for us, and he will answer
you out of his Creed, Christ was crucified, dead, and buried; and that is the
death which the Scriptures describe and deliver. 1 Corin, 15.
I delivered unto you (says Paul) that which I received, how that Christ died
for our sins, according to the scriptutes; what death if we ask the
Apostle, he will answer the death of the Cross. For 1. Cor. 1
we preach (says he) Christ crucified; and I esteemed not to know any thing
among you but Christ Jesus and him crucified. Christ crucified then, that is by
his death on the cross, destroyed him that had power of death. [Of what death,
you ask, has the devil power?] as well of the second death which Christ
could not suffer; as of the first which he did suffer. [Christ, you will
say, could deliver us from no death, but from the very same which he
suffered himself.] If so you say, 1. Cor. ^.
or so would say, it is no less then heresy, or blasphemy. He delivered us
from everlasting death, which he neither did, nor could suffer. If you say
he delivered us not from everlasting death, it is open heresy; if you say
Christ suffered everlasting death, it is blasphemy. Yet has the devil power
of both deaths, as well temporal as eternal. What power, you ask, has the
devil of this death which our bodies die? Sapient. 1.
God made not that death, but by the Sapi. 2.
envy of the Devil it came into the world. He was the first procurer of it by
persuading sin, and still reioiceth in it as the very gate to hell. Esa. 38
I shall go (said Ezechiah) to the gate of hell, which was the death of his
body; that way the wicked pass to hell. Yea the Apostle calls the
corruption of our bodies the sting of sin, wherewith the devil pierced us;
1. Corin. 15.
when this corruption has put on incorruption, o death where is thy sting?

For the exposition of the Apostles words, I may either say with August. de
pec^. merit. and remiss. li 2^ c. 32
S, Austen* Ipse Dominus mori voluit, vt, quemadmodu^ de illo scriptum est, per
mortem euacuaret eum qui ptoestate^ habebat mortis, id est Diabolum, and
liberaret eos qui timore mortis per t^tam vitam rei erant seruitutis. Hoc
Testimonio satis illud monstratur, and mortem istam corporis principe atque
authore Diabolo, hoc est ex peccato accidisse, quod ille persuasit. Neque enim
ob aliud potestatem habere mortis verissime diceretur. The Lord himself would
die, that as it is written of him, by death he might destroy him that had
power of death, even the devil, and deliver them which for fear of death were
all their life long subject to servitude. By this testimony it is
sufficiently proved that this very death of our bodies came from the Devil
as the Author and chief dooer thereof; that is from the sin which he
persuaded. He cannot for any other cause be said to have power of death, which
here is most truly spoken. Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Cyril refer death
throughout that sentence to the death of the body: In these words (say they)
the Apostle Ambros. in, Hebre. ca. ^
notes an admirable thing, that whereby the devil had power, thereby was he
ouerthrown. The weapons which were his strength against the world, that is
death, by yt Christ struck him. Why tremble ye? why fear ye death? now death
is not terrible, but acceptable as the end of labor and the beginning of rest.
Chrysostom. in Hebre. ca. ^
Chrysostom has almost the same words. Cyrill very often expounds death in
that place for the death of Christ's body. Cyril de recta fide. lib. 1. ex
Hebr. ca. 2
The son of God was partaker of flesh and blood, that yielding his BODY to
death, he by nature as God being life it self, might quicken it again:
otherwise how had he abolished the imperie of death, unless he had raised
again his dead BODY. And again; Idem de recta fide lib. 2.
Because it was above man's nature to abolish death, yea rather it was subdued
of death, the son of God, that is life, took unto him man's nature subject to
death, yt death as a cruel beast inuading his flesh should cease from his
tyranny over us, that should thereby be abolished. If by death in the second
place we understand the death of body and soul with Fulgentius, I am not
against it, this being always remembered, that Christ died no death but the
death of the body. Fulgent de incarnat. and gra^. christi. c. ^
Mors filij Dei, quam SOLA CARNE suscepit vtramque in nobis morte^, animae
scilicet carnisque destruxit. The death which the son of God suffered ONLY in
his flesh, destroyed BOTH DEATHS in us, as well that of the soul, as that of
the body.

The Confu^er having be stirred himself in his special and choice arguments,
as thou have heard (christian reader) and now drawing to an end, purposes
like a politic captain so to entrench himself, that no force shall fetch him
out of his hold. And because words are the weapons that can endanger him; he
takes the ready way with them, to turn and wind them at his will, and so
makes any thing to be every thing, that nothing should hurt him. The
scriptures affirme^ that Christ crucified is the wisdom and power of God to
all that be called, and that we are Romans 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his son, and our sins redeemed, and the
Hebre. 2.
devil destroyed by the death of Christ Jesus; as also that he 1. Peter. 4
suffered for us in the flesh, yea he 1. Peter. 3.
suffered for our sins being put to death in the flesh. And least it should
hence be collected, that Christ died not ye death of the soul; but rather the
death of his body was a sufficient price for the life of the world; the
Refuter undertakes this place of Saint Peter, that Christ was 1. Peter. 3.
done to death in the flesh, and thence will prove, that the flesh
comprehends body and soul, and that the soul of Christ Page 79
DIED "and was crucified as well as the body. Reason or authority besides his
own he brings none, but out of the hinder part of his head he gives an
observation, which, if he say the word, must needs prove sound and good;
and this it is. Page 78
Whenever in scripture the flesh and the spirit are opposed together, the
Page 79
flesh is always Christ's whole humanity, as well his soul as his body.
From whence it follows that Christ's soul also died and was crucified. How
prove you this note, (Sir Refuter?) had you said that wheresoever the flesh of
Christ living is spoken of, there the flesh of a man endued with a humane soul
is intended; you had said well: for Christ was perfect man and perfect God, in
one and the same person: but when you will stretch all the attributes of the
body, and make them common to the soul, because Christ had a soul as well as
a body, it is no true observation derived from the scripture, but a partial
supposition intended to further your hellish sorrows. In the 26. of Matthew,
when Christ tells his disciples Matthew. 26.
that the spirit is ready, but the flesh weak, does he take spirit there for
the godheade, as if that were ready to suffer any thing, or for the soul
which was willing, but that the flesh was weak? In the 24. of Luke when Christ
says, Lucae. 24
a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have, had his soul flesh and
bones, and those to be seen as his body had? To the Romans when Paul says,
Romans 1.
Christ our Lord was made o the seed of David according to the flesh, and
declared to be the son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification, by the
resurrection from the dead; will you conclude that Christ's soul was made of
the seed of David and came from David's loins as Christ's flesh did? The like
he repeateth in the same Epistle: Romans ^
of the Israelites came Christ according to the flesh, which is God over all to
be blessed for ever; where^f your observation fail not, Christ's soul must be
kin to the Jews as well as his flesh. Why then^ when Peter says, 1. Pet. 3
Christ was put to death according to the flesh, but quickened by the spirit,
do you make it so clear a case that the word flesh there compriseth both
body and soul; and therefore by Peter's confession, Christ died in soul as
well as in body? so when Paul says; 2. Corin^ 13
Christ was crucified through infirmity, yet lives through the power of God,
what leads you to imagine, that his soul was crucified as well as his body?
who did crucify him I pray you, God or the Jews? Peter says to the Jews,
Acts. 2.
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God, after you had taken with wicked
hands, you have CRVCIFIED and slain. So again, Acts, 3.
the holy and just one ye denied, and killed the Lord of life. And likewise.
Acts ^
By the name of Jesus, whom ye have crucified, whom God raised again from the
dead, does this man here stand whole, who before was a creeple. If the Jews
then crucified and killed the Lord Jesus, could they crucify and kill his
soul? Are you so simple that you remember not the words of our Savior, Matt.
10
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul? And
you make it not an oversight; but a positive point of your holy truth, as you
call it, that Christ's soul was crucified and died; and consequently that the
Jews directly against the words of Christ were able to kill and crucify the
soul of Christ. Will you say that God crucified the soul of Christ, for what
will you not say, that say Christ's soul was crucified and died? in what
scripture shall we read that God crucified the soul, as the Jews did the
body of Christ? you would seem to conclude it out of the scriptures, which
whenever they speak of Christ crucified, they note the shameful and cruel
death which the Jews executed on him, not any thing that God did unto him.
And out of that word, every where in the scriptures referred to the Jews, to
infer that God also crucified his soul, is as much madness as the former.
If you fear not the pains of hell, because you are so well acquainted with
them, fear at least the shame of the world, least they deride you to skorne,
as lacking that common understanding which boys in the streets, and prentices
in the shoppes have. But what if your self, being be like amazed, and (as you
say of Christ) all confounded in all the powers of your soul, and senses of
your body, when you wrate in defense of your holy cause, do contradict your
self, and call your own assertion ABSVRD and MOST FALSE, and that not ten or
twelve leaves off, but in the very same place where you labor to justify
this position, and proving and pronouncing it to be absurd and most false, you
presently conclude it as a principle of your new faith? well, if it be not
so, then I must confess I was a sleep when I thought you did so. But if it
fall out to be true which I say, I hope (christian Reader) thou will think my
time any way better employed then longer to reason with such a brainsicke
babbler.

The words of Peter are; 1. Pet. 3. ver. 18.
Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, and was put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit. Saint Austen writing upon this
place observes this for a sure rule to expound the whole. Aug. epist. 99
In ear quippe viuificatus est, in qua fuerat mortificatus. Christ was
quickened in that very part, wherein he suffered death, or was put to death.
This rule has in it a mighty truth that may not be resisted. For if any part
of Christ died, which was not again quickened, but still left dead, then that
part suffered perpetual death; which is not only plainly false but
openly blasphemous. Then must this stand for an undoubted ground; that
whatsoever part of Christ was dead, the same must be quickened again, to avoid
the eternal death of any part. And if any part of Christ needed not
quickening or restoring to life, it never died; for quickening is here the
restoring of life to that which was dead, and not the giving of life to that
which had none before. Then if Christ's soul died, of force it must either be
quickened again, or kept under eternal death; but to say that Christ's soul
was quickened or made alive IS ABSVRD AND MOST FALSE: Ergo to say that Christ's
soul died IS ABSVRD AND MOST FALSE. You will ask me how I prove the Minor or
second part of this Argument? if Saint Austen did not help me to prove it,
the Confuter will. Lo (Sir Refuter,) your own words in the very same place,
take care I pray you, that I misrepeat them not, for if I hit the^ right, you
will prove your self as very a baby as ever sucked a bottle. Page. 78 linea. 25.
BOTH THESE, say you, ARE ABSVRD AND MOST FALSE, that Christ was made alive
either in his HVMANE SOVLE, OR BY THE SAME. See and shame, if there be any
grace, or sense in you, that going about purposelie to prove that Christ's
soul died and was crucified, you set this for a preface unto it, it is ABSVRD
and most FALSE that Christ was made alive in his humane soul;which without any
shift or color, you do say and must say, before your conclusion can be true;
except you will fly to this, that Christ's soul died in deed, but was never
restored to life, or made alive again; which if we come to, I must proclaim
you no longer foolish but blasphemous. Howbeit I hope you will rather see your
folly, then fall to this frenzy; for my part, I wish you better counsel and
more reading; and although you tell me of Page 1.
errors, Page 3
corrupt fancies and vain imaginations, Page 54.
shameful questions, Page 81.
toyish fables, Page 68
fond, absurd, without sense or reason,when I do but repeat the judgments of
the ancient and learned Fathers; yet I will bear them at your hand, and from
my heart do pity your ignorance, for I hope it be but ignorance; howsoever
you take upon you to control all as fond and absurd, that yield not to your
humor.

For the clearing of this place of Peter, wherein the Confuter has so much
ouerseene himself, I stand not upon the advantage of his words, but upon the
sound and learned exposition of Saint Austen, whose antiquity and authority
concurring with the truth of the scriptures does please me, and I trust
(christian reader) will content thee. Aug. epist. 99
Christus spiritu viuificatus est, cu^ in passione esset c^rne mortificatus.
Quid est enim, quod viuificatus est sp^ritu, nisi quod eadem Caro, qua sola
fuerat mortificatus viuificante spiritu resurrexit? Nam quod anima fuerat
mortificatus Jesus, hoc est eo spiritu qui hominis est, quis audeat dicere, cum
mors animae non sit nisi peccatum, a quo ille omnino immunis fuit? Certe anima
Christi non solum immortalis, secundum naturam caeterarum, sed etiam nullo
mortificata peccato, vel damnatione punita est, quibus duabus causis mors
animae intelligi p^test; and ideo non secundum ipsam dici potuit Christus
viuificatus spiritu. In ea re quippe viuificatus est, in qua fuerat
mortificatus; ergo de carne dictum est. Ipsa euim reuixit anima redeunte, quia
ipsa erat mortua anima recedente. M^rtificatus ergo carne dictus est, quia
secundu^ solam carne^ mortuus est, viuificatus autem spiritu quia spiritu
operante, etia^ ipsa caro viuificata surrexit. Christ was quickened by the
spirit, when in his Passion he was put to death in his flesh. What means it,
that he was quickened by the spirit, but that the same flesh, in WHICH ONLY HE
DIED, rose again by the quickening of the spirit? For that Jesus DIED IN SOVLE,
I mean in his humane spirit, WHO DARE AFFIRM IT, where as the death of the
soul is nothing (in this life) but sin, from which he was wholly free?
Surely the soul of Christ was not only immortal by nature, as others are,
but neither died by sin nor was punished by any damnation, which are the two
ways how the soul may possibly die. And therefore Christ could not be said
to be quickened in soul by the spirit: for in that part was he quickened, in
which he died. Therefore it was spoken (by Peter) of Christ's flesh. That
revived when the soul returned, because that died, when the soul departed.
Christ then is said to be done to death in his flesh, for that he died ONLY
IN HIS FLESH, and to be quickened by the spirit, because that very flesh rose
again being quickened by the working of the spirit. These learned and sound
conclusions of S. Austen, are derectlie repugnant to your weak and false
observations, Sir Refuter. Christ died in the flesh (says Peter) that is says
Austen, in THE FLESH ONLY; for the soul of Christ died not, since the death of
the soul is either sin in this life, or damnation in the next, both which
were far from Christ. You tell us that Christ's soul not only died, but was
also crucified; and all the proof you bring for it, besides Terence, is that
Peter says Christ died in the flesh. Now the flesh say you, signifies as
well the soul as the body, and so Christ died in both: but such proofs, if
you use them often, will prove you to have a great deal less religion and
learning, then you would seem to have.

What death the Scriptures affirm Christ died for us, if you be now to seek
at these years, it is pity your shoulders have been so long troubled with
your head. Can there be fuller, or plainer words then those which the four
Evangelists use in describing the death, burial, and resurrection of the body
of our Savior? Show but one such word in Scripture or father, that Christ's
soul died at the time of his Passion, and take the cause. [ Esai. 53.
He laid down his soul unto death, you will say;] You should have done well
in your pamphlette at least to have laid that down for a show, and not upon
your single word to have vouched so weighty a matter as the death of Christ's
soul is; but you must be borne with, your wits are often not at home. What is
meant by this that Christ laid down or yielded his Soul unto death, S. Austen
largely disputes in his 47 treatise upon S. John's Gospel. The effect is,
when Christ laid down his soul unto death, his body died, and not his soul.
August. tract. 47. in Johan.
Quid fecit Passio, quid fecit mors, nisi corpus ab anima separauit? S^ enim
mortuus est dominus, immo quia mortuus est Dominus (mortuus est enim pro nobis
in cruce) sine dubio caro ipsius expirauit animam. Hoc est ergo ponere animam,
quod est mori. Cum ergo exit anima a carne, et remanet caro sine anima, tunc
homo poner^ animam dicitur. Carni hoc tribue, caro ponit animam suam, and caro
iterum sumit eam. Caro ponit animam suam expirando. Ipse Dominus Christus
dictus est sola caro. Audeo dicere, et sola caro Christi dictus est Christus.
Confiteris illud quod habet fides, in eum Christum te credere, qui crucifixus
est and sepul^ns. Ergo sepultum Christum esse non negas, and tamen sola caro
sepulta est. Ergo Christus erat etiam caro sine anima, quia non est sepulta
nisi caro. Disce hoc etiam in Apostolicis verbis, Humiliauit scmetipsum factus
obediens vsque ad mortem. Iam in morte SOLA CARO a Iudaeis est occisa, and
tamen carne occisa Christus occisus est. Ita cum caro animam posuit, Christus
animam posuit, and cum caro vt resurgeret animam sumpsit, Christus animam
sumpsit. What did the Passion, what did the death of Christ, but separate his
body from his soul? If the Lord died for us, yea rather because indeed the
Lord did die for us: (for he died for us on the cross,) doubtless his flesh
did breath out his soul. So that to lay down his soul and to die is all
one. When the soul departs from the flesh, and the flesh remains any
soul, then a man is said to lay down his soul. Understand this of the flesh.
for the flesh lays down her soul, and takes it againe^ the flesh lays
down her soul by breathing it forth. The Lord Jesus is called his flesh alone.
I dare be bold to avouch it, THE ONLY FLESH of Christ is called Christ. Thou
confessest, as it is in thy Creed, that thou beleeuest in that Christ, which
was crucified and buried. Then thou acknowledgest Christ to be buried, and yet
only his flesh was buried. Therefore flesh without a soul was Christ, because
nothing of him but his flesh was buried. Learn the self same in the Apostles
words, Christ humbled himself and was obedient unto Death. Now in his death
ONLY HIS flesh was killed of the Jews, and yet the flesh being slain, Christ
was slain. So when the flesh laid down her soul, Christ laid down his
soul, and when the flesh took her soul again to rise, Christ took his
soul again. To men that do not wilfully blind themselves these words are
clear enough, and they have for their warrant the full consent of Scriptures,
Councels, and Fathers, for 1400 years, without dissenting from it. 1 Pet. 2^
Christ suffered for you, (says Peter) leaving you an ensample that you should
follow his steps, who himself bare our sins in his body on the Tree, that
we being: dead to sin, should live in righteousness. Then when Christ died to
sin, his body died on the tree, his soul lived in righteousness: So must we do,
for so did he, when he left us an example how to follow his steps. Our souls
must not die before we can resemble his death; they must live in righteousness
as he did. 2 Cor. 4
Every where (says Paul) we bear about in our body the dying of the Lord
Jesus, that the life of Jesus might also be made manifest in our bodies; which
he thus expounds afterward. Therefore we faint not, but though our outward
man perish, yet the inward man is daily renewed. Ibid. verse. 16
Then in our bodies we carry about the death of Christ, who for our example
died in his body unto sin, that we should follow his steps. And why doubt
we hereof, since the same apostle does in as plain and express words, as might
be spoken, testify, that Christ, when Colos. ^.
we were enemies, reconciled US IN THE BODY OF HIS FLESH THROVGH DEATH; to make
us holy, and without fault in his sight, grounded and stablished in faith, and
not moved away from the hope of the Gospel? What could the heart of Paul
invent, or his tongue utter more effectual then this, that Christ THROVGH DEATH
IN THE BODY OF HIS FLESH reconcileth us to God and makes us holy, and
without fault in his sight? If you can quarrel with these words (Sir Refuter)
you may do what you will with the Scriptures. No words will bind you, that
take body for soul, life for death, faith for amazed fear, hope for
intolerable horror, descending for ascending, and hell for heaven. What is this
else but to make a confusion of all Religion, and give open defiance to the
truth by taking one contrary for the other? You do not so, you will say.
Leave so doing and these Questions will soon be determined. I prove there was
always in Christ evidence of faith, assurance of hope, Joy of love even in the
midst of his pains on the cross: and you grant there was Page 7.
not any the least diminution in Christ of his faith, patience or obedience to
God, neither was Christ so much as touched with any wavering, much less
fearing in his trust and confidence of Gods love and protection toward him.
How then can the Page 77
horror of Gods severe justice and wrath, like them that indeed be separated
from the grace and love of God, be in Christ?Or how can the sorrows of the
damned which are separated from the life of God be found in Christ? how could
Christ suffer page 46.
the same terrors of Gods wrath and assaults of the Devil, yea far greater
then the godly feel in their consciences, for want of faith, and fear of
Gods displeasure?What are these but plain contrarieties? Again in Christ, you
say, page 57
was no defect of grace; how then could the soul of Christ replenished with
the spirit of life, and living in all fulness of grace and truth, be dead?
can you make one and the same part of Christ both alive and dead? So likewise
if Christ had but page 64
feared to be utterly forsaken with the hatred of his Father, that indeed you
say were desperation, which God forbid. And yet you do not doubt but Christ
was as Page 49.
deeply touched with the Page 70
unspeakable horror of Gods Page 80.
severe wrath due to sin as the Page 81
Reprobates themselves. A number of these hogepots you have made us; speaking
of things which your self cannot, or dare not express. Sometimes you would
feign affirm it in general words, and when you come to particulars, you
renounce it again. In the very case that gave us occasion of this rehearsal,
when the Apostle says, we are Romans 5^
reconciled to God by the death of his son, and explaining himself, says
the death that reconciled us to God, was the death which Christ suffered Col. 5^
in the body of his flesh; Is it not as clear as day light, that the bodily
death of Christ, which he suffered on the cross, is by the scriptures resolved
to be the sufficient price of our redemption, and mean of our reconciliation
to God, except you take the body of Christ for the soul of Christ, and the
stripes and wounds of his ^lesh for the pains of hell? 1. Pet. ^.
Ye were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, says Peter. Can there
be plainer words, that Christ's Mat. 26.
blood shed for the remission of our sins is the perfect price of our
redemption, without the death of the soul, or pains of hell, which you
interpose? So likewise, when Peter says 1. Pet 2.
Christ bare our sins in his body on the Tree, in that he 1. Pet. 3.
suffered once ^or sinners when he was put to death in his flesh; are you not
forced to peruer^ these words for defense of your fancy, and to take the
flesh for body and soul, that you may make the death of Christ to be
common to both? [It is one thing, you will say, to take the flesh for the
whole man, and another to take the body for the soul.] I know it right well,
but the one will not serve your turn without the other. By a part to name or
note the whole man, is no news in the Scriptures; but to ascribe the
attributes of one part to the other, because the name of either part is
sometimes taken for the whole, that is a general subuerting of all the truth
of the Scriptures. Saint Austen told you even now, that Christ's dead flesh
is called Christ; will you therefore refer the properties of Christ's dead
flesh unto his soul, and not think you take the way to dissolve as well the
union as communion of two natures in Christ, and of the distinction of two
parts in his manhood? The body indeed is more distinguished from the soul,
then the name of flesh is, because the unregenerate part of the soul is in the
Scriptures every where called flesh; but this has no place in Christ, by
reason no corruption of sin cleaned unto his soul, and therefore the name of
flesh does no where signify the soul in Christ, as it does often in us;
only by naming flesh in Christ, the scripture sometimes intends, that he
disdained not the weakest and basest part of our nature, when he came to
redeem us. And so Saint John says, John. 1.
The word was made flesh, meaning the true and eternal son of God,
vouchsafed to take not only our reasonable and humane soul unto him, but
even our vilde and mortal flesh into the unity of his person, and so became
man, that he might restore man now fallen from God, and perished in his
sins, to the favor and life of God again. But when the Scriptures say,
that Christ died for our sins, the ancient fathers and Councels with one
consent apply that to the death of Christ's body on the Cross, and not to
the death of the soul, or to any pains of hell. And though in the Treatise
before I have cited such as sufficiently witness that doctrine to be sound
and Catholic, yet will I not be grieved to let thee see (Christian Reader)
that there was nothing more commonly, nor constantly professed in the
Primitive Church, then the doctrine which I am now forced to defend against
the rage and reproach of this slanderous impugner.

Athanasius de incarnat. verbi dei.
Post edita per facta diuinitatis suae monumenta, reliquum iam erat, vt pro
omnibus sacrificium offerret, pro omnibus templum suum morti tradens, quo omnes
innoxios and liberos a veteri praeuaricatione efficeret, seque declararet
mortis victorem. Corpus igitur quod communem cum omnibus habebat naturam
(corpus enim humanum and mortale erat) ad similitudi^em sui generis mortem
excepit; verbum enim quoniam mori non potuit, vtpote immortale, corpus sibi
sumpsit, quod mori poterat; illudque vt suu^ pro omnibus obtulit, vt ita pro
omnibus, omnibus ipse corpore coniunctus^ mortem patiens, compesceret eum, qui
mortis habebat imperium, hoc est Diabolum, and liberaret eos quotquot formidine
mortis per omnem vitam obnoxiy erant seruituti. After Christ by his deeds had
declared his divinity, it remained that he should OFFER A SACRIFICE FOR ALL,
yielding unto death the temple (of his body) for all, thereby to deliver and
discharge all from the old transgression, and to declare himself the
conqueror of death. His body therefore, which in nature was like all ours
(for it was an humane and mortal body) died in like manner as bodies do. For
the son of God, because he could not die being immortal, took a body unto
him that might die, and offered that as his own for all men, that so being
joined in body to all, and suffering death for all, he might repress him that
had power of death, even the Devil, and free those, that for fear of death
were all their life long subjected to servitude. Epiphanius treads in the
same steps. Epipha. haeres. 69.
When the son of God (says he) would suffer of his own good will for
mankind, because his divinity could not suffer, being of it self
impassible, he took (...), OUR BODY THAT MIGHT SVFFER, that therein he
might yield to suffer, and admitted our sufferings, his Godhead being present
in his flesh, the godhead suffers not. For he that says I am life, how can he
die? But God remaining impassible (...), suffer^th by his flesh, that his
passion may be accounted to his deity, though it suffered not to the end our
salvation should be from God. In his flesh was the suffering, least we
should have a passible God. Which indeed is impassible, imputing that
suffering unto himself, according to his free choice, and not of any
necessity. Ambrose in like sort. Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 4 de duct. Christi in
deseru^m
Laqueus contritus est, and nos liberati sumus. Non potuit melius conteri
laqueus nisi praedam aliquam diabolo demo^strasset, vt dum ille festinaret ad
praedam, suis laqueis ligaretur. Quae potuit esse praeda nisi corpus? Oportuit
igitur hoc fraudem Diabolo fieri, vt s^sciperet corpus dominus Jesus and corpus
hoc corruptibile corpus infirmum, vt crufigeretur ex infirmitate Sien^m fuisset
corpus spirituale, non dixisset, spiritus promptus est, caro autem infirma. The
snare is broken, and we are delivered. The snare could not be better broken,
then by showing the devil some pray, that whiles he hastened to the pray, he
might be wrapped in his own snares. What pray could there be beside the body
(of man?) It was therefore requisite the devil should be thus deceived, that
the Lord Jesus should take a body unto him, even this corruptible and weak
body of ours, that he might be crucified through infirmity. Had it been a
spiritual body that he took, he would never have said, the spirit is ready,
but the flesh is weak. ^de de incarn. sacrament. ca. 5
The same Christ suffered, and suffered not; died and died not, rose again and
did not rise; because he raised up his own body. For that which fell, that
rose again; that which fell not needed not rise. He rose then according to
the flesh, which being dead did rise again. Ergo also he died in our nature
which he took unto him, and suffered in the body which he took, that we might
believe he took a true body. To the unbeliever asking, Shall I believe God in
flesh, God borne of a woman, God crucified, whipped, dead, wounded, buried?
August. de verbis domini secundum lohan ^erm 42.
Austen answers, thy God remains unchangeable; fear not, he perishes not.
Christ was borne of a woman, but in his flesh. He was an infant, but in his
flesh. He sucked, increased, was nourished, and grew in age, but in his
flesh. Wearied he slept but in his flesh. He hungered and thirsted* but in his
flesh. He was taken, bound, whipped and mocked: yea he was CRVCIFIED AND
KILLED, BUT IN HIS FLESH. Why art thou afraid? The word which was God remains
for ever. He that despises this humblenes of God will never be cured from the
deadly swelling of pride. The Lord Jesus therefore by his flesh gave hope to
our flesh. To be borne, and to die were here on earth common, to live for ever
was not here. Christ found here our earthly wares, which were vilde, and
brought with him his heavenly, which were strange. If thou fear (his) death,
love (his) resurrection. August. in psalm 148.
He came to the place of our pilgrimage to take that which abounds here, eue^
mocks, whippes, blows, spittings in his face, reproaches, hanging, the cross
and death. These things abound in our region, to this entertainment he came.
What has he given thee here? Instruction, exhortation, and remission of
sins. What has he promised thee O mortal man? that thou shall live for
ever. Do thou not believe it? Believe it, I say, believe it. It is more that
he has already done, then that he has promised. It is more incredible, that
the eternal died, then that the mortal shall live for ever. If God died for
man, shall not man live with God? But can God die? He took from thee wherein
to die for thee. THERE COVLD NOT DIE BUT FLESH, THERE COVLD NOT DIE BUT A
MORTAL BODY. He clothed himself with that wherein he might die for thee;
he will clothe thee, wherein thou shall live with him. Idem in ps. 70
In that (part) Christ died, in which thou shall die: in that (part) Christ
rose in which thou shall rise. Thou will pardon me (Christian Reader) if among
so much loathsome stuff of reprobate horrors, damned pains, and hellish
torments, as this Confuter has heaped together, I solace my self sometimes
with the longer comfort of sound and sweet doctrine, so sincerely and
sensibly delivered by the learned and ancient Fathers. I will allege one
place more wherein thou shall see the full consent of provincial and general
Councels, not to be gainesaide by any man that will bear the name of a
Christian, and so shut up this point.

Cyrill writing to Nestorius, to stay and suppress that false doctrine which
he began then to spread; teaches us very plainly how the son of God
is said in the Scriptures to SVFFER, DIE, AND RISE AGAIN for us, and our
salvation. Cyril epist. 8 ad Nestorium.
So we say (the son of God) suffered and rose again; not that the son of
GOD suffered in his own nature, either the stripes, or the boaring of the
nails, or the rest of the wounds, (...), the Deity could not suffer by
reason it is no bodily substance; but because THAT BODY, which he made his
own, suffered these things, himself is said to suffer these things for us.
(...), He that could not suffer was then in his body which suffered. After
the same manner we think of his dying. The son of God is by nature
immortal, incorruptible, life and the giver of life; but because the body,
which was his own, tasted death for all by the favor of God, as Paul
speaks, he himself is said to have suffered death for us, not that he had
experience of death as touching his own nature, (it were a madness so to
think, or say) but for that as I said even now, his flesh tasted death: So
his flesh rising again, it is called his Resurrection, not that he fell to
corruption, God forbid; but that his body rose again. When this stayed not
the frenzy of Nestorius the heretic, but that he replied in swelling
words, Cyrill called a Council at Alexandria, and there with one consent,
they approved the truth, and sent it unto Nestorius to be confessed in these
words amongst others; Synodi. Alexand. anathematismus. 12.
If any man do not confess that the Son of GOD suffered in his flesh, was
crucified in his flesh, and tasted death in his flesh, let him be accursed.
Dilating this and the rest of their Articles in their Synodall Epistle sent to
Nestorius, they say, Epistola Synodi Alexandrinae ad Nestorium inter Cyril.
epist. 10.
We confess that the only begotten God, even the son borne of God his
father, though he were impassible in his own nature, yet suffered he in his
flesh for us according to the Scriptures; (...); and was in his body that was
crucified, accounting the sufferings of his own flesh as proper unto him,
though he were without suffering; and by the grace of God tasted death for all,
(...), when he gave his own body unto death. This doctrine came to be
scanned in the third general Council held at Ephesin. council 11. Se^l. 1.
Ephesus, and being there deliberatelie read, was wo^de for word allowed of
the whole Council, as agreeable to the Scriptures and the Nicene fathers. The
like approbation it had, not only in the Council of Constantinople under
Fluuianus, but in the great council of Council. Chalcedon. act. 1.
Chalcedon, where the proceedings of both these Councels were a fresh examined,
and the former words of Cyrill repea^ed and confirmed, with the full consent
of that general Council, as most ^ound and catholic.

So that he shall ill deserve the name of a christian* that after so many
fathers, and Councels, both Provincial and General, will begin to teach us a
new faith, and tell us that the Scriptures mean Christ was crucified and died,
as well in his soul, as in his body; since the whole Church with one assent
has ever so conceived and expounded the Scriptures, that Christ's crucifying
and dying must be referred to his body; and consequently that the joint
sufferings of Christ (the soul feeling what the body suffered) were most
auailable for our redemption. For when they ascribe the crucifying and death of
Christ to his body; they do not exclude the soul from the sense and feeling
of the pain, which is a natural consequent to the conjunction with her body,
but they show what part of Christ's manhood suffered the cross and death, that
the Scriptures so much speak of, and whereby we are redeemed and reconciled
unto GOD. One place repeated in the Council of Ephesus, may serve in steed
of many, to declare their meaning. Interrogatio and respo^. in council.
Ephesino propositae.
How can the Creator of all thnges, who is neither visible, palpable, nor
mutable, sustain the Cross and death? We say the son of God sustained the
Cross and death in his own flesh, that he might deliver us from death and
corruption. He laid down his soul for us, not as an alien and stranger to
the son of God, but vnspeakeablie united unto him, as himself says; I have
power to lay down my soul, and I have power to take it again. (...). It is
proper to the soul to be pensive, to feel pain and grief, to depart from
the body; as it is proper to the flesh to be wearied, to be crucified, to be
raised again. So the violence was offered to the body, the sense whereof
reached unto the soul; and these are the sufferings of the cross, and of
death, which the Scriptures attribute to the son of God for our salvation;
Insomuch that your long discourse of the proper and immediate suffering of
Christ's soul for sin without and besides the body, may be hanged on the
hedge, as discording both from the scriptures, and all the Catholic fathers,
that either have privately testified the truth by their writings, or publicly
confirmed it by their assemblies. And as for your hellish pains, when your
self can tell what they are, and make some better proof, then yet you have
done, that they were, or might be in the soul of Christ, you shall receive
further answer.

These are the Refuters exquisite arguments, which he calls his special
reasons, being indeed rather so many monsters in Christian Religion, then
matters to persuade any man were he never so simple, and but that a strange
faith must needs have such strange grounds as these be, I should think
he did rather expose this conceyte of Hell pains, to be derided of the
world, then to be believed, he every where so secondeth his badde cause
with worse proofs; but where better food wants, Akornes are good meat,
and black Moors may be beautiful, when others be away. I would here
make an end of his first part, but that as his manner is, when he has
stumbled absurdlie a long while at hell he steppeth on the sudden as
vnhandsomelie to heaven. Page 80.
Know therefore (says he) hell, as we take it is even in this life found
sometime, as heaven is likewise; for as Page 81
touching material fire in hell, what a toyish fable is that? else I pray you
how may the souls of the damned suffer by material fire, seeing they are
spirits, and therefore with them and fire material there can be no communi^n.
But let it be as it may be; the local hell of the damned we speak not of.
You slack your hell pains (Sir Resuter) toward the end, as if all this
while you had been too hot in them; and here you give three qualifications to
them; or rather contradictions to your former speeches. Hell as you take it is
SOMETIMES found in this life. But two leaves before you told us the Page.77.
pains and sufferings of Gods wrath, which are the hell that you say Christ
suffered, ALVVAIES accompany them that are separated from the grace and love
of God; how comes ALVVAIES to be so quickly changed into SOMETIMES? were
there fewer wicked when you spoke the last words, then when you spoke the
first? or are you better advised; remembering what a gross absurdity it would
be to cast all infidels and hypocrites, wicked and disobedient persons into hell
torments all the time of this life before the judgment of God takes hold of
them? Secondly, Page 8^.
as there is heaven even in this life in some measure, even so, say you, there
may be hell. You do not mean that here on earth are the very same ioies and
bliss that are in heaven, nor any way equal to them; if you did, it were a
lewder absurdity then the former. For here Luke 10
we rejoice, that our names are written in heaven; ( as the Apostle teaches us
to do) Romans 5
we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. Rom 8.
Now hope that is seen, is not hope. For how can a man hope for that which
he sees (or possesses?) but when we hope for that we see not, we do with
patience abide for it. In this life 2. Cor. 5
we walk by faith, not by sight; and whiles we dwell in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. For though 1. John. 5
we be now the sons of God, it appears not as yet what we shall be; Colos 5
our life is hid with Christ in God; when Christ, who is our life shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. If you therefore
affirm of heaven as you do of hell, that the VERY SAME ioies which are in
heaven, or EQVALL with them are here sometime found on earth, it is a wicked
error flatly repugning to the truth of Gods promises, and to the very
nature of our Christian faith and hope. (For Hebre. 11.
faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not yet
appearing,) but if you mean that as we conceive HOPE of heavenly bliss, so
we must needs REJOICE in it; this position is very true, but plainly
opposite to your imagination of hell pains. For then must there in this life
be no more felt of hell, but the FEAR thereof, and the grief arising from
that fear; even as the HOPE of heaven maintains our joy. Now in Christ
could neither the fear of hell possibly be found, nor any grief, or
sorrow arising from any such fear, since there was in his soul no want of
faith nor hope, no Page 71.
not any the least diminution of either, as your self confess; but as the
Apostle says, Hebre. 12.
FOR THE JOY THAT WAS SET BEFORE HIM he endured the (pain of the) cross, and
despised the shame. And here you may see by your own comparison the folly of
your own assertion. For if your hellish "sorrow Page: 68.
be the only true and perfectly accepted sacrifice to God, (as you say) and
Hebre. 11.
without faith it is impossible to please God; which always has hope, and
consequently, Psalm. 51.
the joy of salvation annexed unto it, which you call heaven; then can no man
please God, or offer any sacrifice to God, till he be both in hell and
heaven at one and the same time; and the joys of heaven are so coupled with
the pains of hell, that none of the faithful can be in the one without the
other, but in both together. And thus have you brought heaven and hell not
only to be every where, but by your corrupt conceits to be always linked
together. Lastly, ^he fire of hell does somewhat trouble you, and therefore
you labor "utterly to quench it; and ask, Page 81.
what a toyish fable is that? but good Sir, if you would bring no more fables
then I do, you might have spared not every leaf, but every line in this
your unadvised pamphlet. I spoke not in my sermon one word either of material,
or corporal fire in hell, but I urged the fire of hell to be a true created
fire, and not any metaphorical flame, as you here dream: from which since the
body and soul of Christ were both free, he did not suffer the true pains of
hell, nor the same torments which the damned do in hell; and which we should
have suffered, had we not been redeemed.

Page 80.
This (you say) is great iniquity, yea plain sophistry to amplify against
you, and to make your most holy truth odious with the people only by the
ambiguitie of the word hell. Begin you now to find the sensible absurdity
of your misshapen fancy? if you would have taken the name of hell
metaphoricallie for great and exceeding pains, this question had been sooner
calmed, and our Creed freed from your new found exposition. But to father
your opinion upon the creed with more likelihood, where the word hell is
properly taken, (though you now hatch us a new signification of hell out of
Socrates,) you then urged as your self in this present confutation do still
urge, that Christ must have the Page 28.
FVL WEIGHT AND BVRDEN of our sins laid upon him, and Page 34
suffer those sorrows and pains for sin, WHICH ELSE WE SHOVLDE; that his
price WAS THE SAME which else we should have paid; that seeing it page 37.
was possible for him to feel THE FVLL SMART of our sins, yea ALL OUR SMART,
and Gods strict justice so required, IT WAS SO, AND MVST BE SO; as also, that
page 2
it is not proportionable with justice, that an easier punishment should
satisfy for a greater sin, and page 48
of al absurdities the greatest, that mere men should suffer more deeply
then Christ did; and therefore, Page 73.
Christ sustained even the sense of Gods wrath DVE to our sins, and had the
Page 40.
WHOLE CVRSE of God for sin executed on him, that is the Page 77.
DEATH OF THE SOVLE and the Page 77.
TORMENTS and sorrows DVE TO THE DAMNED. Without any Sophistry Sir, what is
the FVLL BVRDEN of our sins, and THE SAME PRICE which we should have paid,
what is OUR FVLL SMART yea ALL OUR SMART, and the WHOLE CVRSE OF GOD; what is
the DEATH of the soul, and the TORMENTS DVE TO THE DAMNED, but those very
things which I by the warrant of Gods word told the people were prepared and
threatened to the wicked, and shall be executed on them in hell, as they
should have bin on us, if we had not bin redeemed by the blood of Christ? you
must recall all your reasons, and vnsaie all these positions before you can
avoid that which I object. If Christ did, and must by Gods justice suffer the
WHOLE, the SAME, and ALL that was due to us for our sins; show me, good
Sir, I pray you ( for I confess it passes my reach) how you can free him
from the darkness, destruction, reprobation, malediction, worm or fire of hell?
yea those words, if you look not well to them, and rebate them in time with
some fresh write, they will carry with them both the PLACE and PERPETVITY of
hell; for both these were DVE to our sins, and are parts of Gods CVRSE, and
should have been executed on us, as they shall be on the damned; and out of
ALL, the WHOLE, and the SAME, how can you except any, but by an open Vray
dire of dotage? [ Page 81.
The local hell of the damned you speak not of.] Speak of what you will; so
long as your assertions, in full and plain terms infer and conclude so
much; well your words may run without your wits; but I tell you truly what
is the consequent of them, and leave those words, and then your most holy
truth is left naked without show or shadow of proof. For these generals, the
WHOLE, the SAME, and ALL give life, such as it is, to your childish reasons.
Without them you cannot open your mouth to make one conclusion.

But because hell fire so much crosses your cause, that you would feign be rid
of it, and burns your fingers so fast, (Sir Refuter,) that you strive to cast
water on it; give me leave a little to let you understand, it flameth more
fiercely, then that you can quench it with the licour of your mouth. And the
rather for that in the ears of all men it is a most sensible reproof of your
unsavory position. For if Christ suffered not the fire of hell in body nor
soul, then most apparantlie he suffered not the FVLL burden of our sins, nor
paid the SAME price which we should have paid, nor endured ALL our smart, nor
felt the WHOLE curse of God, nor sustained the torments DVE to the DAMNED;
and therefore the true kindeling of this fire, is the utter quenching of your
new devised hell pains. Know you therefore (Sir Refuter) that your
metaphorical fire in hell is a fantastical error of yours; and you shall
do well to tremble at the terrible judgment of God threatened in his word
with more religion, then to cast off that fire as a toyish fable. I" shall not
need to rehearse, how often it is denounced in the Scriptures, and in what
vehement and constant manner; let us learn rather carefully to shun the
place, then cunningly to shift the word, which they shall find to be no
figure, that feel it. Deutero. 32
A fire (says God himself) is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn to the
bottom of hell, it shall eat through the earth, and the depth thereof, and
shall inflame the foundations of the hills. Esa. 66
Behold, (says Esaias) the Lord will come with fire, that he may recompense his
anger with wrath, and his indignation with the flame of fire, for the Lord
shall judge with fire. The slain of the Lord shall be many, their Worm
shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched. Which words our Savior
directly reffereth to hell. Mark. 9.
It is better to enter into life haulting, then having two legs to be cast
into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where their Worm dies
not, and the fire never goes out. Hebre. ^0
If we sin willingly (says the Apostle to the Hebrews,) there remains
no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and
raging fire, which shall devour the adversaries. Iudae. epist.
As Sodom and Gomorra and the cities about them are set forth for an ensample,
and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Apoc. 21.
The fearful and unbelieving, the abominable and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters and all liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death;
To whom the Judge shall say, when they shall see the truth thereof before
their eyes, Matt. 25
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his angels. 2. Thessa. 1
For the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with the Angels of his
power in flaming fire rendering vengeance to them which know not God, and obey
not the Gospel. That the fire with which Christ shall appear to judge, shall
be corporal and visible to all men's sights can be no question, it 2. Pet. 3
shall dissolve the heavens, melt the elements, and burn up the earth with the
works that are therein, as Peter affirms: and that the wicked shall
everlastingly burn therein, all the Fathers with one consent acknowledge.
August. de great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 3
Ignorance (says Austen) of such as are not wilfully, but simply ignorant,
shall excuse no man from burning in everlasting fire. For it is not said
without cause: Christ shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance to those
yt know not God. Hierony. in 2 Thessa. ca. 1
Inflaming fire rendering vengeance; this (says Jerome) Paul speaks against
them because they dreampt of the pain of conscience, and thought this
impossible. If the flame by Gods commandment did not so much as touch the
three men (that were cast into it,) Ambros. in, 2. Thessa. ca. 1
why by the same power should not fire be believed to be sharper to some, and
easier to others? Christ shall come (says Ambrose) with his heavenly army,
and with fire as his minister to give vengeance on the Pagans which knew not
God, and the Jews which believed not the gospel of Christ, all which the fire
shall burn, that they may be punished with everlasting destruction, always
feeling it, and never failing in it, that the very pain which confumeth them,
may ever renew them. And so Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in 2. Thessa. ca 1
Think on this fire, and thou will count the pleasure of sin to be no
pleasure. If the only sight of a dead man so quail our hearts, how much
more hell, and the fire which cannot be quenched? because the very remembrance
of it is able to draw us to do well, therefore God has appointed the very
threatening of it, as an wholesome medicine for our souls.

Your sleeuelesse objections against these and the like places, that if there
be true fire in hell, why not a true worm as well, and much wood? And if this
fire were prepared for Devils that are spirits, what communion has fire with
spirits? these trifles of yours I say, S. Austen has long since fully
considered, and learnedlie refuted, and plainly resolved, that all these toys
notwithstanding, the fire of hell is not only a TRVE fire, which were my
words, but a CORPORAL fire that shall punish both men and devils; at which you
so much wonder. August. de ciuitate dei. lib. 21. cap. 9
Mitti in gehennam ignis, vbi vermis eorum non moritur, and ignis non
extinguitur, non piguit vno loco eadem verbater dicere. Quem non terreat ista
repetitio, and illius paenae comminatio tam vehemens ore diuino? To be cast
into hell fire, where their worm dies not, and the fire quenches not, Christ
did not loath in one place, to repeat the same words thrice. Whom would not
this repetition terrify, and the threatening of that pain so earnest by
Christ's own mouth? Both these, the fire and the worm, such as would have
them to belong to the pains of the soul, and not of the body, say; that fire
may be here fitly taken for burning grief; as the Apostle speaks, 2. Corin
^1.
who is offended, and I burn not? the same kind of grief they think, may be
understood by the worm; for so it is written, Proverb. 25
As the worm wastes wood, so does grief the heart of man. On the other
side those that doubt not, but in hell the body and soul shall be both
punished, they affirm the body shall be afflicted with fire, the soul with a
kind of sorrow, as it were with a worm. The which though it be MORE
LIKELY, because it IS ABSVRD, that in hell should want either pain of body or
of soul; I rather believe that both PERTAIN TO THE BODY, then that neither;
and that the scripture in these words suppresseth the grief of the soul,
because it follows as a consequent, though it be not expressed, that the
body being so tormented, the soul must likewise be afflicted with an
unfruitful repentance. For it is written in the books of the old Testament,
Ecc^esiast. 7
the vengeance on the flesh of the wicked is fire and worm. Let every man
choose what best pleases him, to attribute fire to the body, the worm to the
soul, the one properly, the other figuratively; or both to the body properly.
For I have before sufficiently showed, that certain creatures live even in the
fire in burning without consuming, in pain without death, by the marvelous
power of the Almighty Creator; which to be possible whosoever denies, knows
not by whom all wonders are wrought. Let therefore every man choose of the
twain, which he likes best, whether he will refer the worm properly to
the body, or to the soul, by a kind of translation of things corporal to
spiritual, so that BY NO MEANS HE THINK the bodies in hell shall be such,
that they shall not be touched with the pain of fire. Idem de ciuitate dei
lib. 21. cap. 10
Here rises another question, if the fire that shall afflict (in hell) be
not incorporall, as the grief of the soul is, but CORPORAL AND HVRTING
WHERE IT TOVCHETH, that bodies may therein be tormented, how the wicked
spirits shall be punished by the same? For the same fire is provided to punish
both men and Devils as Christ says, Matthew. 25.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Why should we not say that incorporall spirits may be afflicted by the
pain of corporal fire, after a true but a maruailous manner, when as the
spirits of men being also incorporall, may now be enclosed in the members of
their bodies, and shall then be tied to the bands of their bodies without
dissolution? therefore the spirits of Devils, or rather the spirits that are
Devils, though they be incorporall, shall be FASTENED TO CORPORAL FIRE,
thereby to be tormented after a strange and unspeakable manner: Fastened I
say, to receive torment from the fire, not to give life to the fire. And hell
it self which is called the lake burning with fire and brimstone, SHALL BE A
CORPORAL FIRE, and shall torment the bodies of men with their souls, and the
devils that are spirits without bodies feeling pain, but not giving life to
those CORPORAL FIRES. The steps of Austen does Gregory follow: Greg moral
li. 15 cap. 17.
Corporal fire to continue needs corporal nourishment: but contrariwise the
fire of hell (which is incorporal) and SHALL CORPORALLY BVRNE the wicked cast
into it, is neither kindled with man's industry, nor fed with wood, but once
created remains unquenchable, and needs no kindling, and wants no
burning. Therefore the Scriptures, to show that the reprobate burn within and
without, say, they are devoured with fire, and made as an oven, that by fire
they may be tormented in their bodies, and by grief burn in their minds.
And though the word incorporeus be crept here into Gregory's text in stead of
Corporeus, as appears by the comparison and words adjoining, (for it were no
strange thing that a metaphorical fire should need no kindling of man, nor
nourishing of wood; and how can an incorporall fire CORPORALLY burn the
reprobate, which are the words presently following?) yet to put that out of
doubt, his opinion is clear to the contrary in his Dialogues, where he
says: Idem. dialog. lib. 4.
That the FIRE OF HELL IS CORPORAL, I have no doubt, in which it is certain
bodies shall be tormented. And if the devil and his angels being incorporall
shall be tormented with CORPORAL FIRE, what marvel if the souls before they
receive their bodies feel corporal torments?

Neither were they the first that made this resolution; that an actual and
sensible fire shall torment the bodies and souls of the damned; the Church of
Christ from the beginning believed ye same. Tertul. in apologetico versus sinem.
The profane Philosophers (says Tertullian) know the difference of this
common and that hid fire; so far distant is this which serves man's use, from
yt which in Gods judgment appears, whether it flash with thunder from
heaven, or break through the earth by the tops of hills. For that consumes not,
what it burns; but rather repayreth what it eats, as the mountains ever
burning do still continue, and he that is blasted from heaven lives and
turns not to ashes. This is a testimony of that eternal fire, this is an
example of that perpetual judgment, which maintains punishment. The hills
burn and dure; how then shall the wicked and the enemies of God? Lactantius in
like sort: Lactant de diuino p^ae^^^^ li. 7. ca. 21.
The holy Scriptures teach us how the wicked shall be punished. Because they
sinned in their bodies, they shall take their flesh again, that they may be
punished in their bodies; yet that flesh which God will clothe man with, shall
not be like this earthly ^lesh, but indissoluble and remaining for ever, that
it may suffice for torment, and for everlasting fire. The nature of which fire
is diverse from this which we use about the necessaries of this life. For that
fire always lives and burns of it self without any nourishment. The same
divine fire therefore with one and the same strength and power shall burn and
continue the wicked, and shall yield it self everlasting maintenance, so as it
shall only burn and torment without any decay to the body. Cyprian is often
and earnest in this cause: Cyprian. ad Demetrianu^.
Cremabit addictos ardens semper gehenna, and viuacibus flammis vorax poena,
nec erit vnde habere torment a vel requiem possint aliquando, vel finem: Hell
always burning shall broyle them that are adjudged to it, and pain shall
devour them, with continual flames; neither shall their torments have ease or
end. And again, Idem de lau^e martyrij.
Saeuiens locus cui gehenna nomen est, eructantibus flammis per horrendam
spissae caliginis noctem, saeua semper incendia camini fumantis expirat; globus
ignium atratus obstruitur, and in varios poenae exitus relaxatur: The cruel
place, which is called hell, casts up fearful fires, like a burning chimney,
the flames breaking through the horrible darkness of y^ thick mist; a whole
globe of blackish fire standing and resolving into diverse sorts of torments.
Idem de ascensione ch^^sti.
Stridorem illum Dentiu^ flammae inextinguibiles agitabunt, immortales miseri
viue^t inter incendia, and inconsumptibiles flammae nudu^ corpus allambent:
Unquenchable flames shall force that gnashing of teeth, immortal wretches
shall live in the midst of fire, and flames never consuming shall wrap their
naked bodies. Hell as Chrysostom writes, has fire and darkness, but far worse
then these which we are acquainted with. Chrysostom. in hebre ca. 1. homilia. 1.
For if there be fire (says he) how is there darkness? thou see that fire
is more grievous then this our fire, for it has no light: if it be fire, how
does it burn for ever? thou see it is worse then ours, for that is not to be
quenched, and therefore is called unquenchable. Let us then think with our
selves how great a misery it is, to burn for ever, to be in darkness, to make
continual lamentation, and to gnash the teeth and not to be regarded? if
darkness alone do so terrify, and trouble our hearts, what shall it do when
such griefs and flames of fire come with it?

Minutius Felix in his dialogue betwixt an Ethnicke and a Christian, cited by
Lactantius in his first book De falsa religione cap. 11. says: Minutius Felix
in Octauio.
As the lightnings touch men's bodies, but consume them not; and the flames of
the hills Aetna and Vesuuius, and of other parts of the earth do burn and not
waste; so that punishing fire (in hell) feeds not upon the decays of their
bodies that burn, but continues without eating or wasting their bodies. The
same comparison does Pacianus, yt died under Theodosius, make in his
exhortation unto repentance against the Nouatians: Pacianus in paraenesi ad
poenitentiam.
Post animarum te^pestiua supplicia rediuiuis quoque perpetua corporibus poena
seruatur: After the due punishment of the souls, (of the wicked) a perpetual
torment is prepared for their bodies that shall be restored to life. The force
whereof you may conjecture by the things which are in this world. AEtna,
Lisaniculus, and Vesuuius in Campania do cast out vnceasing, flames of fire,
and to manifest to us the perpetuity of that (terrible) judgment, they still
break and waste, and yet never end. Sibylla whom Lactantius lib. 7. ca. 20.
Lactantius, Eusebius de vita Constant.
Eusebius, and August. de ciuitate Dei li. 18. ca. 23.
Austen allege and allow as inspired by God, describes the last judgment
with these words: The earth cleaving shall lay open the dungeon of hell; all
kings shall come before the Tribunal of God, and a flood of fire and brimstone
shall fall from heaven (upon the wicked.) Greg. in Ezechiel homil. 2.
Christus in suo tunc terrore videbitur, eique ignis iudicij in reproborum
vindicta famulabitur, quia videlicet Ignis ille Iudicij, qui coelum, aerem, and
terram concremat, peccatores inuoluit; quos proculdubio in poena suae
damnationis confringit: Christ then shall be seen in his terror, and the fire
of judgment shall serve him to revenge the Reprobate, by reason the very fire
of judgment, which melts the heavens, the air and the earth, wrappeth in
sinners, whom doubtless it crusheth in the torment of their damnation. Idem
moral. li. 9 ca. 39.
Yea, the flame of hell shines not to the Reprobate for their comfort, and yet
gives light for their punishment; that to the eyes of the damned though the
fire of their torment shine with no brightness, yet it shows for their further
grief in what sort they are punished. How think you Sir Refuter, is it a
TOYISH FABLE worthy of such contempt as you make it, or a point of Christian
doctrine delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, and received by the Fathers in
all ages in Christ's Church, that the FIRE of hell shall be VISIBLE and SENSIBLE
to the bodies of the wicked, and shall ETERNALLY and CORPORALLY punish the
damned according to their deserts without quenching it self, or consuming
the^? And your foolish Philosophy that things corporal cannot work upon
things spiritual, must give place to the power and will of the Almighty; by
whose appointment we see in this life nothing more common, the^ that the soul
which is spiritual, suffers from her body all kinds of pains; and
therefore it is as easy for God to make the soul feel fire in the next life
without the body, as with the body; whose power if it please you to impugn,
you must leave the name of a Christian, and get you some other profession. So
then the pains which the damned feel, besides the grief of heaven lost, is
FLAMING FIRE intolerably formenting both body and soul; and as De ascensione
Christi.
Cyprian observes; Omni tormento atrocius desperatio condemnatos affliget:
Desperation, which shall afflict the condemned worse then al their torments. To
these if you subject the Son of God, you know what will follow; from these if
you free him, as you needs must, then is the Question at an end: for in every
man's sight, Christ did not suffer the pains of hell, nor the torments of the
damned, which the scripture makes to be these, and not those which you can
neither express nor prove.

From slender reasons you come (Sir Refuter) to slenderer authorities; and
though you quote but few, and not one of them speaking one word to your
purpose, yet before you produce them, you challenge them as insufficient to
testify in this, or any cause against your liking. For where they may not be
judges, nor with you so much as witnesses of the Scriptures sense, (you so
reie^t their expositions every where with pride and disdain) yet you in your
wisdom take upon you to build upon the words of the holy Ghost, what
absurdities and follies you list; and your best reason is, it were fond to
think otherwise: but be more sober, if you will be ruled by me; it is the way
to hazard your own wits, and not their credits to entertain the^ in this
manner. [They speak not plainly, nor fully you say, because it was never in
question in their time.] Touching the redemption of man by the death and blood
of Christ Jesus, they speak as plainly and fully as it is possible for men to
speak; and keep exactly the form of wholesome doctrine delivered in the
Scriptures; touching your hell pains they say nothing in deed, because it was
never heard of in ye Church of Christ in their times; but that Christ died NOT
THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE; and by the ONLY DEATH OF HIS BODY, and shedding of his
blood sufficiently ransomed and redeemed us, this cannot be spoken in plainer
and exacter terms, then they have proposed it and proved it. And therefore you
and others shall do well not to make all the ancient and learned lights of
Christ's Church so ignorant in their Creed and Catechism, as not to know, how
they were saved by ye Cross and death of Christ, before your hellish pains of
the damned were of late devised. Your better sifting of this matter, is the
open wresting and forcing of the scriptures against their true, proper and
perpetual sense, to serve your strange conceits. And as you do with the
scriptures, you must be suffered to do with the Fathers which you produce, that
is; to put the^ quite from their own meaning, and frame their words to your
fancies, before any man can tell to what end you cite them.

The first word you quote out of Ierom, you falsify by putting maledictum to
it, where Ierom does not so, but simply says, WHAT WE should have suffered
for our sins, that he suffered for us. The very next words that are his own,
(for he interposeth a place of Scripture, that in his f^esh Christ dissolved
our enmity with God, and healed us with his stripes) are these. Hierony in
Esa. ca. 53.
Ex quo perspicuum est, sicut corpus flagellatum and laceratum, ita animam vere
doluisse pro nobis. Whereby it is evident, that as his body was whipped and
torn, so his soul truly sorrowed for us. Here you must be permitted to add
of your own, besides Ieroms meaning, that this sorrow was your hellish sorrow,
or else I cannot see why you cited Ierom, except it were to falsify him. But
how, and why Christ sorrowed for us, when Ieroms own words were alleged by me,
your answer was; this Page 68.
is more fond and absurd than the other. Cyprians words you neither understand,
nor like; he says that Christ Cyprian de passione christi.
taking our person and cause upon him said in our names, that he was forsaken:
Quod pro eis voluisti intelligi qui deseri a Deo propter peccata meruerant,
quorum reconciliationis causam agebas, which he would have to be understood of
us (or for us) who deserved by our sins to be forsaken of God, whose
reconciliation he then undertook. So S. Austen expounded those words of
Christ, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? August. in Psalm. 21.
Illa vox membrorum ipsius vox erat, non capitis, that voice was the voice of
his members, and not of the head; but you could not endure either Austen or my
other father so to say, without controlement. [But Cyprian says Christ endured
like punishment to those that be sinners and accursed.] In part, not in all;
otherwise he must have suffered eternal death of body and soul: and
therefore expounding himself in the next sentence, he says, Cyprian. Ibidem.
In tantum infirmis compateris, vt nec crucifigi, nec mori, dum illi viuant and
non pereant, nec erubescas nec formides. So far did thou suffer with the
weak, that thou did neither shame to be crucified, nor fear to dye, so they
might live and not perish. Ambrose says; With the sorrow of his soul Christ
abolished the sorrow of our souls; Here you must have leave to bring in your
hellish sorrows against Ambroses mind, or else this is but lost labor: the
causes of Christ's heaviness and sorrow when I repeated out of this very place of
Ambrose, you rejected them as Page 67.
fond and false, and now with the bare name of sorrow you think Ambrose dreamt
of your hell pains. For shame read out the chapter, and leave these
mistakings.

[But In Lucae. ca. 23. de commendatione spiritus.
Ambrose says, the man (in Christ) now ready to die, by the separation of the
Divinity, cried, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.] A man dies when
his soul leaves his body. Christ therefore ready to die the death of the
body, which was left of ye deity unto death, by withdrawing it self for a
time, uttered these words. Death of the soul, or dereliction unto hell pains,
there are none to be found in Ambrose, nor any words sounding that way, unless
you pervert them at your pleasure. The words next going before are these:
Ambros. ibidem.
Gloriosa Dei professio, vsque ad mortem se pro nostris descendisse peccatis,
vel euidens manifestatio contestantis Dei secessionem Diuinitatis and CORPORIS.
It was a glorious profession of God, that he descended even unto death for our
sins; or an evident manifestation of God witnessing the departure of his
Divinity from HIS BODY, (when it dyed.) The next words of Ambrose why you
allege I do not see, but to make up the number, which is very small, and
less forcible. Who doubts but Christ offered that, which he put on? He put
on his body, and his body he offered. S. Paul will tell what Christ offered.
Hebre. 10.
We are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made. Your
own author Saint Ambrose writing upon these words alleged by Paul, Ambros. in
Hebre. ca. 10.
thou have fitted me a body, says; Hoc ex persona dicitur eius, qui CORPUS
SVSCEPIT nostrae mortalitatis, vt pro nobis haberet quod offerret. This is
spoken in his person, who put on our MORTAL BODY, that he might have what to
offer for us. Ibidem.
Vna quippe oblatio corporis Christi perfectos facit sanctificatos quae
remissionem integram facit peccatorum. The one OBLATION OF THE BODY OF CHRIST
makes perfect, such as be sanctified, and gives full remission of sins. If
you think Ambrose mistook the matter; hear Athanasius. Athanas. de
incarnatione verbi Dei.
A nobis simili corpore mutuato, eo quod omnes mortis corruptioni obnoxij
essemus, pro omnibus IDIPSVM in mortem deditum patri suo SACRIFICAVIT, vt
homines a morte ad vitam CORPORE suo, quod proprium sibi fecit, reuocaret.
IMMOLATIONE enim SVI CORPORIS and legi nobis in festa sinem posuit, and
primordium vitae no^is renouauit spe resurrectionis nobis data. The son of God
BORROVVING FROM US a ^ODIE LIKE OURS, because we all were subject to the
corruption of Death did SACRIFICE THE SAME to his father by yielding it up unto
Death, that BY THE BODY which he made his own he might recall men from Death to
life. For by the OFFERING OF HIS BODY, he ended the law that oppressed us,
and renewed the beginning of life unto us, giving us hope of Resurrection.
Cyrill with the whole Synod of Alexandria, which I mentioned before, wrote
thus to Nestorius. Epistola Synodi Alexandrinae ad Nestorium.
Christ is made the mediator of God and man, and a reconciler of peace,
offering himself to God, and to his father as a sweet smelling sacrifice, for
he OFFERED HIS OWN BODY FOR US, to be a sweet savor. But of the true
sacrifice for sin, which Christ offered, I have spoken enough before, as well
in this conclusion, as in the Treatise. It must have the BODY, the BLOOD, and
the DEATH of the offerer: none of which agree to the soul of Christ, though
the body without a soul could be no reasonable sacrifice; and therefore I
exclude not the soul whose obedience, innocence, and patience concurred to
sanctify this sacrifice; but I note the parts of the sacrifice for sin by the
Apostles doctrine were those, which I named, the blood and death of the
Sacrificer; both which must needs be found in his body and not in his soul.

From Ambrose you roue to Tertullia^, and there you find that which I never
doubted of. Tertullian contra Praxeam.
The Son suffered, forsaken of his father. Haec vox est animae and corporis, id
est hominis. This was the voice of soul and body, that is of man. Did you
think the body could speak without the soul, before you read in Tertullian
that this was the voice of both? If you did, you were deeply learned; if you
did not, why do you bring it as a matter worth the hearing, that body and
soul joined in speaking? But you help it over y^ style with a false
translation, and where Tertullian says, this was the voice of soul and flesh,
you english it, o this is meant of the flesh and of the soul, to wit, as you
expound" it, that both soul and body died forsaken of God. Take back, Sir
Refuter, your false and unsavory glozes that corrupt the text, Tertullian
never heard, nor thought of the death of Christ's soul, nor of any such
forsaking, as you imagine; he expounds himself without your additions, in
the very same place, plain enough. Tertullian aduersus Praxeam in eodem loco.
Denique posuit spiritum, and statim obijt. Spiritu enim manente in carne, caro
omnino mori non potest. Ita relinqui a patre fuit mori filio; silius igitur and
moritur, and resuscitatur. Dicendo denique Christus mortuus est, id quod vnctum
est mortuum ostendit, id est, carnem, Christ laid aside his spirit, and
PRESENTLY DIED. For his spirit remaining in his flesh, the FLESH by no means
could DIE. So to be forsaken of the father, was for the son TO DIE. The
son therefore died and was raised again. Then in saying Christ died, (Paul)
showed that died which was anointed, even the flesh of Christ. Of the death of
Christ's flesh Tertullian speaks; which he says, could not possibly be,
so long as Christ's soul remained in his body. Christ then died no death of
the soul whiles he lived, and breathed on the cross; but the death which he
died was the laying aside of his soul, and leaving his body unto death. You
end with Cyril that Cyril de reota fide ad Theodo^ium.
Christ made his flesh a Redemption for our flesh, and his soul a Redemption
for our souls. Cyril means nothing less then that, which you would implie,
that wi^h the death of either part in himself, Christ redeemed ^ach part in
us; But Cyril knowing that Christ in his sufferings on the cross joined both
parts together, the one to receive the violence and rage of the wicked, which
was his body; and other to feel and endure the smart thereof with all
obedience patience, which was his soul; says truly that Christ joining both
soul and body in suffering for us, redeemed both soul and body in saving
us; which we acknowledge to be true without exception. For had not the soul
of Christ been partner, yea chief patient in those bodily sufferinges of
Christ, they could not have profited us; neither do we at any time otherwise
speak or think of Christ's sufferings, but that the body was the instrument
whereby the soul of Christ did admit and feel all those pains, wrongs,
shames, wounds and whatsoever he endured on the cross, or before at their
hands, which put him to death. But these pains and sorrows of Christ's soul,
you say; MAKE NOT TO OUR REDEMPTION, and unless the soul properly and
immediately (not from, or by her body) feel hellish pains and sorrows, such
as the damned do, you make no reckning of all that Christ otherwise suffered.
And this is your error which you shrowde under the name of a most holy truth,
where indeed, if it be urged and followed, as you begin, it will fall out to
be a most heinous contemning of all that Christ suffered for us; and a
dangerous substituting of other devises, which Christ neither did nor could
suffer, as you propose them.

You end, Sir Refuter, as you began with egregious lies, that Page 87.
not the most or the best, BUT ALL AND EVERY ONE, both churches and writers in
the world, that are protestants, teach as you do, and that your Page 89.
doctrine is publicly authorized by the laws of this Realm, as appears by
the book of Homilies, where it is said, that Christ put himself between Gods
deserved wrath and our sin. But (Sir confuter) if you have this property of
Mydas yt you can turn all Fathers, Churches, writers, and laws with touching
them, to be of your opinion, you must have Mydas ears too; unless you look
better about you. Such an insole^t and impudent speech would well become an
alehouse, where no man should hear you; but in the face of the world to bray
after this sort is tolerable in no man, but in you, that neither know what you
say, nor see what you should prove, nor understand what makes with you or
against you. You no sooner read in any man new or old mention of Gods wrath,
or of death; but you straight fansy that he means your hell pains, and the
death of the soul; and so you play with the homilies allowed by the laws of
this Realm. Where because you find that Christ interposed himself between
the wrath of God and us, to auert it from us, you forthwith resolve, the
Homilies teach your doctrine. But awake, Sir Refuter, and you shall see great
difference betwixt the doctrine taught in the book of Homilies, and publicly
approved by the laws of this Realm, your frenzies; that Christ DIED the
DEATH of the SOVLE; that the WHOLE CVRSE of God was executed on Christ; that
he was by our sins defiled, sinful, hateful, and accursed; that all the powers
of his soul and senses of his body were overwhelmed, distracted, and all
confounded, that he felt the very Devils to be instruments, executing the
wrath of God upon him, that the sufferings of Christ's soul, by Sympathy as
you call it, (that is from and by the body) make not to our redemption; that
Christ's soul died and was crucified, where it is absurd and most false to say
Christ was made alive either in his humane soul, or by the same; these and an
hundred such absurdities and impieties have no allowance in the books of
Homilies, nor any thing sounding toward your hellish pains of the damned. The
doctrine there taught is sound, true and plain, that we are redeemed by the
death and blood of Christ Jesus; that such was the just displeasure of God
against our sins, that though he were his own son, that undertook the cause
for us, the justice of God pursued him with most painful smart and anguish
even unto death; and forced the weakness of his humane flesh to cry, my God,
my God why have thou forsaken me. But you content not your self with this;
you must have him suffer the very pains of the damned in Hell, or nothing.
His bodily death were it never so paynefull and sharp, you make light
account of; Page 58
the thieves crucified with Christ suffered, you say, as great bodily violence
as he did; yea wicked and ungodly men endure with boldness and great joy far
more exquisite and barbarous torments and sharper tortures, as touching the
body, then Christ could endure, and therefore in plain words you say, Page 51
such folly in the son of God, be it far from y^u once to imagine, as
that he should stagger, shrink or fail for any corporal torments whatsoever,
forgetting what Ambrose writes; Ambros in Lucae ca, 22 de Tristitia Christi.
Neque enim habent fortitu linis laudem, qui stuporem magis vulnerum tulerunt,
qua^ dolorem: it can have no praise of fortitude to be desperately confirmed,
rather then patiently subjected unto pain of torments. And what Auste^
confesses, Aug. tractat. in Johan. 36.
Nihil erat tunc IN CARNE INTOLERABILIVS, there was nothing more intolerable in
the flesh then the cross of Christ* as likewise what Bernarde resolves
Bernard. de passione Christi. cap. 5
Nec aliquo modo dubitandum, quin infirmitatem and exterminationem corporis
incomparabilem sustinuerit; it must not be doubted, but Christ suffered
incomparable weakness and torment of body. For this if you did strive, it were
to be tolerated; for that which no father ever testified, nor scripture ever
affirmed, when you show your self so eager; you bewray your humor, you benefit
not your cause.

Thou have heard christian Reader, what things I have misliked in the first
part of this opponents pamphlet; but nothing more then this, that he wastes so
many words, and neither expresses what he means, nor proves what he
pretends. All that he has said is this in effect; Christ suffered in soul
the wrath and curse of God for our sin, or due to sin; but these are so
general terms that in part they be true, in part they be false, and
therefore he that walks in these clouds, and descends not to particulars,
means to hide his head under the Covert of these generalities when need is;
and out of these to fashion to himself such assertions as please best his
humor. The wa^e to come by a truth, is to specify the parts of Gods wrath
and curse, which they suppose Christ suffered, and then shall we in few
words try whether those sufferings accord with the rules and grounds of the
scriptures, or no. And this I foretell, because if he or any other for him
be disposed to revive his cause, he must not bring a sack full of words for
so weighty matters; but plainly and particularly declaring what he holds,
and proouing what he affirms, go directly to the point, and then by Gods
grace we shall soon try where truth stands. But if any man will draw the
ground of our redemption to general and ambiguous terms, which shall still
increase contention to noe purpose; I mean not to repel words with words;
till they answer these proofs, I will not trouble my self with their empty
phrases.

In the second Question of Christ's descent to hell, I shall not hold thee long
(gentle reader) because this babbler forgetting what I said, concerning the
proof and purpose of Christ's descent to hell, runs a new course to Pagans
and Poets for help, to expound that article of our Creed; and there presumes*
himself to be so strong, that of the rest he does prate without reason or
remembrance. The end of Christ's descent to hell, I noted out of Athanasius,
Fulgentius and others, and proved their speech conformable to the Scriptures;
the places thou have in the latter part of the treatise, I mean not to
increase this close with needless repetitions. The Co^futer, belike distracted
and distempered with the cogitation and confusion of his hell pains, utterly
mistaketh or forgets the whole. He supposes Christ's descent to hell had
none other purpose, but Page 64.
to triumph and insult upon the thrice miserable and woeful wretches in their
present unspeakable damnation, infinitely confounded already, and infers;
Sure a very sorry triumph this were for the son of God which even among men
were nothing but dishonorable; but if his brains be so bri^kle, that he can
neither conceive, nor carry away what I said; I must not beat it into his
head: that I then preached, is here now printed, let him refell it if he can.
So when I made the subduing of hell and treading on Satan with all the power
of darkness, a chief part of the glory of Chrits resurrection, this scorner
in his foolish conceit mocketh at it, and says Page 54.
a worthy privilege surely, and very honorable. All men would think it a
greater honor never to have come in hell at all. For his actual triumphing in
hell all the world knows, Page 156.
is the most inglorious and vilest debasing. In sadness (Sir refuter) if these
be your best exceptions against Christ's triumphing over hell, all the world
will know, that you are a worthy man, to wear a wooden dagger. The Apostle
made it a part of Christ's high exaltation, Philip. 2.
that every knee, as well of things under the earth, as of things in heaven,
should bow unto him, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord;
and do you think it a meet matter to be mocked and derided? Paul says;
Christ spoiled principalities and powers (of hell and darkness) and made a show
of them openly, Coloss. 2.
and triumphed over them in his own person, (for so I must read till you show
me better authority against it, then I have brought for it;) and your self
both see and sat, that Page 156.
whiles Christ suffered and whiles he died, it was a miserable triumph, yea
Page 159.
a piteous triumph it was indeed, where himself remained in such woeful
torments, where appeared no show of conquest, but rather of being conquered;
and page 156.
still he suffered til he gave up the ghost. What lets them I pray you,
since these words were not verified on the Cross, but they did take place in
his resurrection, as I teach; and therein as by the effects it was most evident
and apparent to the eyes of all men, he did spoil powers and principalities,
and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them in his own person?
Does the holy ghost attribute this as a great honor to the humane nature of
Christ, that Ephesians. 4.
ascending on high he led captivity captive, and do you make a merriment of
it, appealing to the whole world for their censure on your side?

Your strongest sort is this; Page 163
There can be no commodity nor benefit to the godly by it. For what good is
there so much as pretended? The general redemption of all Gods elect and
chosen people was wrought and fully finished on the Cross, Page 164.
what could his going down to hell add more? Is the subduing of hell powers,
and the treading on all their force, and the restraining of all their fury, so
small a matter with you, that it does no good to the godly? He has triumphed
and spoiled them to free us from fear; and has taken the Revel. 1.
keys of death and of hell, into his own hands; to show that all power is
given him in heaven, earth, and hell, and that he can restrain and Revel. 20.
bind Satan at his will and pleasure. Is the performance and assurance of these
things no commodity nor benefit to the godly? [ The redemption of Gods elect,
was (you say) fully finished on the Cross.] Deserved and obtained it was on
the Cross, and by the cross, but not there executed. There were our sins
pardoned, and our selves reconciled to God; but as Christ died for our sins,
so he rose for our ius^ification. His resurrection in that glorious manner,
which I have mentioned in the treatise, and his ascension are necessary parts
of our Salvation; and therefore use not the force of Christ's cross to exclude,
but to induce the rest. For so does the Apostle when he says. Philip. 2.
Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto ye death of the cross.
Wherefore (that is even for that his humility and obedience) God has highly
exalted him and given him a name above every name; that at the name of Jesus
should every knee bow of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth. So
that his descending, rising, and ascending added nothing to the force of his
death, but showed the fruit thereof; and tend all to our good, since we are
presently secured from the power of hell and Satan, and shall be certainly
raised and received to glory. Christ's death without his resurrection and
ascension had been our confusion* and no redemption; for if sin had slain
him without rising, it must needs have damned us without hoping: now in his
Resurrection as every Enemy was most mighty, so was there most need he should
be subdued. But hereof I have spoken so largely before that I shall not need
to rehearse it again; with turning the page it may soon be seen.

[ But Page 148.
The Scriptures ( you tell us,) are clearly against Christ's going to Hell. For
this day ( said Christ to the thief) thou sh^lt be with me in Paradise.
Page.150.
All this must needs be of his humane soul verelie without all question.
There is none can consider herein his Deity. If any think his soul might
go to hell first, and presently go thence to heaven yer night also, that is
ridiculous and toyish.] You have so many toys in your head, Sir Refuter, that
a colored cap would well become it: when you come to a non plus in your
proofs, then you cry, this is ridiculous and toyifh. Go like your self, and
look to the ridiculous toys that you bring us in every page almost. You would
prove, forsooth, that the SCRIPTVRES ARE CLEAR against Christ's being in hell
at any time between his death, and his Resurrection; and for your warrant you
bring his words to the thief on the cross; this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise; and at his death when he said; Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit: And when the places conclude no such thing as you would have them, nor
any thing near it; then you help it with outcries, and say; Page 152.
There is no man of sense considering these circumstances that can judge
otherwise. But will your wisdom remember that S. Austen in his 57. Epistle
discussing this place of purpose, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise;
says the word ME may very readily and easily be referred to Christ's
Godhead, promising the thief Paradise that present day; and all the childish
amplifications that you have brought us to the contrary, are not worth a
nut-shell to conteruaile S. Austens judgment. But grant it were meant of
Christ's soul; are you so perfect in the length of the way from hell to
Paradise, and the wearines of Christ's soul in going to both, that you be sure
he could not do both that day? You think belike Christ would not go thither,
but to view the devils one by one, and call their names to see who were absent.
You have forgotten that Luke 8
with his presence, or with his word whiles he lived here on earth, he could
torment the devils, and therefore if it pleased him but to show himself, who
he was, whom they had so despitefullie pursued by the hands and tongues of
the wicked on the Cross; all hell must not only bend and bow unto him, but
fear and fall before him. Again, what could hinder though he did not
descend that day which he died, but he might so do the day that he rose;
and even when he was to rise to loose all the strength of hell before him, and
to let Satan see that his kingdom was overthrown by that death, at which he
so much insulted and rejoiced? The time I do not determine, though I think it
pertained rather to the glory of his resurrection, then otherwise; as I have
in the treatise more at large expressed.

[Was not his soul, you will ask IN HIS Fathers hands, till the time of his
Resurrection?] Who doubts that? As if to subdue hell with the glory of his
presence did not prove the hand of GOD to be rather mightily with him, then
any way to leave him, and that to be true, which was forespoken by David in
his person, Psalm. ^6.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell? [The hands of God, you think, signify
here his joyful presence, and the possession of heaven.] Who told you so?
Was David dying when he said; Psalm. 31.
Into thine hands I commend my spirit, thou have redeemed me Lord God of
truth? Was Sion not on earth but in heaven, when the Prophet says of her;
Esai. 6^.
Thou shall be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
Diadem in the hand of thy God, it shall no more be said to thy land,
Desolate, for thy land shall have an husband? Was the king of Judah then in
heaven, when God said of him, Iere. 22.
Though Coniah the son of Iehoiakim king of Judah were the Signet of my right
hand, yet would I pluck thee thence? Gods hand signifies his power, and
protection; and could there greater favor, power, or protection be showed to
the soul of Christ, then for God in raising him from the dead, not only to
tread death, but even hell and Satan under his feet? Call you this a most
inglorious and vile debasing* for the humane nature of Christ, to have all
power in heaven, and earth, (in which Hell also must be comprised,) to be
delivered unto him; and to be made Lord over all, not only men, and Angels,
but even enemies and devils? From this honor and power, whereof it is said; 1.
Cor. 15.
Thou have subjected all things under his feet; may no creature in heaven,
nor in hell be excepted? And therefore if this be a vile debasement, I know
not what glory means, The purpose then of Christ's descent to hell, gives
honor to him over all his enemies, and comfort to us against the power and
terror of hell, which we see dissolved and spoiled by our head in our names,
and for our sakes; for so much as being joined to him as Ephesians. 5.
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, hell has now no more
right to us then to him; since it is not possible but the head must be where
the members are: And Christ himself Mat. 25. Acts 9.
hungreth, and thirsts, and is naked, and sick, imprisoned, and persecuted,
in every one of his members, even in the basest and lowest of them; and this
no more impeacheth the all sufficient merit of Christ's Cross, then his
resurrection from the dead does the third day after his death, and all things
finished on the Cross, needful to be suffered for our redemption; which in
your ^ranticke humor you seem to detest as Page 156.
BLASPHEMOVS.

[The proof that he went thither, you will say, is all; if that were once
cleared, the rest would soon be accorded.] I may not for your pleasure (Sir
Refuter) stand to rippe up and repeat the things which were then
delivered, and are now published; there you may look; If you like them not,
give me some reason besides your own rouing conceit, and it shall be soon
answered. [It is no where written in the Scriptures you, will say.] Saint
Epist. 9^.
Austen iudiciallie and resolutelie tells you, it is written in the Prophet
David, and so expounded by Saint Peter; and of that judgment were all the
Fathers of Christ's Church without exception. Athanas. in Symbolo.
Athanasius says it is a part of the Catholic faith, without believing the
which we can not be saved. And s^re the words be plain enough, if you leave
wresting them from their right and true signification to serve your affections.
What can be plainer, Psalm. 16.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, besides the Article of our Creed, He
descended into hell? Your answer is: Act. 2.
This is evident that the word hell in our vulgar Creed is unfit, corrupt and
stark naught. For this I affirm, it is only the Fathers abusiue speaking,
and altering the usual and auu^cient sense of Hades, that has bredde this
error of Christ's descending into hell. Their unapt and perilous translating
into Latin, Inferi, and our naughty and corrupt translation in English, hell,
has confirmed the same. Page 96.
And note here first it is a thing too rife with the Fathers, yea with some of
the auncie^test of them to alter and change the authenticke use of words,
whereby consequently it is easy for errors and gross mistakings to creep
in. As Chirotonia to signify ordination of Ministers, when it signifies
authenticallie the peoples giving of voices in election: Kleros, to signify
only the Clergy, when it signifies all the flock. Even so truly the
Greek fathers use Hades and the Latin Inferi, to signify hell properly and
particularly, that is, the place of the damned Page 97.
But this is a mere and plain abusion of these words, and specially of our
word most in question, that is Hades. They have much altered and changed the
authenticke and true use thereof. You begin now to show your self in your
right hue. All the Greek and Latin fathers that ever were in the Church of
Christ; all the English teachers that have been since this nation received the
faith, never understood the signification of the word Hades, til you came of
late to bring us news of Socrates fancy, and Ciceros divinity to correct the
Creed; Ignatius, Clemens, Origin, Athanasius, Eusebius, Basil, Nazianzene,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Cyril, Eustathius, Theodotete, with a thousand more
naturally borne Greeks; and many of them nothing inferior to Plato, or whom
you can name, even for their eloquence in the Greek tongue, were they all
ignorant of the word Hades, which boys in Grammar school do well
understand? Or did they all conspire one after another to falsify the faith?
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Jerome, Ambrose, Austen, Hillarie,
Prudentius, Prosper, Fulgentius, with infinite others great Scholars and
pillars in the Church of GOD, had none of them the skill to know what Infernum
or Inferi meant, till you sprang up to restore the Latin tongue to his
original integrity? Or did they all concur purposelie to corrupt the
Creed? Which will you take from all these fathers religion, or learning? If
you leave them so much understanding as the boys have now in Paul's School,
they could not mistake either Hades, or Inferi. And therefore you may talk
thus long enough before you shall get any sober Reader to believe you. He
must be as far infected with this frenzy as you your self are, before this
will any way sink into his head, that none of these understood their own
natural language. [But they have mistaken other words, you say, as well as
these; namely, (...) and (...)] In deed you, or they have grossly mistaken
the one; the other is not, that I know in question, unless you take upon you
so great a command in the Church of GOD, that no word may be used by any
man without your consent. Does any Father in expounding the Scriptures, put
the Clergy for the people; as if the rest had no part in the Kingdom of
Christ? but if they wanted a word to note them, that were called to the public
service of Christ's church; and thought best to name them clerici, clerks;
what have you to do with it? or what reason to speak against it; so long as
the rest of Gods people are not thereby deprived of their part in Gods
heavenly inheritance? And what if they took this term from the scripture
and derived the very word from the Apostles mouths? are you not well occupied
to quarrel with them? Peter does twice use that word for a part, or place in
the public ministry and service of the church, with which the people did not
meddle. Acts. 1,
Judas (says Peter) was numbered with us, (...), and had his place in this
ministry. So again to Simon Magus; Acts, 8.
(...). Thou have no part nor lot in this business or function. Where Peter in
both places calls the charge of an Apostle (...), not that Judas, or the rest
of the twelve were chosen by lots, but that he had a part with them in that
function.

As for (...), I think there be more said, then you will be able to answer;
you know where to find it. Could you prove that the Apostles did make elders
with the peoples voices, which you shall never be able to do, you had some
reason to think the word might importe some such thing; but where the word
in his own nature is but to stretch out the hand, and it is certain by the
scriptures the Apostles in ordaining elders did use imposition of hands, which
is plainly (...); (electing by voices they did not use for ought that can be
proved;) what a malepart guest are you to say, It was a rife thing with the
fathers, yea with the ancientest of them to alter and change the authentic use
of words; because the Athenians in Demosthenes time had a course in their
public assemblies to give their consentes to make laws and decrees with
holding up their hands, which he calls (...)? But you bite on the bridle I
perceive, and so you must, till you learn to be more sober then to condemn so
many learned and religious fathers of ignorance and corruption; which in such
a companion as you are, might well be believed, in men of their religion and
judgment can by no reason be mistrusted ^^ is by the way, because you glance
at (...), though the rein you accuse not me that allege them, but the fathers
themselves as corrupters of church discipline, and peruerters of their own
language; howbeit hades is now in question and not (...), or (...); and
therefore say for hades what you can, or rather for your self; since all wise
men will hold you more then rash and presumptuous, if you condemn so many
without great cause.

Page 97.
[The classical writers, you say, the masters of the Greek tongue do use HADES
in proper sense only in general for the STATE OF THE DEAD, the WORLD OF THE
DEAD, the WORLD OF SOVLES DEPARTED, indifferently, and indefinitely, meaning
as well those in eternal ioies, as those in pains.] Labor you (Sir Refuter,)
to bring into the creed the maribones of a greek phrase, or an article of the
christian faith? if you be so idle headed, that you strive to have a new phrase
into the Creed, 1. Corinthians. 4
remember the kingdom of God is not in speech but in power. If you intend an
article of the faith, pagans and Poets are no such classical masters, to be
cited or followed in the mysteries of christian religion. What if it were true,
which here as your manner is, you avouch with a brazen face, y^ Homer, Plato,
and Plutarch did so use the word; is it therefore a consequent the scripture
must so speak? how many hundred Greek words have with Pagans their general
significations, which the holy ghost restrains to express Gods truth, and
serve Gods will? The greek words for Apostle, elder, Bishop, Deacon, Gospel,
Scripture, faith, hope, repentance, sinne^ the law, conscience, concupisence,
and infinite such like, do they not with Pagans import one thing, with
Christians an other thing, and that by the warrant of Gods word? touching hell
it self; with your classical writers, and masters of the Greek tongue, (I
mean even Homer, Plato, and Plutarch) are not (...), taken for good and
blessed spirits, yea for Gods, which the scriptures use only for devils?
Plutarchs book (...); of Socrates spirit; which thing also Plato mentions in
his Apology and dialogue De sapientia, means not Socrates Devil; neither
does Isocrates prescribe unto Demonicus by this rule, (...), that he should
worship the devil, but rather God; and yet by that word the new testament and
the Septuagint in the old intend only devils. (...) with the masters of the
Greek tongue is but a carper or reprehender, insomuch that most of Platoes
scholars were called (...), Apud Athen.
and yet in the new testament this is the proper name for the devil. (...)
Plutarch does take for the air, and deriueth that word from cold; Plutarch.
de primo frigido.
(...). Tartarus is so termed from cold, whence Hesiode calls it the ayrie
tartare; and he that shakes and trembles for cold, is said tartarizein. Yet
your instructor makes (...) the tail and prison in hell, and says, S. Peter
when he tells how God condemned the Angels, takes all the words from Homer
and HIS PROSE COMMENTARY. If he mean Eustathius the Christian Bishop, it is a
foul ouersigat; if he mean any other, he shall do well to prove, and not to
presume that Peter read Homer and his prose commentary to express the
punishment of Devils. Now if (...), and (...) have other significations and
acceptions with the masters (as you make them) of the greek tongue, and yet in
the new testament are wholly and only referred to note hell and the devils
thither adjudged; why may not the word HADES in like sort be taken from his
profane use among the heathen writers, and be applied by the Evangelists and
Apostles to signify hell? yea if the opinion which the pagan Poets, and
profane Philosophers held of HADES were false and repugnant to the christian
faith, how could the canonical writers of the new testament use the word, and
not change the sense? dare you so much as dream, that the holy Ghost would
canonize, the Poets fables and the Philosophers fancies of the world to come?
or if you be so foolish, as to forget the difference between light and
da^kenes, truth and falsehood, will any wise man entertain your poetical furies?

[The Gentiles, ( you will sat,) took HADES for the worlds of the dead, the
world of souls departed: generally and indefinitelie, were they in hell or
in heaven, and this is no error, ( you think,) against the faith.] But this is
an open falsehood committed against your own classical writers; and if your
cunning in the greek Poets be no profounder, the boys in Grammar schools
will deride it. I pray you sir by your Greek Poets, Homer, Hesiode, and
others what is HADES originallie, the name of a person, or of a place? I ask
you none other question, but that which every child acquainted with your
Poets can readily tell, which your masters of the Greek tongue, Plutarch,
and Plato confess; which every speech that you, or your Instructor brings
out of his Poets does confirm. And here (christian Reader) I must pray thy
patience and pardon, if I turn from the scriptures and fathers to the Poets
and their fables; I have no desire to it, nor delight in it; but such is the
insolence of these men grounded upon ignorance, that it may not be endured,
and without some entering into these matters, it will not be displaied. I will
say no more then I must needs, and omit what is not material.

Homer the first and eldest of your classical writers imagines that the three
sons of Saturnus, whom he supposes to be Gods, divided the government of
the whole world between them; Jupiter taking the sky and the air; Neptune
the water, with her deepes and rivers: and Pluto the heart of the earth with
all the dead of what sort soever. This third son of Saturn, and owner of
the dead, is he that Homer and all the Poets call (...) HADES; his name being
diversely declined and inflected to serve their verse, but still the same
person. Homer in the 15. of his Iliades makes Neptune thus to speak. Homer
Iliad. 15.
We are three brethren, the sons of Saturn by Rhea; Jupiter and I, (...);
the third is HADES the ruler of those yt lie (dead) in the earth. The whole was
divided into three parts; my lot was to dwell always in the sea, (...), and
HADES lot was to have the dark mist; and to Jupiter fell by lot the large
heaven with the sky and clouds. This HADES or God of the dead Homer calls
Iliad. 5.
(...), the god under the earth, and gives him in the same book these
properties, (...),

(...); HADES implacable and fierce; and for that cause of all ye gods the most
odious to men. Hesiode agrees with Homer, that Rhea companying with Saturn
brought him notable children.

Hesiod. in Theogonia,
(...),
(...), even mighty HADES that dwells in housen under the earth and has a
cruel and merciless heart. The same Hades he makes the governor of the
dead, as Homer does.

(...): Ibidem.

HADES was afraid that is ruler of the dead under the earth. This is that
hades which you so much talk of, to whose house your Poets make all the dead
just and unjust, good and bad to come; and therefore the most of your
authorities out of the Greek Poets and others have (...), understanding (...)
or (...), to show that the dead go or come to HADES HOUSE or dwelling.

The rest of your classical writers and masters of the Greek tongue, both
Plato and Plutarch allege and approve this fable of Homer. Plato in his
dialogue of rhetoric called Gorgias, makes Socrates thus to say; Plato in
Gorgia.
Hear then a very excellent tale which you will think a fable, but I a good
lesson. That which I will say, I will speak to you for a truth. As Homer
reports, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto divided the government, after they
received it of their father. There was a law touching men under Saturnus, and
ever was and still is with the gods, that such men as led a just and holy
life, when they departed hence should go to the Isles of the blessed, and
there live in all happiness without any evil; and they that had been wicked
and ungodly should go to the prison of punishment and vengeance which is
called Tartarus. The judges of these matters, in Saturnes time, and in the
beginning of Jupiters reign were the living of such as yet lived, and gave
judgment the same day that each man should die, wherefore their judgment was
corrupt. PLVTO the^ and the Gardians of the blessed Islands going to Jupiter
told him, that there came unto them men to either place unmeet for that
condition. To whom Jupiter answered, I will see it redressed. The judgments
are therefore now amiss, because they that are judged are covered round, for
they are judged alive, and so many that have wicked souls are compassed with
beauty, nobility, and riches, and many come to the place of judgment, and
depose they lived honestly, and so the judges are astonished; as also the
judges themselves are clogged, having their souls wrapped with their eyes, and
ears, and the rest of their body. First therefore men must be kept from
foreseeing the time of their death. The^ they must be judged when they are
naked from all these things, that is after death, and the Judge likewise must
be dead also, that he may be free from these lets, and wi^h his soul he must
view the soul of every man newly dead, forsaken of all his kind, and stripped
of al worldly pomp, that the judgment may be sincere. And I foreseeing this
before you, have appointed Judges, two of my sons Minos and Rhadamanthus out of
Asia, and a third which is Aeacus out of Europe. These when they are dead shall
judge in an open meade in the meeting of three ways, whereof two shall lead,
one to the Isles of the blessed, another to Tartarus. The souls of Asia shall
be judged by Rhadama^thus, and those of Europe by Aeacus, to Minos will I give
the prerogative to decide ye doubts that shall arise in either place: yt the
judgment may be very eue^ which shall send souls to their places. This is that
which I have heard, and believe to be true, and by their speeches am persuaded
there is some such thing. Plutarch. de consolatione ad Appollonium ad finem.
Thus far Plutarch cites out of Plato ye judges and places for the dead, and
all this within Plutoes kingdom under ye earth, which they call HADES: where as
well the places, and pleasures for the good, as the prisons and punishments
for the bad are in their conceit prepared and settled. And this if you doubt,
read either Ulysses descent to HADES described by Homer in the 11. book of his
Odisseas, or Aeneas journey to hell, set forth by Virgil in the sixth book of
his Aeneidos, or Dyonisius voyage to see Euripides, expressed by Aristophanes,
Aristophanes, in ranis
as also the like adventures of Hercules and Theseus mentioned by Euripides,
Euripides in Hercule furente.
and others, and you shall see THE WORLD OF THE DEAD, or THE WORLD OF SOVLES,
be they good or bad, to be in Plutoes kingdom, which the greek Poets call HADES:
and therefore unless the distemper of your brains make you weary of Christian
religion, and incline you to Paganism, I do not see what reason moves you to
bring Homers HADES to expound the Creed. And were you permitted so to do,
what gain you by it? For Homers HADES is ye region under the earth, where the
good are kept in pleasant fields, and the wicked in places of punishment, and
this is evidently the hell of the Poets and Pagans, to which by your own
classical and authentical exposition Christ did descend, if their HADES be
received into the creed.

[But Plato the wise Master takes it sometime for heaven, as namely in his
Phaedone, where speaking in the person of Socrates a little before his death he
says. The soul being an invisible thing goes hence to another place like to
it self, that is, to a noble, pure, and invisible, in HADES; in truth to a
good and wise God, whither if God will my soul shall presently go.] Did you
not propose Plato to be an expounder of the Creed, and prefer him as a wise
master before all the fathers, because you think he fitteth your humor
right. I could suffer him to have his praise; but in this case I must say of
him as Tertullian does, Tertul^ de anima.
Doleo bona fide Platonem omnium haereticorum condimentorium factum; Illius est
enim and in Phaedone, quod animae hinc euntes sint illinc, and inde hinc; I am
sorry in good sadness that Plato is become the Apothecary of al heresies. For
it is his opinion even in his Thaedone, that souls go hence thither, and
thence hither. Your wise Masters report of HADES and PLVTO, was the private
opinion of Socrates against the common consent of Homer and all the poets, and
against the received persuasion of the people. The conceit it self is full of
pride, error, and paganish infidelity, absurdity, and blasphemy. And yet
all this being very true, Platoes words importe no such thing, as you
imagine, that HADES is that heaven where God and his saints remain. And
therefore, Sir Confuter, if you be weary as well of the Apostles, as of the
fathers, and instead of Christ will have Plato to teach men the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven; England (where God be thanked there is a religious,
virtuous and wise prince, ruling with christian laws, and a number of learned
and grave both Counselors, Bishops, Judges, and others that will endure no
such prophanenes) is no fit place for you to bring in Platoes heaven. If I
prove not these exceptions which I take to your wise masters imagination, let
me bear the shame; if I do, look you and your fellows how well you deserve of
Christian religion to make the saints to rest, and Christ to reign either in
Platoes heaven, or in Homers hades.

For the first it is evident; the Poets all wi^h one consent placed HADES
BELOVVE UNDER THE EARTH, and not above in the skies, nor in heaven. Homer and
Hesiod you have heard. Aristopha in Ranis.
Aristophanes makes Dionysius desirous to see Euripides now dead, and
therefore sends him to Hercules to learn the way, to whom professing that
no man shall persuade him not to go to Euripides, Hercules replieth, (...);
will thou go TO HADES BELOVVE, to see him? where Plutoes kingdom is described
aunswerable to the rest of the Poets. In Euripides the ghost of Polydor
begins the first tragedy thus. Eurip. in Hecuba.
Here am I come leaving the dens of the dead, and the gates of darkness
(...), where HADES has his seat severed from the gods. Pindarus speaking
(...), of the godly that are in HADES, says, Apud Plutarch de consolatione ad
Apollonium.
(...); to them the strength of the son does lighten the NIGHT that is there
BELOW. Euripid: in Hercule fure^te
Euripides makes Hercules after the murder of his wife, and children to say,
(...). Dying I will go under the earth whence I came; Now whence Hercules came
is expressed before Ibidem.
(...) returning from the dark chambers of the queen of HADES BELOW. In like
sort Sophocles makes Ajax to say. Sophocles in Aiace flagellifero.
(...), the rest I will speak to the spirits BELOW IN HADES. So Hercules
remembering his works, says, with these arms I drew by force, that
inexpugnable Monster Sophocles in Trachin^^s.
(...), the three headed whelpe of HADES UNDER EARTH. Simonides showing how
many ways men end their lives, some by sickness, some by war, some by
sea, says; such as are tamed or conquered in war Simonides in vita^ humanam
(...), HADES sends under the black earth. Orpheus de^ deo.
Orpheus one of the eldest Masters of the Greek tongue without comparison,
that lived in the time of the Judges of Israel, as Suidas testifies, and not
so far infected with fables, as those Philosophers and Poets that came after
him, describing the true God, that, as he says, Moses wrote of, calls him,
(...); the king of the heavens, of the earth, of the sea, AND OF HADES, before
whom Devils do tremble, and the whole company of gods (or Angels) do fear.
Where in old Greek and good divinity HADES is severed from heaven, sea, and
earth, and consequently must be properly HELL. And so if you run over all
the Poets, you shall find that with one general consent they placed Hades not
only (...) below, but (...), under the earth. This was the opinion of the
people. Lucianus de luctu
The common people (says Lucian) persuaded by Homer, Hesiodus, and the rest of
the poets, and taking their poems for a law (...), believe HADES to be a deep
place under the earth; and that Pluto Jupiters brother reigns over that
gulf, the kingdom of the dead falling to him by lotte, and he ordering how
they shall live there below. The place was so called from the name of the
person whom they supposed to be governor of it; otherwise HADES was the
proper name of Pluto, as Plato himself confesses in Cratylo, Plato in Cratylo.
(...). As for HADES the most part of men seem to me to conceive by the name
that which is dark, or which can not be seen, and fearing the name they call
him PLVTO. And howsoever Socrates in that place, with a very false and ^ond
reason goes about to prove, that the name of HADES, as he thinks was not
thence derived but rather (...), from knowing al good things; which in deed is
but a jest, and by no possibility can come within the compass of that word;
yet both Plutarch, and the prose commentator upon Homer, neglect this utterly,
and uphold that which Socrates refused. Plutarch de primo ^rigido.
(...). Hades and Acheron (says Plutarch) have their names from (the air) that
is not seen, nor has any color. And in his discourse, whether a secret and
silent life be best, or no, Plutarch proposes this etymology as truer and
elder the^ So^rates fancy. Plutarch de occulte viue^do
(...) (...). Men ACCORDING TO THE ANCIENT TRADITIONS OF THEIR FATHERS,
thinking the sun to be Apollo, named him Delius, and Pythius. And the RVLER
of the contrary destiny (to life and light) whether he be a God, or a DEVIL,
they termed HADES, being the MASTER of dark night, and dead sleep; for that
when we depart hence, we go into an unknown and unseen place. So that
Socrates deriuation of Hades was both false and new, even as his opinion of
HADES to be an eloquent and bountiful God; and his reason is woorst of all,
that because men return not back again after death, therefore Plato in
Cratylo.
HADES does detain them with eloquent persuasions, and great rewards, which
makes him to be called Pluto. For the scripture assures us, that men dead can
not return again, though they were never so willing; and though God of his
goodness bestows everlasting bliss on his Saints; yet the rest would feign
be rid of their eternal misery, and can not; neither are they held in their
state with fair promises, or large benefits, but by the unalterable rigor of
Gods justice. Eustathius upon Homers words, that Achilles sent many a worthy
soul to HADES, says; (...), is a dark place under the earth, not to be
seen, appointed for souls, and is derived from (...) the privative, and (...)
to see, and is called also (...), and by contraction HADES. So when Homer
brings in Hectors wife complaining of her misery and saying, Iliad. 22
(...)
(...), Thou husband art gone to HADES house under the dens of the earth.
Eustathius adds; (...). This is a place under the earth, and so hid from
us. Therefore it is called Hades, that is an invisible air, which we can not
see. And howsoever Socrates pleased himself in framing this heaven, as you
call it, for himself, and a few others (for he admits none but
Philosophers into it) In dialog. Acaci and Me^nippi.
Lucian in his Dialogues of the dead, bitterly mocketh him, as being in Hell
with all the rest; howsoever he dreamed of an heaven for himself after his
departure hence.

How Paganish, and not only ridiculous but blasphemous Platoes heaven is,
appears by this, that Socrates makes SVVANNES his fellow servants to
Phoebus, Plato in Phedone.
and imagines they sing that day they die, (...), FORESEEING THE GOOD THINGS
THEY SHALL HAVE IN HADES. And further says that when they perceive they must
die, then chiefly and most of al they sing (...); rejoicing that they SHALL GO
TO GOD whose servants they are. And those words which Socrates spoke of
Swannes, foreseeing THE GOOD THINGS IN HADES, Page 9^.
you, Sir Confuter, in the abundance of your wit, note to prove HADES to be
heaven. And to this heaven though Socrates admit Swannes, yet he accepts no
men, but such as have been Philosophers, and those of the purest sort. As for
such as use popular and civil virtues, as justice and temperance, gotten by
care and continuance without Philosophy, his words are expressly these; Plato
in Phaedone.
(...). It is fit that such (souls) should return again into some such
political and tame kind either of BEES, VVASPES, or EMMETS, and after that
into men again. But into the kindred of the Gods it is not lawful for any to
come that has not been a Philosopher, and very pure at his departing hence.
Others that were slothful and filled their bellies, he says must be turned
into Asses, and such other beasts; and oppressors and wrong doers into Wolves,
Kites and Hawks. Of these his plain resolution is Ibidem.
that such souls wander, until by the earnest love of their bodily nature,
which follows them, they PVT ON BODIES again. And such bodies (of birds and
beasts) they put on as resemble the manners of their former life. Here is a
goodly world of souls to be brought out of Plato into the Creed; and Socrates
heaven, why you should fancy, I cannot guess, except it be, that none but very
pure and precise persons shall come thither, to whom you would feign be the
ringleader. But this is not all. In making HADES AND PLVTO, by which the Poets
mean the devil, to be a wise and bountiful God, has not your wise Master
fitted his new heaven with an excellent head? Plutarch moves the doubt whether
HADES be a God or a DEVIL, that has power over darkness and death: Homer and
Hesiode affirm, he dwells under the earth, and is implacable, cruel, and
hated of men. Porphyrie, no mean follower of Plato, concludes PLVTO (which is
all one with HADES as In Cratylo.
Plato confesses) to be the chief of all wicked spirits. Porphyries words
are, Citatur ab Eusebio de preparat. euangelica lib. 4. cap. 12.
(...). We do not without cause conjecture that all wicked spirits are under
Serapis; being led so to think not only by his ceremonies, but because
offerings to pacify, and sacrifices auerting rage are done to PLVTO, as we
have showed in our first book. Now Serapis is all one god with Pluto, and
therefore he is the greatest prince of Devils, and one that gives charms to
drive away spirits. Lo, here is Socrates wise and bountiful god, HADES AND
PLVTO, concluded by a great Platonicke, to be the chief devil; whose
judgment Eusebius follows. And in deed considering his place where he
dwells, his rage that he uses against men, for which he is so feared and
hated of them, and his sacrifices in which he delights, as also his power
over death and darkness, it is a clear case that Platoes HADES OR PLVTO is
the great devil in hell; whose crafts and sleigh^s, because he knew not as a
Pagan, he has promoted him to be a wise and liberal god; and you have
learnedly cited this wise devise to make him ruler of your heaven, whither you
send Christ and his Saints to live there for ever.

Now were it granted unto you, that Pluto and HADES (which by the description
of all your classical Poets is in deed the devil) were one of Platoes gods;
are you so little acquainted either with Plato or with Paganism, that you
presently conclude he is the true God of Heaven? Or that this invisible place
must needs be the kingdom of God? Look but in the latter end of this book,
which you allege for this very purpose: and there you shall see what pretty
fancies Socrates has of another invisible earth far above this, and waters
likewise, and trees, and flowers, and fruits, and beasts, and men that live
longer than we do here below, and without sickness; where also there are
temples and woods, in which the gods dwell familiarly; Plato in Phaedone circa
finem.
(...), That to see that earth is the sight of the blessed. But what be these
wicked fancies either to the Creed or to Christian Religion? Seeing therefore
your Greek Poets with one consent make HADES to be a god below under the
earth; and put under his power as well the Elisian fields and seats for the
just souls, as the prisons and dungeons for the unjust; and this fantastical
conceit of Socrates touching a special place for himself and such
Philosophers as he was, together with Swannes, beasts, trees, flowers,
fruits, as it was singular and secret to himself, so it was most absurd and
wicked; you may by no means bring your Classical writers that were Pagans to
expound the Creed; much less must you bind the holy Ghost in the new
Testament, to use the word HADES, as the infidels did; since the holy Ghost
only knows and speaks truth; and their imaginations of the dead, or as
you speak of the world of souls, was not only false and foolish, but impious
and blasphemous. And yet if you do admit them to be interpreters of the
Creed; which I utterly refuse for the causes I have told you; they make
directly against you. For HADES with them was the Ruler or place of souls that
were beneath under the earth, were they in rest or in pain; and that Christian
Religion will assure you must needs be hell, howsoever to bear out your
broken matter you begin half to doubt where hell is.

[The authenticke authors of the Greek tongue used hades for the place of the
blessed souls ( you say) and not properly for hell. So Leonidas cheered up
his men not to fear such a blessed death; to suppe in hell had been a cold
comfort unto them.] You read nothing your self belike, that you hit nothing
right. In Plutarch whom you allege, this is no comfort given by Leonidas; but
he seeing the Persians now in sight, as his men were dining; and in number so
infinite above his, who were but an handful, wills them to make short, and
says; So dine, as men that must suppe in HADES; that is, care not for meat
since death is so near; but prepare to fight for your Country. It shows a
resolution to dye, but no consolation after death more than they knew before;
which was, that in HADES were places as well for the good to rest, as for the
bad to be punished; but both were below under earth, and in Plutoes kingdom,
as the Gentiles supposed. Neither did Homer mean to make a new heaven, for
such as Achilles slew, but to send them to the place where he thought all
souls did abide; and therefore he put Achilles soul in Plutoes region under
the earth, as well as the rest of the Grecians and Trojans, that died in that
Battle. And because your Proctor will needs have the words that Achilles
spirit spoke to Ulysses at his descent to hell, to be a dictionarie for
hades, what place it is, against which if the Creed had gone, it had been a
skoffe to all Hellas, and had hindered all the proceeding of the Gospel: Let
us see whether his own dictionarie will not return all his allegations upon
his own head. If HADES in the Creed must be the same place, where Achilles
spirit was, whither Ulysses descended, and where he saw and spoke with so many
Ghostes, then apparently HADES must be the Poets HELL. At Ulysses entrance
Homer telling how the souls came about him says, Odiss. 11.
(...):
The souls flocked together out of Erebus; now (...) is the very place where
the Poets place Cerberus, and whence the same Poet says, Hercules Iliad. 8.
(...):
Was sent to fetch from Erebus the dog of HATEFVLL HADES. Again Ulysses
mother asking him how he came to that place, says Odiss. 11.
(...),
My son how came thou under this dark mist? Of Ajax Ghost, who would not
for anger speak to Ulysses, Homer says, Ibid.
(...):
He went away to other souls in Erebus. There Ulysses says he saw Sisyphus
Ibid.
(...),
Suffering grievous torments, as also Titius and Tantalus to endure the like.
There he saw Ibid.
(...) (...):
(...). Hercules strength a Ghost: for he himself was in joy with the
immortal Gods. There Achilles spirit took so small comfort, that when
Ulysses said, Odiss 11.
There is none happier then thou Achilles; before, whiles thou liuedst, we
honored thee as a God, and now art thou a great commander among the Dead; be
not therefore so fadde; he replied, Praise not death to me Ulysses, I had
rather serve any poor man (on earth) as his drudge, though he were scant able
to live, then to reign here over all the dead. If the place be dark and
deep (...): If Cerberus be there which the Hesiod. in theogonia.
Poets make the very keeper of hell; if there be grievous and cruel
punishments for such as deserve them, Virgil. li 6.
if the best have there so little joy of the place, as Homer makes Achilles
ghost here to confess, what place can this be but that hell, which all the
Poets acknowledge; though in some part thereof there he worse punishments
then in other?

[This is not that Tartarus, you will say, which the Poets make the ^ayle and
Prison for the wicked.] What is that to the purpose, if some punishments in
hell be worse than other? Look to those whom the Poets place without the
dungeon, and see whether they be in heaven or no? And because you and your
friends talk so much of the world of Souls, and of heaven to be found in
HADES, and INFERI; and your self bring Virgill as one of your Classical
authors to prove this matter, Page 67.
Who though he were a Poet, and feigned many things, yet he spoke ( you say)
familiarlie, and after the vulgar use, and for the substance of the matter
uttered touching heaven and hell, the opinion of the world then: I must pray
the Readers leave and patience, whiles I follow you in your own fantastical
devise, though against mine own liking, to let the simple see what your world
of souls, and your heaven is, even in those very writers, which you produce
for this purpose; and whether they be fit things to be Presidents for the
Creed or no. In Plutoes kingdom under earth, whether Aeneas went to see his
Father Anchises, Aeneidos 6.
Virgil your authenticke author makes besides Tartarus, Page 101.
and your goodly Elisian fields the eternal habitation (as you call it) of the
blessed, many lodgings. As first for Aeneidos 6.
sickness, care, weeping, poverty, labor, wars, discord, dreams, and death,
besides for Centaures, Briareus, Hidra, Chimera, Gorgon, Harpies, and Gerion,
and sundry other monsters. There wander the Ghosts whose bodies are not buried
a hundred year before they can get over the foul and silthie river of Styx.
The other side of Styx, is kept by Cerberus the Dog with three heads; where
first are placed the souls of infants weeping and crying; then such as were
unjustly condemned to death, next, such as being weary of their lives killed
themselves, now willing to suffer poverty, or any pain on earth, so they
might return to life again. In the fourth place are Lugentes Campi, the
woeful fields of such as died for love; in the fifth, Warriers and such as
pursued each other with the sword, where Aeneas saw all the Grecians and
Trojans that dyed at the siege of Troy. Of all these places, where yet are no
punishments, the Poet makes Deiphobus to say to Aeneas, what cause drives
thee, Vt tristes sine fool domos, loca turbida adires,
To come to the woeful housen without sun, and loathsome places^? Then leads
the left hand to Tartarus, which these men so much harp at, compassed with
fiery Phlegeton, and there are the punishments of the wicked; then Plutoes
palace, and on the right hand, Amaena vireta fortunatorum nemorum sedesque
beatae, The sweet springs of the fortunate woods, and the blessed seats. Here
is the heaven which this confuter alleges out of Virgil, and here Aeneas
found his father Anchises, in a green vale, viewing the souls that drank of
the water of oblivion, and were t^ take new bodies on earth again. His words
are, Aeneidos 6.
Animae quibus altera fato,
Corpora debentur, Lethei ad ^luminis vndam
Securos latices and long a obliuia potant.
The souls who by destiny are to take bodies the second time, do here at the
River of Lethe drink the waters of utter forgetfulness, no way remembering
whatsoever they saw or knew, either whiles they first lived, or during the time
of their abode under earth. And because it seemed strange to Aeneas, that
souls should come to take other bodies, though this be right Platoes fancy in
his Phaedone, Anchises tells his son the secrets of Platoes Purgatory,
heaven, and resurrection, as Virgil conceived them, who was a great Platonist.
When men die (says he) all the infections of their bodies cannot presently be
taken from their souls. Aeneidos ^.


Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque maloru^ supplicia expendunt, Therefore the
souls (of such as are curable, for the desperate and insanable, are cast into
Tartarus, and never come thence by Platoes own words) are purged with pains*
and abide the punishment of their former infection, some are hanged up to the
wind, some are plunged under water, some are cleansed by fire: Quisque suos
patimur manes, Aeneidos 6:
exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta aruatenemus,
Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit,
Aethereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem,
Has omnes vbi mill rotam voluere per annos,
Letheum ad fluuium Deus euocat agmine longo,
Scilicet immemores supera vt conuexa reuisant,
Rursus and incipiant in corpora velle reuerti.
We every one of us suffer our clensing, and after that we are sent out into
the large Elysian fields, where but a few of us inhabit these pleasant
places, until long time has taken away the bodily infection, and leaves
the aethereall sense pure, and the vigor of the fiery and simple air. Then
after a thousand years God calls all these souls (thus purged and placed in
the fortunate seats) to the flood of Lethe, that they may go to the earth
again, with utter forgetfulness of all things, and begin to desire to
return to new bodies. To these Elysian fields when Aeneas should come, the
Poet makes Sybilla say, Aeneidos 16.
Ad genitorem imas Erebi descendit ad vmbras;
Aeneas descends to his father, even to the souls below in Erebus: And that
Erebus is one of the infernal Gods, as the Poets call them, can be no
question. For when Dido minding to kill her self prepared Sacra Ioui stygio,
Sacrifices to the infernal Jupiter, the Poet makes her Priest to invoke,
Aeneidos 4.
Tercentum tonat ore deos Erebumque Chaosque, Three hundred gods, and Erebus
and Chaos.

This is the world of Souls that Virgil delivered in his time; which he
collected out of Plato; this is the heaven, that is contained in HADES and
INFERI. Judge thou Christian Reader, whether this be not the high way to
Paganism, to tell us that this is the heaven, where the Saints of God are in
rest, and whether Christ ascended. For my part, but that I think this confuter
talks of that he knows not, I must have proclaimed him for a Pagan; and
therefore after he sees it, if he persist to say that heaven is either
Homers HADES, or Virgils INFERI, I may not spare to discharge the duty of a
Christian man, to let the whole realm understand, that this is open
infidelity, cloaked under the name of Purity. Platoes world of Souls where
it alters from this, is rather worse than better. For he says, the souls
of evil men are clogged with their bodily uncleanness, and wander, Plato in
Phaedone.
(...), about tombs and graves, as it is said, and then put on the bodies of
beasts, birds, or worms. And y^u, Sir Confuter, lighting on the first part of
those words, openly falsify them, and lewdly misapply them. For in steed of
(as it is said) you translate, ( Page 9^.
as it is commonly said) and by that word" COMMONLY of your own adding, and
referred to the former words, where there is a manifest distinction or pause
betwixt them, you bid the reader note that HADES is commonly called heaven. For
thus you write: Again, Plato says of heaven, that it is an unseen estate,
even HADES, as it is commonly called, which you will by the side to be noted;
where Plato in that place speaks not one word of heaven. But such is the
misery of your cause, you must belie your authors, or else you will lack
proofs for your humors. And touching the souls of all men that are borne,
Plato holds their souls had bodies before, and stay in HADES, until the
time come that they must have bodies again, and therefore all our knowledge
here is but the remembering of that we knew before, when our souls were in
other bodies; which is the opinion that Tertullian charge him with: His own
words are, Plato in Phaedone.
(...). There is an ancient assertion which we remember, that souls
departing hence are there, and come hither again, and are newborn from the
dead. And least you should think he did not consent to it; he says somewhat
after, Ibid.
(...). We are not deceived confessing all this; but there is in very truth a
returning of souls to live again on earth; and of the dead spring the living.
Consult you and your Instructor whether you will bring this HADES or world of
souls into the Creed; or whether the thief from the Cross ascended to this
heaven, together with the soul of our Savior. But if these be intolerable
and abominable heresies to have souls pass from body to body; and Platoes
HADES be nothing else but a continual chopping and changing of souls from
life to death, and from death to life again, hale back your HADES from the
Creed, howsoever your Hellas will take pepper in the nose to see her follies
refused.

Cicero is your last authenticke writer that you bring to prove Inferi to be
heaven, out of whom you note three things. Page 107.
First, that he utterly misliked the opinion of the old Latins, that thought
the world of the dead was under the earth, and therefore gave this term
INFERI, to signify the same: this he openly misliketh, that the damned souls
were beneath in the earth, or at least in such kind of torments as many did
imagine. How much more did he condemn them, that thought all the deceased
souls were beneath, under, or in the earth? The blessed he thought rather, as
Plato did, to ascend up to heaven. Page 108.
Secondly, you note, That although he rejected the opinion of the former
Latins, yet he retained the Latin phrase, as being now common and familiar
every where; which rose of old from that opinion, thinking all the dead after
this life to be infra, beneath. He had learned to think wiselier, but yet he
spoke so, as the vulgar phrase had prevailed, according to Aristotle's rule; we
must think as the wise do, but speak as the people do. Thirdly, Tullie
says of this opinion followed great errors. If a man would hire you to speak
against your self, you cannot do it in playner manner than here you do. You
confess that Cicero was the first (for before him you bring none) that
misliked the opinion of the old Latins (whose seat and tongue in Italy was
then 1200. years old) that the world of the dead was under the earth, and to
signify so much, they used the word Inferi; which had continued in the
mouths of all men learned and unlearned, till Ciceroes time, to express the
state of the dead. Secondly, you say the phrase was so common and familiar
every where for the world of the dead, that Cicero himself, though he
thought otherwise durst not depart from the vulgar phrase which had so
generally prevailed. Then by your own confession we have thus much, that
Inferi for twelve hundred years in the mouths of all men ignorant, and
learned among the Latins and Romans did signify the state of such souls as
were under the earth. Now let Cicero say what he can to the contrary; his
authority is no way so great that it should ouerwaigh so long and settled a
consent. Great errors followed hereof Tullie says. And you affirm the like,
but not so great as Tullie himself mayntayned in rejecting that opinion. For
he in some pride of his tongue and conceit of his wit brought* heaven and hell
to be utterly nothing.

That the old Latins thought all men after death to go under the earth I see
no proof; I find rather the contrary confessed by your own author. He
alleges out of Ennius, Tuscula. quaest li. 1.
Romulus in caelo cum dijs agit aeuum, vt fama assentiens dixit Ennius. Romulus
leads his life in heaven with the Gods, as Ennius approving the fame writes.
And again; Abijt ad Deos Hercules. Vetera iam ista, and religione omnium
consecrata. Hercules is gone to the Gods. These things are ancient and sealed
with the religious consent of all men. So that Ciceroes words which you
allege, cannot import that they thought so of all men, for then they must so
have thought of Romulus and Hercules, which Cicero confesses all men
acknowledge to be in heaven; but they supposed so of most men; which amongst
Pagans, as they were, was no such great error, as you would make it, nor any
way so great as that which Cicero labored to establish in place thereof. For
he through the insolency of his opinion of himself, or inconstancy of his
disposition, or both, would sometimes have an Inferi, or hell below; and
sometimes he would have none. Examples whereof are evident in his writings. In
his spleen against Antonie, he says; Philippica. 14
Illi igitur impij, quos occidistis, distis etiam ad Inferos poenas parricidij
luent: vos autom qui extremum spiritum in victoria effudistis, piorum estis
locum et sedem consequuti. Those wicked, whom ye slew, shall IN HELL suffer the
punishment of their parricide: you that lost your lives in obtaining the
victory have obtained the place and seat of the blessed. In his bravery
defending Cluentius, he cast it all off as a foolish fable. Pro Cluentio.
Quid tandem illi mali mors attulit? nisi forte ineptijs ac fabulis ducimur, vt
existimemus illum apud Inferos impiorum supplicia perferre, et actum esse
praecipitem in sceleratorum sedem atque regionem: quae si falsa sunt, id quod
^mnes intelligunt, quid ei tandem aliud mors eripuit praeter doloris sensum?
What harm could (Cluentius) do unto (Oppianicus condemned and banished for his
lewdnes) by killing him? unless we believe toys and fables to think he
endured the punishment of the wicked in hell, and that he was cast headlong
into the region and prison of the ungodly? which (conceits) if they be false,
as all men may easily understand, what hurt could death do him, but take from
him all sense of grief? To make a reason for his Client, that by killing his
adversary, afflicted with penury and misery, he should rather do him a good
turn, then a spite, he utterly rejects, as a fable, that the wicked have any
punishments after this life; which in the former place against Antonius
soldiers he urged as vehemently for a truth.

And though in this place he tax, as you say, the ignorance of the old
Latins, yet in an other place, he commends their wisdom, for the self
same position. Oration in Caulin 4.
Itaque vt aliqua in vita formido improbis esset posita, apud Inferos eiusmodi
quaedam illi Antiqui supplicia impijs co^stituta esse volueru^i, quod videlice^
intelligebant his remetis non esse mortem ipsam pertime scendam. Therefore to
terrify the wicked in this life, THOSE ANCIENT Fathers held there were some
such punishments appointed IN HELL for the wicked, because they saw without
the^ death was no way to be feared. And, Sir Refuter, are you a Christian, that
think it worth the noting out of a profane Orator, that it is a foolish fable
to think, the wicked are punished after this life in hell? Uphold you the
proud and lewd conceit of a Paga^ against the settled and revealed judgments
of God by his word? dare you add of your own head (for your author has no
such word) Page 106.
that the ignorance OF THE TRVTH began this opinion, that Inferiwere under
the earth, and the terrors of hell also? I see your devise; you would have hell
every where; and TORMENTS OF HELL you would have none, but such as Christ by
your assertion suffered in his soul here on earth; and because you want good
authority to countenance this matter, you read us a Lecture out of Cicero,
that he thought so before you, and that he is a very authenticke and
Classical writer. But keep this lesson till you get none but Atheists and
Infidels to be your hearers; they will thank you for it; Christian cares do
abhor it; and will detest your prophanes as much as they do Ciceroes. For if
there be no punishment in hell, fure there is no hell, and he that decreaseth
the terror, decreaseth the truth of it: therefore the old Latins did not
err. But your New Orator thinks he may buyld and ouerturne hell and heaven
at his pleasure.

As he deals with hell, so does he with heaven; somtymes he will have one,
and sometimes he cannot tell whether there be any such habitation for souls or
no. And the heaven which he would have, is a Mansion of his own making. Such
authors you bring us to expound the Creed, and to outface all the Fathers,
that they themselves cannot tell what they say. Where he purposely disputes of
the seat and sanctuary for the soul after death, he concludes the whole
discour^e, as doubtfully as he began. Tuscula. quaest. lib. 1. ad sinem.
Si supremus ille dies non extinctionem, sed commutationem affert loci, quid
optabilius? sin autem perimit ac delet omnino; quid melius quam in medijs vitae
laboribus obdormiscere, et ita conniuc^te^ somno sepeliri sempiterno? If the
day of our death bring not a perishing but changing of places, what can be
more to be wished for? But if it utterly quench and extinguish (body and
soul) what can be more acceptable amidst the troubles of this life, then as it
were wincking to slumber, and shutting our eyes to fall into an everlasting
sleep? Ibidem.
Habes somnum imaginem mortis, eamque, quotidie induis, and dubitas quin sensus
in morte nullus sit, quum in eius simulachro videas esse nullum sensum? Thou
have sleep which thou daily triest, for an image of death; and doubtest thou
but there is no sense in death, when thou find no sense in sleep, which is
the pattern of death? Now on the other side for Ciceroes heaven, which you
will needs bring into the Creed under the name of Inferi, he makes it no
reward of virtue, nor gift of grace to be bestowed where it pleases God; but
he affirms there is a fiery air above, of which souls are made; and
therefore as soon as the soul is loosed from the body, it flies upward as
fire does, by a natural motion, unto the place, which is like to it self, and
there stays, and is nourished with the self same things, with which the
stars are nourished.

Ibidem.
Quae quum conste^t, perspicuum debet esse, animos quum e corpore excesserint,
sieve illi sint spirabiles, sieve igne^, sublime ferri: accedit vt eo facilius
animus euadat ex hoc aere, quem saepe iam crassum appello, eumque perrumpat,
quod nihil est animo velocius. Qui si permanet incorruptus, suique similis,
necesse est ita feratur, vt penetret and diuidat omne coelum hoc, in quo nubes,
imbres, ventique coguntur. Quam regionem quum superau^t animus, naturamque sui
similem contigit, and agnouit, vinctus ex anima tenui, and ex ardore solis
temperato ignibus insistit, et finem altius se efferendi facit. Quum enim sui
similem and leuitatem and calorem adeptus est, tanquam paribus examinatis
ponderibus, nulla^ in partem mouetur. Eaque ei demum naturalis est seeds, quum
ad sui similem penetrauit, in quo, nulla re egens, alitur and sustentatur,
ijsdem rebus quibus astra sustentantur and aluntur. It is long and tedious
(good reader) to be troubled with these profane follies; but because the
confuter labors so much to have Ciceroes world of souls and his heaven into
the Creed, and in respect of him disgraceth all other writers as ignorant of
the latin tongue, these words will plainly show thee, what an audacious,
irreligious, and heathenish attempt that is; and how absurdly and lewdly he
says, Cicero had learned to think wiselyer then they, that said hell was
below in the earth. For they delivered a truth, and this of Ciceroes is a
false, foolish and wicked fancy. The English of his words is in effect this.
These things being certain, it ought to be a clear case, that our souls when
they leave the body, whether they be of an aerie or fiery nature, do move
upward. A good help for the soul with more ease to pass and break through
this gross air here below is this, yt nothing is swifter than the soul.
Which remaining vncorrupt, and always like it self, OF NECESSITY MVST
ASCEND, and pearce, and divide all THIS HEAVEN (or air) in which the clouds,
winds, and rain engender. Which region when the soul has once passed, and
touched, and perceived a nature like to it self, mixed of a subtle air, and
the temperate heat of the sun; in that fiery region, IT STAYS, and makes
an end OF ASCENDING ANY HIGHER. For when it has gotten like both heat and
pureness (of the air) balanced as it were with equal waights, it moves no
way. AND THIS IS THE NATURAL SEAT OF THE SOVLE, when it comes to a like air
to it self; in which needing nothing, IT IS NOVRISHED and fed with THE
SELFSAME THINGS, WITH WHICH THE STARS ARE NOVRISHED and sustained.
Ciceroes heaven is nothing but an heap of heathenish impieties. The first, that
the substance of the soul consists of fire or air; the second, that of
necessity it ascends upward as fire does. The third, that when it comes to
a pure air and temperate heat of the sun, it stays there, and ascends
no higher. The fourth, that this is the natural seat for the soul, and thence
it moves no way. The fifth, that it is there nourished and sustained with the
self same things, with which the stars are. The consequents to this heaven
are most horrible. First that all souls by necessity of their nature being in
this place, there are consequently none in HELL, nor none in heaven, and so
both those places are utterly emptied by your eloquent Master. Next that, when
the stars and skies shall be melted and dissolved with fire, then must the
souls of all men be likewise dissolved, consisting of the same matter, which
they do, and so utterly extinguish. Lastly, Gods promises, and threats are all
frustrate, if he can do his enemies no more hurt, nor his servants more good,
then this heaven affoordeth. And therefore if you bring the world of souls, or
this heaven into the Creed, I must refuse the Article for open and evident
points of Infidelity, which I suppose, the Apostles, nor Apostolic men never
meant, when they made the Creed.

Yet this place such as it is, Cicero, you say, called it Inferi. Sir if you
leave lying, you must leave writing. For you can skant write a true word.
Cicero does no where call this place Inferi; but howsoever he had his private
conceits as a Philosopher, yet when he spoke before the senate, or the people,
he was forced to yield to such opinions, and to use such words as were commonly
received with all men, and that is the direction which Aristotle gives by the
rule which you allege, that though we must learn to think as wise men do; yet
we must be content to speak as the people do, not that by so speaking we must
alter the nature and propriety of the words, which we use; but mynding to
advise or persuade the multitude, we must condescend as well to their vulgar
phrases, as to their general and received opinions. And therefore as the
people thought all men dying to descend under the earth to Inferi, so Cicero
speaking in open place uses this same phrase, whatsoever he privately thought
of the place where the dead were.

From Pagans (Sir Refuter) you return to Christians, and whom before you
accused for altering and changing the authe^ticke use of words, you now
allege as observing the true propriety of the same word, for which you did
challenge them before. Page 101.
Hereunto let us add ( say you) that the latter learned writers even
Christians have also espied and granted this propriety of the latin word
Infernum or Inferi, as also of the Greek HADES. Ierom says, in Ose: ca. 13.
Infernus is a place where the souls are included either in rest or in pains.
The farther you go, the more you show, you understand neither Pagans nor
Christians. The fault you found with the latin Fathers was, that they Page 96.
use the word Inferi to signify hell properly and particularly, that is the
place of the Damned: or else an other particular place under the earth a part
of hell and not far from hell it self, where souls remained if not in
pains, yet in prison, and far from the place of eternal blessedness and joy
but this you affirm is a mere and plain abusion of the word. And within two
leaves, when Ierom says the very same thing, which you misliked before, and
called a mere and plain abusion of the word; you confess he espied the true
propriety of the word Infernus. This is banding" of Balls in a tennis Court,
and not any searching after a truth in the church of God. But when your
learning reaches no further, you must needs breath out your ignorance, or
bridle your tongue, which has run so long on a voluntary, that you cannot
tell when you be out, nor when you be in. Ierom indeed was of opinion that
before Christ's death the souls of all, as well good as bad, were shut up in a
place within the earth; the good in rest and expectance of Christ's coming
thither, by him to be delivered; the badde in pains and torments. This place
common to both sorts, but which different effects, Ierom calls Infernus, which
in our English tongue is hell. Of this place he says. in Ose^ ca: 13
Infernus locus est in quo animaerecluduntur sieve in refrigerio sieve in poenis.
Hell is a place in which souls are included, either in rest or in pain. Here
you say Ierom espied the propriety of the latin word Infernum or Inferi. Be
it so since you will needs have it so. But Infernum in this place does no way
signify the kingdom of heaven; Ergo the true propriety of the word Infernum
does not signify the kingdom of heaven. The Mayor is your own. The Minor by
Gods grace I will prove even out of Ierom. Mark well his words.

Hiero. in epitaph Nepot. ad Heliodorum.
Quid simile Infern^^ and regna caelorum? What likeness have Infernus and the
kingdom of heaven? you say Infernus is taken by Jerome for the kingdom of
heaven; Jerome himself tells you the one has no likeness to the other. Are
you not caught like a long beaked thing in your own grin? and because you
shall perceive it is not a trick, but a truth that I press you wi^h out of
Ierom, that INFERNVS by no means is the kingdom of God, and consequently
must be properly hell, (except you will build new receptacles for souls
after Christ's ascension where they may be, neither in hell nor in heaven,) you
shall have more out of Ierom touching the true proprieties of these words. In
Amos. ca. 9
CERNE PROPRIETATES; AD INFERNVM DESCENDITVR, AD COELVM CONSCENDITVR. MARK THE
PROPRIETIES (of these two words:) TO HELL MEN DESCEND, TO HEAVEN MEN ASCEND.
And again, In Ecclesiast. cap. 9.
Nota ante aduentum Christi, quamuis sanctos, omnes Inferni lege detentos.
Porro quod sancti post resurrectione^ domini nequaquam teneantur inferno
testatur Apostolus dicens; melius est dissolui and esse cum Christo; Qut autem
cum christo est, vtique non tenetur in Inferno. Note that before Christ's
coming all, even the saints themselves, were detained under the law of hell:
but that after the resurrection of our Savior they are not held in hell, the
Apostle witnesses when he says; It is better to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. And he that is with Christ certainly is not detained in hell. There is
no shifting from the force of these words. Before Christ's coming the saints
were in Inferno, after his ascension they were not. For he that is with Christ
is not in Inferno. Say if you dare that Infernus here is the kingdom of God.
For then these absurdities will pursue you: That after Christ's ascension the
saints are not in the kingdom of heaven, and he that is with Christ is not in
the kingdom of Christ: wherefore maugre your bearde, if you have any,
Infernus with Ierom is truly and properly hell, and in no wise the kingdom
of heaven, as you imagine. Thus thrive you by your own authors, whom you
produce to make the world believe that formerlie HADES and INFERI did signify
heaven: such heavens if you be wise, keep your self from, neither profess to
expound the Creed by the Classical masters of the greek tongue, being Poets
and Pagans. What is to be thought of that opinion of the Fathers that the
saints before Christ's coming were in Inferno, in hell, but free from fear or
torment, though in some darkness, as also whence they took the ground of that
assertion, I have showed in the end of the Vide page 189 et sequent.
treatise before as much as needed to this question; there with ease it may be
perused,

[They mistook, you will say, the word Infernum in the old testament, and
thence grew their opinion, that the Patriarks and prophets before Christ's
coming went to hell; but the scriptures had no such meaning; for neither the
word Sheol with the Hebrews, nor the word Hades with the Septuagint had any
such sense, to signify hell. And this a notable argument, yt Hades signifies
the world of souls, or general state of the dead, were they in hell or in
heaven.] We are all this while out of our proper element to sift heathen
philosophers and Poets for the meaning of the creed, and a little smattering
in the Greek tongue made the Refuter so arrogant, that he bid defiance to all
the fathers both greek and Latin, as unable to understand one poor word in
the Creed, which the church of Christ proposed to every child to learn, and
to every catechist to know. But now we are returned to the scriptures
again, (for Fathers they leave as corrupters of the old both faith and
phrase) we shall go through with more ease, and end with more speed. That
Sheol or Hades do signify heaven, either in the Scriptures of the old or
new Testament, or with the Septuagint which are the translators of the Hebrew
into Greek, I utterly deny; and no man living shall ever be able to make
any proof thereof; on which issue I am content to join with any man that is
learned and sober, for the hazard of either of our credits. If Sheol, and Hades
in the scriptures never signify heaven, then can they not signify THE WORLD
OF SOVLES: for so much as there is no one place common to all souls departed
this life, but some are in hell, and some in heaven; and for one word to
signify both hell and heaven so far distant one from the other, and so much
repugnant one to the other, is somewhat strange, except it could be strongly
proved. Chaos did import the whole mass of heaven and earth before they were
distinguished, but since they were severed, and settled by the wonderful
wisdom and mighty power of God so far apart one from the other, and so much
unlike one to the other, there are words in the scripture which note all that
God made, but none that comprise heaven and hell, excluding the rest. S. Paul
uses Romans 8.
(...) for the creature, and Ephesians. 1
(...) for the making of the world, and our savior uses Matthew. 12.
(...) for this world and the next, where nothing is excepted; but that heaven
and hell should come to be included in one word and the rest excluded, I see
neither why, nor how it should be. For where words are common, some things
must also be common, as needful to be expressed by those words; but to
souls in heaven and hell no positive thing is common; all things are rather
contrary. Their bodies they want in both places, because they are souls;
otherwise their states be as repugnant in all points, as light and darkness,
Christ and Belial, yea as heaven and hell in which they are; and therefore as
light and darkness, faith and infidelity, truth and error have no common word
to comp^ise them being contraries each to other; no more have heaven and hell
as they are she rewards of the just and unjust; for so much as all things in
either are directly repugnant each to other. Again that SHEOL or HADES may
possibly signify heaven I utterly deny, because in heaven besides the souls
of men, there are the elect angels of God, to whom if any man dare apply
SHEOL or HADES, he must give me leave to think his judgment to be weak, and
his faith unsound.

[ Sheol and Hades, you will say signify all that are dead in either place.]
But you must remember, that both these words in the Scriptures do properly
signify places and not persons. For though the ancient Greeks used the word
HADES, first for a person, and then for the place which that person governed;
yet the holy ghost (knowing that the person which the Pagans meant was in
deed the Devil) uses the word for the place, and not for the person, except
the text be figurative. In Sheol it was never doubted but that it always
signified a place, and never any person. Now if neither Sheol nor Hades can
signify both places, I mean heaven and hell, then can they not signify the
world of souls; for they be dispersed in both those places.

[It cannot be denied, you will say, but the old testament refers Sheol, as
the Septuagint do Hades, both to the godly and to the wicked after death.] It
is most true that Sheol in Hebrew, and Hades in Greek are applied in the old
Testament both to the good and bad; The Question is not to what men, but to
which parts of men, good or bad, Sheol and Hades are referred. To the bodies of
men, good and bad, lying dead in the grave they are sometimes applied; to the
souls of the godly, as detained in either, they are never applied. Sheol and
consequently HADES with the Septuagint, imports the whole death that is due
to sin, and every part thereof; but by no means heaven, where the souls of
the saints are, nor any part of that bliss, which they possess. Since then
as well the death of the body in this world, as the death of the soul in the
next world were the wages of sin; Sheol and Hades do sometimes signify the
general state of dead bodies, as when the Scripture describes rottenness,
silence, forgetfulness, senselessenesse, contempt, dishonor, and such like to
be in Sheol. And the same word when it is referred to the souls of the
wicked as there detained, or of the godly as thence delivered; for so much as
the soul cannot be enclosed in the grave; of necessity the pit prepared for
the souls of sinners must be, by all such textes of Scriptures, intended. But
that Sheol or Hades should signify the world of Souls, as well in heaven as
in Hell, neither has this Refuter brought any Text or reason for it, neither
will he ever be able to prove it. And howsoever one of late has taken upon
him to talk of those things, like one of the Titanes with big and bombasted
terms; I, seeing nothing in that fardell of his but Riddles and raylinges,
mean not to alter my course.

Then touching the sense of Sheol in the old Testament, I take it to be
clear, that it sometimes signifies the grave or the state of dead bodies;
but never the world of souls, which phrase the Refuter has caught by the
end, hoping at length to conueie it into the Creed. But he must first show
us where he finds any such thing in the Scriptures, before we may suffer
him to make it an Article of our faith. Against it every place is a proof;
but for it none that I read, or they have yet alleged. They shifte hands,
and in steed of the world of souls they bring in the grave, or the state of
dead bodies; which is but a vain flourish, to propose one thing, and to
prove an other. And though you (Sir Refuter) go to varying of phrases which I
think is your best skill; as, Page 97.
The state of the dead, the world of the dead, the world of souls
departed; yet I must let you understand there is great difference betwixt
these speeches. Sheol may extend to their bodies whose souls do live in
heaven: to their souls it cannot; and therefore you must not chop in the one
for the other, as your instructor does, who when he would prove the world of
souls, falls up above head and ears into the grave. The one you shall
every where light on, of the other there is no mention. As when Jacob said to
his sons, Genes. 42.
you will make my hoare hairs descend to Sheol with sorrow; and likewise when
David said to Solomon, 3. Reg. 2
thou shall make (Shemeis) hoare hairs descend to Sheol with blood: are there
white hairs or blood in the world of souls, as there are in the grave? this
is the state of dead bodies, but not of souls departed. In the destruction of
Core, Dathan and Abiran, the Scripture says; Numb. 16
the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their howsen, and they
descended, and all that were with them alive to Sheol. Alive is both body and
soul in every man's eye. For had those two been severed, they had been dead.
Do the bodies of men descend to your world of souls? or is it plain that in
this place must be meant by Sheol either hell which received both their bodies
and souls that were in that rebellion against God; or at least the heart of
the earth, which received them living, whereas other men die before they are
committed to the earth? Psalm. 49.
like sheep (says David) shall they be laid in Sheol. Are there sheep, or
any resemblance of sheep in your world of souls; or does David rather
mean, that, as sheep are bound, and then slain, and cast on heaps, so
shall the wicked be handled? now as many places in the scriptures as note
Sheol to be below, cannot be referred to your world of souls; for they are as
well on high in heaven, as below in hell. And therefore of force Sheol must in
all those places either importe hell which is below, or the grave which is
lower then the earth whereon men do live. Psalm. 86.
Thou have delivered my soul (says David) from the lower Sheol. And Esaie of
the King of Babell: Esa. 14.
Sheol below was afraid at thy coming, and raised up her mighty men to
meet thee, and to say unto thee, art thou also weakened, as well as we? is
thy pride depressed to Sheol? This cannot be meant of the general and
indefinite state of the dead nor of the world of souls, for many of them
were on high in strength and joy; not in fear and weakness, as here they
are described in Sheol. And therefore ruf^^le you and your abettour as long as
you list with tauntes and terms; fell crakes fray not such as be privy to
your lame legs. Again, heaven is namely expressed, and opposed to Sheol; how
can heaven be included in Sheol? Job. 11.
To the high heavens what will thou do? it is lower then Sheol, how will thou
know it? Will your learning serve you to make the high heavens a part of the
low Sheol? Psalm. 139
If I ascend to heaven, thou art there, (says David to God,) if I lie down
in Sheol, there art thou also. So God himself by Amos: Amos. 9
If they dig to Sheol there shall my hand fetch them; if they ascend to heaven
thence will I bring them down. And to the king of Babylon. Esa. 14.
Thou saiedst in thine heart I will ascend to heaven, and climb above the
highth of the clouds: but thou shall be plucked down to Sheol, even to the
sides of the pit.

To men of any mean capacity I think it be manifest, that ascending here
cannot be descending; and consequently that heaven is no part of Sheol, but a
place rather opposed against it; albeit your impudency be such yt in the Creed
you expound, he descended into hell, by the clean contrary, that is, he
ascended into heaven. But what will not men of your face and fancy do? I hope
all good men will beware of such expositians. We deride the Gloss of the Canon
law^ for saying Statuimus, id est, abrogamus, we establish, that is, we
abrogate. How ridiculous and audacious then is this presumption, to say Christ
descended into hell, that is he ascended up to heaven; but hereof in the close
when we have first cleared your fond conceits of SHEOL AND HADES. Psalm. 115.
The dead praise thee not (says David to God) nor all that descend into
silence. If the scriptures affirm as much of Sheol, how can Sheol be the world
of souls? yea how can Sheol be heaven, where the souls night and day, that
is everlastingly, do nothing but praise God, and confess unto him the honor
of his name? Esa. 38.
Sheol (says Esaias) cannot confess unto thee, neither can such as descend
unto the pit trust in thy truth. Yea (says Solomon,) Ecclesiast. 9
There is no work, thought, knowledge, nor wisdom in Sheol, whither thou
go. If Sheol be the world of souls, they be all a sleep, that neither do
speak, nor think any thing. Small are their joys, and less are their
pains, which they never so much as think of. So that neither hell, nor
heaven, nor any part of your world of souls can be here understood by Sheol
in Salomons words; but of mere force it must be the Grave where the body
lies void of sense, speech, action, or cogitation. The rest of the places of
the old Testament where Sheol is named, concur with these; and import either
the grave, which is common to the godly with the wicked; or else that pit
which is prepared for the souls of the wicked, which can be none other place,
but preciselie and properly HELL. What textes they are of the law and the
prophets, Vide page 147.
where Sheol is named, that cannot be reffered to the grave, I have in the
treatise before specified and handled such of them, as I thought sufficient,
especially receiving no answer to my reasons, but the Sphingicall
perplexities of an high minded Master; whose words with me, though they be
of the largest size, are but wind. And therefore I rest upon the same grounds
and proofs, which I make before, and stand to justify, that in no place of
the old or new testament, where SHEOL or HADES are named, their world of
souls is, or can be understood; let them name me the places, I will
presently send them by Gods grace an answer.

As for HADES (good Reader) by which word the Septuagint express the Hebrew
SHEOL; in all these textes, where thou see the word SHEOL, thou may
assure thy self the Septuagint use HADES in steed thereof, and the very same
reasons that serve for Sheol, serve for HADES in every point without
exception: And that makes me wholly to skippe the handling of HADES in the
Septuagint; and to refer the discussing thereof till I come to the places of
the new Testament. Now the consequent of that I have alleged either here or
before, is this; that by SHEOL and HADES in the old Testament must needs be
meante either HELL, the GRAVE, or their WORLD OF SOVLES, which they so much
talk of; if no place in the old Testament do necessarily enforce their
world of souls to be understood by either of these words, then it
remains, that in what textes the grave may not be endured to be the
meaning of either of these words, there we conceive the place of the damned
must be intended in either of them. Peruse both the observations and
allegations before, Vide page 147
and thou shall see both the textes and the proofs, why the place of the
damned must often be understood by Sheol in the books of the law and the
prophets. I hope thou will think it supersfluous for me to defend it, or
enlarge it, before any man do particularly impugn it. So that whatsoever
you prate (Sir Refuter) without weight or warrant touching Sheol, I count it
lip labor; when you or your helpers bring any thing worth the regarding, you
shall find me ready to receive it, or refute it; as the matter deserves.

Sheol then in the old Testament, and Hades in the Septuagint signifiyng
sometimes the state of dead bodies which is the grave; sometimes the place of
dead souls, which is hell; but never the world of souls, whereof some are in
heaven; let us see what force HADES has in the new testament; or whether it
can thence be proved, that HADES imports the world of souls. As ye mysteries
of God were more fully declared by the gospel, then by the law; so the kingdom
of heaven was more preciselie severed from the kingdom of Satan by Christ,
then by Moses. What Moses darkly shadowed under figures, that Christ revealed
in plain words; and therefore hell fire, which is obscurelie mentioned in the
law and prophets, is often and openly named by the mouth of our Savior; and
HADES, which before extended to good and bad, is now by the writers of the
new testament restrained to the place of the damned. So that Hades with the^
signifies hell, and the powers thereof, and not the death of the body, much
less the world of souls. Examples hereof I have given thee (gentle Reader) in
the Vide page 171
Treatise before; save that I then reasoned the death of the body was not
signified by HADES, which now those deuisers have changed into the WORLD OF
SOVLES. I must therefore now ouerrun all those places again, and show that
the WORLD OF SOVLES cannot be expressed by any of those places. Which I will
with as much brenitie as I can, considering the wise Reader will soon be
able to discern this new Camisadoe lately offered with the WORLD OF SOVLES.
The first place is, Matt. 1^
Woe to thee Chorazin, and woe to thee Bethsaida, says our Savior: Lucae. 10
And thou Capernaum exalted to heaven, shall be brought down even to hell; it
shall be easier for Sodom in the day of judgment then for thee. What is Gods
curse and threats to impenitent sinners? HELL, or the WORLD OF SOVLES? and in
the day of judgment, when their punishment shall be greater then the
Sodomites, shall they go to hell fire, or to the WORLD OF SOVLES? I pray you
(Sir Refuter,) were are the Sodomites at this hour? in hell or in your WORLD
OF SOVLES? In hell I think. Saint Jude says, Iudae. epist.
They do sustain the punishments of everlasting fire. Is that your WORLD OF
SOVLES? if it be not, they shall certainly be where the Sodomites are, yea in
worse case shall they be, and that I suppose must be in hell, and not in
heaven. The second place is in the words of Christ to Peter, Matthew. 16
Upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, and I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
The WORLD OF SOVLES does not impugn ye church, therefore it is no sign of
Gods favor, for that not to prevail against the church. Again, whatsoever
prevail not, yet if hell prevail, what safety has the church? Heresy and
iniquity are the gates of hell fighting against the church, as well as
cruelty. Hiero. in Matthew. 16
Ego portas Inferni reor vitta atque peccata, vel certe haereticoru^ doctrinas,
per quas illecti homines ducuntur ad Tartarum. Nemo itaque putet de morte dici,
quod apostoliconditioni mortis subiecti non fuerint, quorum martyria vides
coruscare. I think (says Ierom,) the gates of hell to be vices and sins, or
else heresies, by which men being enticed are led to hell. Let no man therefore
imagine it is spoken of death, as if the Apostles were not subject thereto,
whose martyrdoms thou find so famous. Hilarious. in Mat. cano* 16
Digna aedificatione illius Petra, quae infernas leges, and Tartari portas, and
omnia mortis claustra dissolueret. It was a Rock (says Hilarie) worthy of
Christ's building, which should dissolve the laws of hell, the gates of
Tartare, and all the Cloisters of death. So Origin, Origenes in Matthew. ca. 16.
Portae inferorum dicentur etiam principatus ac potestates, aduersus quas nobis
est colluctatio. The gates of hell may the powers and principalities be
called, against the which we have to strive. Beda in Mat. 16.
Portas inferni haereticam prauitatem nominat, sieve vitia and peccata, vnde
mors ad animam venit. The gates of hell Christ calls Haeresies, (says Bid)
or else vices and sins, by which the soul dies. So Ambrose, Ambros lib 6.
in Lucae ca 8.
Quae aute^ sunt portae Inferni, nisi singula quaeque peccata? What are the
gates of hell, but all kind of sins And Gregory; Greg. in. Psalm. 5
paenitentiale^
Portae Inferni haereses sunt, quae quasi inferorum aditum pandunt. The gates
of hell are heresies, which open as it were the passage to hell. The fifte
general council of Constantinople with one full consent allows the same.
Synod. 5. constantinop. Sessione. 8.
Portae inferni non praeualebunt aduersus eam, id est haereticorum linguae
mortiferae. The gates of hell that is the deadly tongues of heretics, shall
not prevail against the church. You might have more, but these are enough.
Here (Sir Refuter) you tell a long and a foolish tale of death out of your own
head, as if Christ did promise his Apostles protection against the violence of
Tyrants, but not against the rage of Satan; Page 111.
To understand sins and errors as some of the ancient writers do, the
circumstances of the text, you say, do seem not to bear it. Your ignorant
humor is loath to have it so; otherwise the words of Christ, respect the
truth of Peter's confession, that himself was Christ the son of the living
God; against the which faith no policy, nor tyranny of Satan should
prevail, and so by your leave the Fathers go directly to the meaning of the
text; and you would wrest it to your private fancy, least HADES should
signify HELL; and yet at length upon aduisement you Page 113.
confess it may be here the GATES OF HELL, and that HADES is thus used
sometimes, and namely in the last example out of the 16. of Luke. It is well
then that in the 16. of Luke you yield HADES does signify HELL, where the
wicked are tormented, and did you deny it, the Scripture avouches it; the
words are plain, Lucae. 16.
I am tormented in this flame: and again, least they come into this place of
torment. Then HADES without any other addition notes HELL, and when Christ
says, the rich man IN HADES LIFT up his eyes; he adds this as a necessary
consequent being in torments, to show that HADES is the place of torment, and
not the WORLD OF SOVLES.

From thence you leap to the Revelation; and there, when Saint John saw
Reuelat. 6
one sitting on a pale horse whose name was death, and HADES followed after
him, that is, say you, the world of the dead. Page 116
It cannot be hell certainly, because hell slaieth none in that sort. Again,
to say preciselie that the fourth part of the world should go to hell, I take
it to be a strange phrase in scripture. Here first is a plain proof, that
death and HADES are two several things, the one following after the other. For
nothing does follow it self. The doubt is now what HADES imports. The world
of the dead, say you. The world of the" dead, if thereby you mean dead
bodies, is al one with death; if you understand the world of souls, that has
two parts heaven and hell, which of these two did follow after death to
destroy the fourth part of the earth? the kingdom of heaven is never proposed
in the scriptures as a destroyer, but the devil has his proper name in this
book, Apoca. 9.
(...) the destroyer. Again, this vision S. John saw at the opening of the
fourth Seal, but the world of souls in heaven was showed him in the opening
of the fifth Seal, which presently follows in the next verse in these words.
And when (the lamb) had opened the fifth Seal, I saw (says John) under the
altar the souls of men slain for the word of God, Apoca. 6. verse 9.
and for the testimony of the Lamb. The world of souls in heaven was seen
in the opening of the fifth seal; therefore that world of souls was not seen
in the opening of the fourth Seal; but of force, if by HADES you will
understand any world of souls, it must be of those that were in HELL. Howbeit
because he did accompany death that was sent to destroy, I take it rather to
be the power of the devil, that is there described; then any world of
souls, as you dream. And that the devil destroys as well the body as the
soul; if it be strange to you, you are a greater stranger in the Scriptures
then you would seem to be. Who threw the house upon the heads of Job. 1 Job. 2
Jobs Children can you tell? or who smote Job himself with that loathsome
disease? [But the fourth part of the earth, you say, could not go to hell;]
God grant no more then the fourth part go thither. Never read you, Math. 22.
many called and few chosen? and Rom: 9.
though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but
a remnant shall be saved. And why might not the dragon as well devour the
fourth part of ye earth, as Apoca. 12
draw down from heaven with his tail the third part of the stars? Or if
there you take a certain number for an uncertain, which is S. John's manner of
writing in this book, why not as well here as else where? these therefore are
a couple of idle quarrels; if these be your best, you are more willing, then
able to do harm. But by ye same words in the same book, we shall better
understand what is meant by HADES, then by your wandering and weak gloze. Death
and HADES, Apoca. 20.
says S. John were cast into the lake of fire. Page 116.
It were absurd (you add) to say death and hell were cast into hell. True;
but more absurd, and more blasphemous to say, that death and the world of
souls shall be cast into the lake of fire. For then not only the Saints of
God, but heaven it self should be cast into hell fire. Yet if we take the
containing for the contained, which is the most usual phrase of the Scripture,
as Math. 11.
woe be to thee Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, and thou Capernaum: as likewise
Math. 23.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the prophets; and it shall be easier for
Tyrus and Sydon, with a thousand such every where occurrent; then is it an easy
and true speech, that hell, to wit the powers of hell; even the devils
themselves shall be cast into the lake of fire. And so does Andreas Bishop of
Cesaria expound it, Andreas. Caes. in Apoca. ca. 20.
(...) the wicked spirits the possessours of HADES, shall be cast into hell
fire. And so Bid Beda in apoca. ca 20.
Mors and Infernus missi sunt in stagnum ignis. Diabolum dicit et suos, quem
supra in equo pallido sedentem Infernus sequebatur. Death and hell shall be cast
into the lake of fire. He means the devil and his, who^ before sitting on a
pale horse hell followed. As yet then HADES in the new Testament is not only a
thing different from death, but even hell it self; and your world of souls in
none of these texts can find any hold or help. Let us see the rest.

That Christ triumphed over hell and Satan, and not over death only; the
Apostle fully affirms when he says; Christ Colos. 2.
spoiled principalities and powers, made an open show of them, and triumphed
over them in his own person; that likewise he has the keys of hell and not
of death only, S. John plainly shows when Reuelat. 3.
he saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomeles pit,
and there binding and shutting up the devil. The same key of the bottomeles
pit was, in the 9 Chapter of the Revelation, given to the Star that slidde from
heaven. This keye must Christ have, for he says of himself that he Reuelat:
3.
has the key of David, which opens and no man shuts, which shuts and
no man opens. Since then there are Math. 16
keys not of heaven only which Christ committed to Peter and his fellow
laborers; but of the Reuelat: 20.
bottomless pit, where Satan lies bound; which of force must be HELL; when
Christ professes in the first of the Revelation that he Reuelat: 1
has the keys (...) of death and of HADES; who sees not that HADES there
must signify hell it self, the key whereof is so expreslie mentioned in that
book? And so when the Apostle makes two parts of Christ's conquest against
death and hell, 1 Corinthians 15
o death where is thy sting? o HADES where is thy victory? what reason is
there to exclude out of these words, Christ's victory over HELL, since the same
Apostle witnesses, that Christ had a glorious triumph against hell, and the
word HADES in all the places of the new Testament, which we have yet viewed,
infers hell? [The Apostle (you say) Page 117.
speaks not of the Damnation of the wicked; but of the resurrection of the
dead.] And so do I; and therefore infer, that when the bodies of the saints
shall be raised from death, whose souls be already saved from hell; then shall
these words be openly verified, o death where is thy sting? o hell where is
thy victory? For since by sin hell gate possession of both parts of man as
well of his body as of his soul; the full deliverance of man must free both
parts, and the full conquest over hell is the loss of both parts, which in the
resurrection of the dead shall be performed and not before; and therefore then
is the time for all the faithful to thank God, for their full victory over
DEATH AND HELL, and to say with the Apostle o death where is thy sting? o HELL
where is thy victory? But what has your world of souls to do with these
words, or with any other; where HADES is named in the new testament? All these
places serve fitly for hell, and the most of them necessarily; since either
is expressed as a diverse thing from HADES, or not to be comprised in the name
of HADES. But your world of souls is most absurd and false in every one of
these, and can not stand with the circumstance of the text, the first of the
Revelation only excepted, where though there be no words to impugn it, yet
are there none to approve it. For is it any curse for Capernaum, to be
brought to the world of souls, except you mean hell? Does your world of
souls impugn the Church of Christ? or destroy the fourth part of the earth?
or shall it be cast into the lake of fire? And what victory shall the just have
against the world of souls in the last day; since their own souls rejoice to
receive their bodies; and against the souls of the wicked they neither may nor
will insult? It therefore remains that though HADES with the Septuagint
signify either BODILY DEATH or HELL; yet in the new Testament where HADES is
described as a different thing from DEATH, and following AFTER DEATH, HADES of
necessity, being NOT DEATH, must needs import HELL. Of the place in question,
Thou will not leave my soul in HADES, I will yet say nothing, but will come
to the words of the Creed, Christ descended to HADES, and search what must be
the meaning of HADES in that article.

What I take to be the meaning of Hades in the Creed, where it is said, Christ
descended to HADES, as also what reasons lead me thereunto, thou have, Christan
Reader, in the former Vide Pa. 171.
treatise, thou shall with more ease find it there, then I repeat it here;
how much this Confuter confesses or resists, that must I now examine. When
I object that in a short sum of the Christian faith made for the simple and
common people, to repeat one thing twice were needless, and against the
nature of the Creed: and to use a dark and hard phrase after a plain and
easy, is unreasonable and absurd; he answers, Page 126.
It is true. I hold it unreasonable altogether in the short and vulgar Creed,
appointed even for the common Christians, to use words dark and difficult. And
when the same thing is by diverse words expressed, the later ought to be the
lighter and cleerer. Therefore I fully grant, in the Creed specially, the
phrase must be familiar, triuiall, easy and plain. I urged three things to be
observed in the expounding the Creed, the words to be proper and evident
without figurative obscurity, the things to be different without idle
repetition, and the order to be consequent without any confusion. The Confuter
agrees with me in all these; and he doubts not but his exposition is such.
Since then there be three expositions of that article, Christ descended to
HADES; that is either to the GRAVE, or to HELL, or to the WORLD OF SOVLES,
which in Christ's case (you say) was HEAVEN; which of these three, Sir
Refuter, comes nearest to the nature of a short, easy, and orderly sum of
a Creed? The first you like not, because it expresses that in dark and hard
circumloquution, which was familiarly and plainly said before, he was dead and
buried. The question then rests between the two last, which of the twain
best expresses the proper sense, Page 125.
and vulgar use of the word HADES. For the Apostles and Apostolic men (you
confess) did so write and speak, as the people then might best understand. If
it be so, then your exposition, (Sir Refuter) is clean thrust out of doors.
For neither with the ancient Masters of the Greek tongue, which were the
Poets, nor with the Septuagint, nor with the writers of the new Testament, nor
with the people of that time, in their understanding, did HADES ever signify
the world of souls without any limitation of state, or place. Again that
general and indefinite world of souls, without respect of hell or heaven, is
no point nor part of the Christian faith. For faith touching Christ must not be
general or ambiguous, but particular and certain. It is no faith, much less
an article of the faith, to say, Christ's soul after death went some whither;
the Creed must specify the place whither it went before it can be a matter
of faith, that must be believed. And therefore HADES does point out the
particular place, as hell or heaven whither Christ's soul went after death,
before any man may challenge it to be the true meaning of that article.

If any do ask particularly whither is this? You answer, Page: 128:
namely into heaven: for whither should the Saints go else? This in deed is a
familiar, triuiall, easy, and plain exposition, Christ's soul DESCENDED
DOWN TO HADES; that is, it ASCENDED UP TO HEAVEN. And so by taking heaven for
hell, and ascending up for descending down, you have quickelie made an end
of this matter. Why then go on with your wise Master, and make HADES, which
is the chief Devil, to be God, and you have made a perfect exposition of the
Creed, fit for such as attribute to Devils, what they should attribute unto
GOD. Was this the plainest and easiest way for the Apostolic men (...) teach
the people, Christ's soul ascended up to heaven, by saying he DESCENDED TO
HADES? And did the people so best understand them? You that expound this by
the clean contrary, and say they be best so understood, no marvel if you
arrogate so much unto your self in framing the Scriptures to your fancies; you
may with little study prove a speedy expositour of the Scriptures. But,
Sir, wise men that regard their faith more then your follyes will ask; where
you find descending for ascending, and Hades for heaven? If you pretend
Plato, they will tell you, that to embrace a private conceit of Socrates
against all the former Greeks, against the Septuagint, against the
Evangelists, and Apostles, and evidently against all the fathers is not to
expound an Article of the faith, but the next way to bring Paganism into the
Creed; and that by so licentious and lewd a trade of open perverting the
words of the Creed, and taking sour for sweet, cold for heat, evil for
good, that nothing shall stand sound if this be admitted. [a It is, you
say, an Hebrewe phrase. Page: 126
So Jacob spoke, I will go down mourning to my Son unto Sheol, yet Jacob
thought not to go to hell to his son, but among the souls of the godly
dead, that is to say, into heaven.] It has been meetelie well told you,
that Sheol never signifies Heaven in all the Scriptures, but that Jacob meant
he would go mourning unto Sheol, that is to his Grave, refusing to take any
comfort whiles he lived, since his son was dead. You like a tyrant over the
Scriptures, will have what sense pleases you in every place; and then you
say it is plain and common. In deed your ignorance and insolency is very
plain and common; but the interpretations which you make of Scripture, be
absurd and more then foolish. A man living may well be said to descend into
his grave; living he stands, dying he lies down; and the face of the earth
on which we are, is higher then the bowels of the earth where we lie buried;
but of a soul ascending up to heaven, to say it descends to hell, is a
phrase of your making, and fit for your faith; which is guided more by will
then by truth. When you prove these two points, that HADES is HEAVEN in the
Scriptures, and that DESCENDING IS ASCENDING, we will hearken to your
exposition; till then we will leave it as a distemper of your unsettled brain.

For the last exposition of the three which remains, I have showed thee
(Christian reader) by the particular circumstances of the Scriptures, Vide page
170 and sequent.
that in the continual use of the new Testament HADES signifies HELL, which
is the place where the wicked after this life are in torments. I have also in
the sermons before examined the words of David, Psalm. 16.
alleged and applied by Act. 2.
Peter to Christ, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, whence Peter concludes
Christ's soul was not left in hell; as likewise the words of Paul importing that
Christ descended (...) to the bottomless deep, which word throughout the new
testament does signify nothing but HELL; I have noted how anciently Christ's
local descent to hell was preached in the church, even by one of the Luke. 10.
seventy disciples (that were conversant with Christ) and continued to this
day with the full consent of the fathers, both Greek and Latin without
exception, and by the whole church of Christ received; I must not iterate that
which there is so lately written. The words are fair and plain, there is no
danger nor difficulty in them, the end of Christ's descending thither being
both honorable to him, and comfortable to us, as I have before delivered it.
Lastly, I see no cause either in this Confuters ridiculous pamphlet, or in his
abettors tempestuous and furious libell, why any man should dislike or
distrust this exposition, as unfit for the words, or unsound for the faith of
the Creed. To load thee with authorities were to make an other volume; thou
shall only see I have not devised it of mine own head, but that it has
both antiquity for it, and authority with it, and so I will make an end.
Cyprian in his Sermon of Christ's passion; Cyprian. de passio Christ.
. Ipse dicit ad patre^, non derelinques anima^ meam in inferno, nec sines
corrumpi carnem meam in sepulchro, quia vbi in praesentia illius, effractis
inferis est captiuata captiuitas, praesentata victrice anima in praesentia
patris ad corpus suum sieve dilatione reuersus est, Christ says to his Father,
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer my flesh to rotte in the
grave, because as soon as captivity was subdued, hell being broken up in
his presence, and his triumphing soul presented to the sight of his Father,
he without delay returned to his body. Arnobius writing upon the hundredth
thirty and seventh Psalm; Arnobius in psalm. 1^7.
Postea vidit Inferos, and long factus est non solum a coelis, sed and ab ipsa
terra: Abyssi profunda descendens scidit, and quia indereuerteretur ad superos,
and quia a superis remearet ad coelos. Afterward Christ went to hell, and was
far not only from heaven, but from the earth: descending he brake the
bottomless deep, that he might thence return to life; and from thence to
heaven. Lactantius in his verses of the resurrection, says.

Lactan. phoenix de resurrect.
Tristia cessarunt infernae vincula legis,
Expau^tque Chaos luminis ore premi.
Depereunt tenebrae, Christi f^elgore fugatae,
Aeternae noctis pallia crassa cadunt.
The fearful bands of the infernal power ceased, and Chaos was afraid to be
oppressed with the light of his presence. The darkness of hell was chased away
with the brightness of Christ, and the gross couerings of eternal night
vanished. Athanasius, Athanas. ad Liberium.
Ipse est dei virtus, qui infernum expugnauit, and imperium Diaboli demolitus
est, qui Deus in descende^do, deus in ascendendo, corpus suum a morte excitatum
patri repraesentauit, ac vindicauit a morte sub ^uius imperio tenebatur. Christ
is the power of God, which surprised hell, and ouerthrewe the kingdom of the
devil, who being God in descending, and God in ascending, presented his body
raised from death to his father, and took it from death, under whose power it
was held. Hilarious. Hilarious de trinitat. lib. 4.
Hic ergo vnus est mortem in inferno perimens, spei nostrae fidem resurrectione
confirmans, corruptionem carnis humanae gloria sui corporis perimens. Christ
alone is he that in hell killed death, confirmed our hope with his
resurrection, and destroyed the corruption of man's flesh, with the glory of
his own body. Basil: Basil^ in psa. 44
Habes ergo myrrham ob sepulturam, guttam ob descensionem ad infernum, quod non
inefficax in sepulchro permanserit, sed ad infernum descenderit, gratia
dispensationis circa resurrectionem absoluendae, vt quae de seipso erant
oracula Prophetarum, vniuersa expleret: Thou have (in this Psalm) myrrh for
his burial, dropping for his descent to hell, because he lay not in his grave
without force, but descended into hell to dispatch things needful for his
resurrection, that he might fulfill all that the Prophets forespake of him.
Nazianzene makes Christ's mother to say of him, Nazianzen. in christo patiente.
At vbi veneris in atram nocte Plutonis domum, Infernum acerbo iaculo
defixeris. But when thou wentest to the house of Pluto, where dark night is;
thou did thrust through hell with a wounding spear. Fulgentius: Fulgentius
ad Thrasimundum. lib. 3.
David spoke of Christ's resurrection, that his soul was not left in hell, nor
his flesh saw corruption. In this then the Godheade of Christ showed the power
of his impassibilitie, that being every where, always, and vnspeakeablie
present, it wanted not to his flesh, when it suffered not his soul to feel
any pain in hell, neither forsook his soul in hell, whiles it kept his flesh
from rotting in the grave. Beda our countriman shall be the last, Beda in Psalm.
15.
My flesh (says David of Christ) shall rest in hope, expounding in what hope;
to wit in this hope, that though my soul descend to hell, yet thou will not
leave it to be possessed of hell. The rest go all clear that way, applying ye
words of David cited by Peter, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, to Christ's
descent thither after death. And howsoever the fathers incline to think, as
Ierom did, that the saints before Christ's coming were enclosed in a place
under the earth, expecting Christ's coming to be carried up to heaven (of
which I have spoken as much as is needful in the Vide page ^89. and sequent.
treatise before;) yet they absolutely acknowledge that Christ descending
destroyed the kingdom of Satan, and freed all the faithful from ever coming
thither.

The rest of the Confuters talk is like ye froth of the sea, which wind and
waves roll to and fro; sometimes he runs this way, and then back again
another way; saying and unsaying he knows not how, nor what. Sometimes he
says the Creed, and namely this article Christ descended to Hades could not
be made long after the Apostles time; Page 93.
whereof Ignatius and others most ancient do speak. Page 166.
In another place he says; We find almost all the Creedes, certainly the most
ancientest, and the best of them to want these words of Christ's descending
into hell. In one place he says, The Creedes which we find in Ignatius, Page
167.
Irenaeus, Justinius Martyr, Tertullia^, Origin, Athanasius, Augustinus, the
Nicene, Co^stantinopolitan, Toletan, Ephesine, al these never thought that
Christ's going down to hell, was any distinct or certain Article of the
Christian faith. Page 93.
And yet before he confessed y^ Ignatius and others most ancient do speak
namely of this Article. But, Sir, have these Creedes which here you cite, all
the rest of the Articles that are in the Apostles Creed? I hope there want in
some of them a good many. For these rehearsals in the eldest Fathers do but
touch some of the Articles of the Creed, and show that there was such a
compendious brief of the Faith received amongst Christians from the beginning.
The Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and others, want every one of
them sundry Articles that are in the Apostles Creed, and add other that are
not there; so as in deed they are rather expositions then recitals of the
Apostles Creed. And yet I hope Athanasius creed has this Article in precise
words, and rehearses it as a part of the Catholic faith, that Christ
descended into Hell. Neither is there any one of these Fathers whom here you
have named, as Igna^ad Trall^
Ignatius, Iren. li 5. c. 31
Irenaeus, Justin. in dialo. cum tryph.
Justinius Martyr, Tertul. de anima^
Tertullian, Orig^ in cap. 5^ ep. ad Rom
Origene, Aug. epi. 99.
Augustine, but they expresselie touch and teach Christ's local descent to
Hell, as all the rest do without exception. And if Councels will content you,
you shall not go far for both Provincial and General. The Council of
Alexandria that wrote to repress the heresy of Nestorius, makes the spoiling
of hell a part of Christ's resurrection, and says; Epist. Cyril. and Synod.
Alexan. ad Nestor:
Tertia Die reuixit, expolians infernum, Christ rose again the third day,
having spoiled hell. This confession was read and allowed as Catholic in the
first general Council of Vide acta co^cilii Ephesini and. 5. Synod. Constan.
Ses. 7.
Ephesus, in the great Council of Chalcedon, and in the Vide acta co^cilii
Ephesini and. 5. Synod. Constan. Ses. 7.
fifth general Council of Constantinople. So that fathers and Councels both
decumenicall and provincial, have received and approved this article even
from the foundation of Christ's church; as a part of Christ's resurrection,
howsoever they did not always annexe it to their Creedes.

With like folly and inconstancy, he says it is Page 166.
the natural and necessary division of the articles of the Creed, that
these, Christ suffered, was crucified, dead, buried, descended into hell,
should concern Christ's humiliation, and he supposes every sensible man will
confess so much whereas he himself expounds the last of them to have this
meaning, that Christ's soul ascended to heaven. Now to ascend to heaven every
boy knows is a part of Christ's exaltation, and not of his humiliation. How
his note book deuideth the Creed, I know not, but Saint Paul whence this
division has his ground, says this is Philip. 2,
Christ's exaltation, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow of things
in heaven, earth, and under the earth, which is hell. His humiliation
stretches no farther then the death of the Cross, then begins his
exaltation. With like discretion when I alleged the Parable from Christ's own
mouth, that his triumph over Satan must have three parts, the Mat. 12. Luke. 11.
ouerrunning, the binding, the spoiling of Satan, and his kingdom; and further
from that Parable I derived nothing; This wisdom to show himself learned,
cries out, Page 161.
a fine toy or rather a shameful gloze by unsavory allegorizing to corrupt
the Text. Is this a good way to prove Articles of the faith, videlicet by
Allegories? As if the most part of Christ's doctrine were not delivered by
Parables and Allegories? The parables of the Sower, of the laborers in the
vineyard, and the husbandmen killing the heir, of good trees and straight
gates, of the lost sheep, unjust Steward, and unrighteous Judge; of Tares
sowed by the enemy, and harvest at the end of the world, of the great Supper,
and wedding garment, of the wounded Samaritane, and wise virgins, of the
prodigal son, and evil servants, one yt neglected his masters talent, the
other that imprisoned his fellow, of the rich man and Lazarus; to be short the
allegories of light, of salt, of leaven, of chaf^e, of the vine and branches,
of the good shepherd, and a thousand such in the prophets, Evangelists and
Apostles, do they teach no matters of faith? What Buzzard was ever so blind as
so to say, no points of faith may be proved by allegories? Had I extended
the Parable farther then Christ himself did, or applied it to any other
purpose then he did; there might have been some cause of quarrel, but keeping
my self preciselie both to the Scope and words of our Savior, I could not
tread awrie. But in a bravery to challenge all the Parables and allegories in
the Scriptures, as unfit to teach points of faith, never came in any sober
man's head.

As you use the Scriptures, so you use the Synod of this Realm, that is you
arrogantlie and absurdlie falsify it. Page 171
The manifest meaning of the whole Synod (of this Realm,) which is our publik
doctrine and established by law in England. APPARENTLY RENOVNCETH, (say you)
this doctrine of Christ's going down to the hell of the damned. If you prove
that you say, I must confess it is very material; and by Gods grace I my
self will revoke all that I have said in this point; but if you brag not only
without cause, but against the very truth and tenor of their proceedings, are
you not worthy in steed of H. I. to be named W. F? but let us hear how this
appears? Page 172
Even thus; the Synod before holden in king Edwards time affirmed this
doctrine directly and expressly ( in their article of Christ's descent to hell.)
This Synod coming after repeateth and ratisieth apart ( of that article) in
express words; but part of it even all and every whit that contains this
doctrine expreslie of Christ's going down to the hell of the damned, all this I
say our Synod, (anno 1562) cutteth off, it puts out, it casts away. The
words are these of the former Synod. Quemadmodum Christus pro nobis mortuus
est and sepultus, Articlu. 3
ita est etiam credendus ad Inferos descendisse. Nam corpus vsque
adresurrectionem in^ sepulchoro iacuit, spiritus ab illo emissus cu^ spiritibus
qui in carcere sieve in inferno detinebantur fuit, illisque praedicauit,
quemadmodum testatur Petri locus. As Christ died for us and was buried: so also
it is to be believed, that he went down to hell. For his body lay in the grave
until the resurrection; his spirit which he breathed out was with the spirits
that were in prison or in hell, and preached unto them, as the place of Peter
witnesses. Page 172.
But our Synod since corrects it herein and says but thus only, Quemadmo
du^ Christus pro nobis mortuus est and sepultus, ita est etia^ crede^ dus ad
inferos descendisse. As Christ died for us and was buried, so we are to believe
also, that he went unto the dead. This therefore in the^ is seen manifestly (
as I said) to renounce and abrogate this particular sense of Christ's
desce^ding, yt HE WENT AFTER DEATH TO HELL. Is this all you have to say (Sir
Refuter,) then when prouender is divided you shall have a part for your good
collectio^. You collect that ye later Synod by leaving out certain words of
the former renounceth that CHRIST AFTER DEATH WENT TO HELL; and that which it
retains of the former Synod in express words is this; IT I TO BE BELIEVED
THAT CHRIST WENT DOWN INTO HELL. So in your judgment by believing that
Christ went down into Hell, they renounce, that Christ went to hell. If it
were a matter of sight I should ask whether you had any eyes or no; now it
is a matter of reason I must more doubt whether you have your five wits or
no. Set your inference to the view of all men. The Synod in her Majesty's
time agrees, It is to be believed that Christ went down into hell. Ergo they
appara^tly renounce that Christ went to hell. This is your conclusion; show it
to any tapster or tinker in England and see whether he will reward you with a
mock or no.

[But they leave out the latter part of the Article which the former Synod
concluded.] So they leave out that Christ's body was in his grave until his
resurrection, which are the words of the former Synod. Is the omitting of
this a manifest renouncing and abrogating of it? God forbid [But the first
Synod in king Edwardes time added farther, you say, that Christ's spirit was
with the spirits detained in Prison or in hell; and preached unto them.] First
then tell your abettor, that all the Realm will take him not only for a Railor
against al honesty, but for a lier against al duty, that voucheth so
confidently king Edward the sixth and his subjects held that Christ his soul
never went to Gehenna; and the realm knows the Q. oath; as also the Q.
aduentureth her eternal state. These be no states to come within the compass
of his unclean mouth: He may do well to remember who they be, of whom it is
written: Iudae epistola^
They despise government, and speak evil of those that are in authority, as
raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame; And to take heed, that
he prove not too true a prophet against himself in paying the price of
misusing his liege and Sovereign Lady, and her whole Realm. But I wish him
repentance and so I leave him. Secondly, (Sir Refuter) you may see three
things in the latter words of that Article in king Edwardes Synod, which are
very wisely with silence ouerskipped by the Synod in her Majesty's time; and
wherein for my part I think they did very well not to add to this Article,
any time, purpose, or prisoners, when, why, or to whom Christ descended. But
therein to imitate the wisdom of the best ages, who kept this Article as they
found it without enterlacing it with any new additions. For in the later
words of that former Synod now left out are three things that cannot be
justified by the Scriptures. 1. that the Spirits of the just were in hell. 2.
that Christ there preached unto them. 3. that he stayed there till his
resurrection. These three points contained in the Article of that Synod; were
advisedly and profitablie suppressed by the Synod kept in her majesty's time;
and these are the points which I my self impugn in this Treatise, as having
no just nor tolerable ground in the Scriptures. But these things being
drowned by omission, what is that to the rest of the article, which the later
Synod imbraceth as a matter necessary to be believed? for thus they resolve;
Articul. 3
As Christ died for us and was buried; so also it is to be believed yt HE
WENT DOWN INTO HELL, And though you would weaken their resolution with a
false translation, as your manner is, by making them say, we are to beleeeue
that Christ went unto the dead, yet may you gain no thing by that, for we have
public assurance and allowance that their words were and are IT IS TO BE
BELIEVED THAT CHRIST WENT DOWN INTO HELL. Their words in Latin were, you
will say, Credendus est ad inferos descendisse? But the same Bishops and the
same Clergy that were at the first Synod in the 5 of her Majesty, assembling
again in the 13 year of her highness reign, did themselves english it as I
report it, and offered it to the Prince and Parliament in those words to be
confirmed, which accordingly that high Court did. So yt now not these words,
Christ descended into HADES, though they be true as being the original words,
much less yours Christ went to the dead, but preciselie these, Christ went
down into hell, are the faith and doctrine which the Church and Realm of
England professes, or which the law establishes; and what they mean, were
it not for your addle quirckes, is soon perceived even of the simplest.

You conclude that the Page 173
public sentence of our Church, yea the public law of our land is against
this opinion of Christ's descending into hell. And I conclude likewise that
which is in the bone will never out of the flesh; with arrogance and ignorance
you began, and so you will end. If HELL in english be HELL, and GOING DOWN be
DESCENDING, the^ both the Church and the law of England directly, expressly,
precisely mayntayneth CHRIST'S DE^CENDING INTO HELL, If HELL in english be
HEAVEN; and GOING DOWN be GOING UP, then the Church and law of England
favors your fancy. And hereof I am well content thou shall be Judge
(Christian Reader) that understand best thine own tongue. For the latin
INFE^NVM and the Greek HADES I am content to be tried by all Fathers, Greek
and Latin that ever wrate in the Church of Christ. If these men cannot keep
their quarter clear nor uphold their conceit, but they must exclude all
Greek, Latin, and English divines since Christ's time from understanding
every man his own natural tongue; I will see their brains better settled,
and their mouths b^tter tempred, before their philosophical follies and
Rabbinicall fancies the one sort being strangers, the other enemies to the
faith of Christ, shall draw me from my Creed. And so I wish thee (Christian
Reader) as my self, mercy and grace from the Lord Jesus, and commit thee to
God.

FINIS.

