A Sermon preached at Westminster before the King and Queens Majesty's, at
their Coronations on Saint James his day, being the 28. of July. 1603.

By the Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Winchester.

Printed at London by V. S. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Holy Lamb. 1603.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I present unto thee here, a Sermon, preached by the right
reverend and learned Father the Lord Bishop of Winchester, at the late
Coronation of the Kings most excellent Majesty: which having (with much ado)
obtained of a good friend of mine about his Lordship, I hope it shall no whit
offend his Lordship, if by this means he do more service to the Church, then
by the uttering of it he could do in one (though so honorable) assembly. I
dare not presume to censure it. The Sermon it self, the Royal presence before
which it was uttered, and the learning and gravity of the Preacher, grace it
much more, then whatsoever I could study to say in commendation of it. Read
it therefore dilligently, and learn by it to obey Gods ordinance willingly;
and so I commit thee to God.

Romans 13. verse 1. The powers that are, are ordained of God.
SO true, without exception it is, Romans 13.
which the Apostle says in the next words before, There is no power but of
God, that man at his first Creation, and in his perfection could have no power
over Beasts, Birds, and Fishes; till GOD with his own voice made him Ruler
over his Creatures, and put all things in subjection under his feet. If none
could dispose of Gods works besides the workman, nor use the Creatures void
of reason without the Creators leave; how much less might any man have
dominion over the Servants and Sons of God, created after his own Image, and
sanctified with the grace of his spirit, had not God ordained the power of men
over men, and with manifest words authorized Rulers to take and keep their
places. Private and inferior powers, as the husband over his wife, the father
over his children, the master over his Servants, were to be allowed and
ratified by God, from whom is all power, before they could be lawful: Public
then and Superior powers, as they contain and command all those governments,
and far exceed them, so must they have a larger and stronger warrant in the
word of GOD, than any other Regiment has.

Which, that we may the better perceive, I think it fit for this present
time, and place, to observe, not only, how the Princes function in general is
established by God, but more specially, how the branches thereof, namely,
their power, their honor, and their service are ordained and confirmed of God.
To express them more distinctly. Their Authority is derived from GOD,
resembling his image; Their dignity is allowed of GOD, to partake with his
homage: Their Duty is enjoined them by GOD, to preserve his heretage. The
first they have received from GOD; the second they must receive from men; the
third they must yield to both. And first of resembling Gods Image.

The likeness that Princes have with the kingdom of GOD and of Christ,
consists in the Society of the names, and signs, which they have common
with Christ; in the Sufficiency of the spirit, wherewith God indueth them; in
the Sanctity of their persons, which may not be violated in the Sovereignty
of their power, which must not be resisted.

Psalm. 82.
The Society of their names is evident. I have said, ye are Gods, and all the
Sons of the most High: And of this very Scripture our Savior says, John 10.
it can not be dissolved; that is, it can neither be false, nor frustrate,
since it is the word of God. Stedfaster than Heaven and earth is the word of
God. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words, Luke 21.
says our Savior, shall not pass away. If vanity and falsity in our speech
argue the weakness and wickedness of our hearts; how impossible is it the
word of GOD should want either truth or force? We are severely prohibited
to take Gods name in vain, which is most holy and mighty. And shall we
think, that God himself will give his name to Princes in vain? Numb. 23.
Is God as Man, that he should lie? Has he spoken it, and will he not perform
it? Or shall his word return to him empty, and without effect? GOD forbid,
we should so much dishonor him, or deceive our selves. Since then Princes
can not be Gods by nature, being framed of the same metal, and in the same
moulde, that others are; It follows directly, they are gods by Office; Ruling,
Judging, and Punishing in Gods steed, and so deserving Gods name here on
earth. As it was said to Moses, Exodus 7.
Behold, I have made thee Pharaohs God, that is, his people, his person, his
land, his life, and all he has, shall be in thy power, and depend on thy word.

As Christ gives Princes his name, by calling them Gods, and, the Sons of
the most High: So he takes their Names and Signs to show the Unity and
Sovereignty of his Kingdom, and to sever it from all other kinds of
government: for Christ is never called in Scripture, a Consul, a Senator, or
a Tribune of the People, but, the name on his garment, and on his thigh, as
Saint John says, Revel. 19.
is King of Kings, and, Lord of Lords, that is, a most mighty King and Lord.
Insomuch that when Christ is described in the Scriptures, as a King, all the
ornaments and ensigns of a Kingdom, are namely recited and personally
referred to him, though in him they be spiritual and eternal, which to men
must be material and temporal. Psalm. 45.
Thy Throne, O God, endures for ever, says the Scripture of Christ, as the
Apostle expounds it, Hebr. 1.
The SCEPTER of thy kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness. Wherefore, Revel.
19.
God even thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy
Partners. On his head (says Saint John) are many Crowns, and out of his Mouth
(as working his Will by his Word) goes a sharp SVVORD, wherewith he shall
smite the Heathen. To Princes then, as Partakers with Christ in the power,
honor and justice of his Kingdom here on Earth, are allowed of God a Sword,
in sign of Power, a Crown, in show of Glory, a Scepter, for a token of
Direction, a Throne for a seat of Justice and Judgment; and Invnction as a
pledge of outward Protection, and inward Infusion of grace. All which Signs
and Ornaments of a Kingdom since Christ assumeth from Princes, and applies to
himself, he confirms to be lawful in Princes, because they are common to
them with him, who admits or accepts no unlawful or superstitious thing as
pertinent to his person.

The Spirit also, which Princes receive from God, and wherewith they are guided
in doing their office, shows their Resemblance with the Son of God. Men
choose the fittest they can find to supply their places, because they want
means to make others meeter than they are. But God who works all in all
according to the good pleasure of his will, and has power most abundant to
enable all his Agents for any work he has in hand; never calls any man to
serve him, whom he does not furnish with gifts according. Workmen he would
have none to the making or decking of his Tabernacle, but such as he
replenished with the spirit of understanding for that purpose: Prophets he
never sent any, but with his words in their mouths, and his truth in their
hearts, which all their Adversaries could not withstand: governors then, whose
hearts, mouths and hands, he uses to keep his people in peace and piety; God
never chooses any but he first endewed them with a Principal spirit. Whiles
Moses alone sustained the burden of the whole people in the wilderness, the
abundance of Gods spirit on Moses was sufficient for the whole: but when he
desired part of that labor to be eased, God took off the spirit, Numb. 11.
which was upon Moses and divided thereof to the seauenty Elders, who assisted
Moses. As soon as Samuel by Gods commandment had Anointed Saul, 1. Sam. 10.
God gave Saul another heart, says the Scripture, and he was changed into
another Man. But when for disobedience the Kingdom was rent from him, the
spirit of the Lord likewise departed from him, and from that day forward came
upon David, that was anointed to succeed Saul. It pleased God well, that
Solomon, at his first coming to the Crown, 1. Kings 3.
desired an understanding Heart to Judge the People: and in sign of liking and
granting this request, GOD gave him also that which he asked not, even Riches
and Honor above all the Kings of the Earth. Of all good Princes the wisdom of
God says, Prou. 8.
By me Kings rule, and Princes decree Justice: that is, Prou. 21.
the Kings heart is in Gods hand, he turns it whither he will. ^rou. 16.
A divine direction is in the Kings lips, Proverb. 16.
his mouth shall not transgress in judgment. Proverb. 20.
A King sitting in the Throne of Justice, chaseth away all evil with his Eyes,
which are the shows of his affections. So that not only the height of their
calling is derived from God, but the strength of Gods spirit rules their
Hearts, guides their Mouths, and setleth their Affections, to execute
Judgment, and to banish evil from the Earth.

The inward Annoynting, which is the diffusing of heavenly wisdom and courage
in the hearts of Princes, God testified by external Inunction, when he first
appointed a King in Israel: And by that his Ordinance taught us, that their
persons once dedicated to his service, are not only protected by his stretched
out Arm, but are and ought to be Sacred and Secured from the violence and
injury of al men's hands, mouths, and hearts. Psalm. 105.
Touch not mine Anointed, says God by his Prophet. Which though it be true of
all whom God vouchsafes inwardly or outwardly to Anoint, yet is it chiefly
verified of Princes, whom God annointeth to be the chiefest of his people. This
David well saw, when he so often said: 1. Sam. 24. and 26.
The Lord keep me from laying mine hand on his Anointed, for who can lay his
hand on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? Neither is violence only
prohibited toward them, but all offense in speech or thought. Exodus 22.
The Prince of thy People, Lo Taor, thou shall not reproach, by word or deed;
The word Arar imports both: and so, Ecclesi. 10.
Despise not the king (or make not light of him) no not in thy thought, for the
Foul of Heaven shall bewray it; that is, God will strangely reveal it, be it
never so secret. Yea the very Robes, which they wear, are sanctified. When
David had privily cut but the lap of Saul's Cloak in the Cave, to let him
see, that he spared his life; 1. Sam. 24.
David's heart did afterward strike him, says the scripture, for cutting that
piece of the kings garment. So sacred is every thing belonging to them, that no
part of their apparel may be wronged or abused.

The force of their Anointing being perpetual and general, we must not think
the outward action Judicial or Temporal. Jewish it could not be, that neither
had his beginning from the Jews, nor was restraind to the Jews. The qualities
and duties of a King are proposed in De. 17. but the Anointing of a King is no
where mentioned in Moses Law. Only Samuel had a precept from God to Anoint,
first Saul, then David: and so had Elias to Anoint Hazael king over Aram, 1.
Kings 19.
who was no Jew, and Iehu King over Israel, and god by his prophet called Cyrus
King of Persia his anointed. Esa 45.
Likewise Solomon, Ioash, Iehoahaz, and other Kings of Judah, 1. Kings 1.
(though it be not expressed) were Anointed, 2. Kings 11.
notwithstanding there was no express commandment of God for so doing, 2
Kings 23.
but a continuance of the first Institution or approbation of Anointing Kings
received from God. Yea, 200. years almost before there was any king in Israel,
or any mention of Annoynting them, Iotham the son of Gedeon in his parable to
the men of Shechem, said, Judges. 9.
The trees went forth to Annoint a king over them, speaking of the Annoynting
of Kings, as of a thing requisite to the creating of Kings, and well known to
them and his hearers, when as yet there was no precept, nor example extant
thereof among the Jews. Which they must needs learn by the use of other
Nations round about them. Since then Inunction of Princes had not his original
from Moses, who wrote nothing thereof, but being first used in other places (as
appears by Iothams Parable) was afterward received and approved by Gods
direction, when he created a king in Israel: and was extended to other
Kingdoms and countries, namely, to Hazael King of Syria, and to Cyrus King of
Persia, who were strangers to the Law and people of the Jews: And the vocation
of Princes in no part of their power, honor, or service is abrogated or altered
by the new testament, as the Leuitical priesthood is, but rather continued and
confirmed, which is a manifest truth of sound doctrine: I see no cause why the
function of Princes still remaining the same, the Inunction of Princes should
not have also the same signification, operation and approbation from God which
it had in David, Solomon, Ioash, Iehoahaz, and others, and depend upon as good
warrant, as their Crowns, Thrones, Swords and Scepters do, all which are
resemblances of Christ's Kingdom, and approved of God, as signs and assurances
of their authority, dignity, and duty from God, even as Inunction is an earnest
to them of that inward sufficiency, and outward security, which God bestows
on their persons, when he aduanceth them to their Places.

The Sovereignty of their power will soon appear, Romans 13.
as well by the persons subjected, as by the things committed to their charge.
Let every Soul be subject to the Superior powers, says Paul in this place.
Every Soul; yea though thou be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or
whosoever thou be, says Chrysostom. for these things are commanded to all. He
that brings an exception, uses but a delusion, says Bern. For who can loose
where God has bound? Nether is this an Exhortation to obedience, but a plain
Iniunction; you must, Romans 13.5.
says Paul, be subject, not only because of wrath, but also for conscience
sake. You must] imports a necessity, for Conscience] declares a duty to
God; the danger of resisting being as great, as the commandment of Obeying is
strait. Romans 13.2.
Whosoever resists power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves Judgment. Dare any man promise unto
himself success and protection in Conspiracy and Treason, when the spirit of
God so plainly thretneth Ruin and Condemnation to all that resist, whosoever
they be? They which would not learn by other men's falls, what it is to
undermine Princes Thrones and Crowns, let them feel by their own smart, that
Gods Arm is most mighty, and his Mouth most true, denouncing Judgment to al
Resisters.

As al persons must obey Princes, so al goodness must be supported by them, and
al evil punished, Do well, Romans 13.3,4.
says the Apostle, so shall thou have praise of the power: But if thou do
evil, fear: for he bears not the Sword in vain: he is Gods minister to
take vengeance on him that does evil: not this or that evil, but any manner of
evil.

The Sword is equally authorized against all kind of evil, that may be
discerned and judged by Man. Wherefore God giving the King, not as a private
person, but as a public Governor, his Charge, says; Deu.. 17.
The King sitting on the Throne of his kingdom, shall write this Law in a
book, or cause it to be written) and shall read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to keep all the words of this Law, and these
ordinances, for to do them. Kings as Kings, Epist. 50. Id. con. Cresc. l. 3.
ca. 5 1s
says Austen, serve god in doing that for his service, which none but Kings
can do; to wit, by making Laws to command that which is good, and prohibit
that which is evil, not in civil affairs only, but in matters also touching
divine religion. Princes then by their office are Keepers and Supporters of the
whole Law, and of every word or thing therein contained; and consequently
Punishers of all evil committed against any part of Gods Law. So that the
safeguard of godliness and honesty pertains to their places, as much as the
maintenance of peace and tranquillity.

To which end, God has allowed them power over the goods, lands, bodies and
lives of their subjects: and what private men may not touch without Theft and
Murder, that Princes may lawfully dispose, as Gods Ministers, taking vengeance
on them that do evil. The wrath of a King is the Messenger of Death, Proverb.
16.
says Solomon, which is not spoken of tyrants oppressing the just, but of
Powers revenging the wicked. Early, says David, Psalm. 101.
will I destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all the workers
of iniquity from the City of the Lord: not making an hasty vow to bathe his
hands in blood without mercy, but an holy promise to God, to execute his Law,
without favoring impiety.

The greatness of the power which Princes have received from God, resembling
his Image, leads us to the greatness of the Honor they must receive from men,
in partaking with gods homage. The one is Gods ordinance as well as the other,
for God has not put Princes in his place, and given them his power, to be
despised or disobeyed, but to be honored and served as his Lieutenants and
Vicegerents here on earth. And if it be truly said of us, who have the word of
Christ in our mouths; Math. 10. Luke. 10.
he that receives you, receives me; and he that despises you, despises me:
how much more rightly is it said of them, that sit in Gods seat, and bear
the Sword; he that resists or dishonors them, resists and dishonoreth
the ordinance of God, to his own confusion in this life, where Princes are
permitted to revenge the wrongs done to them; and in the next, where God
everlastingly punishes the contempt of his Ordinance?

What kind of honor is due to Princes, is shortly delivered in that
commandment, Honor thy Father. They are Fathers by Gods Law, that have or
should have fatherly care over us, whether it be to aid us in the things of
this life, as masters and teachers; or to guide us the true way to heaven, as
pastors and ministers; or to keep us in peace and godliness, as Magistrates
and Princes: God giving Princes that name, because they should be as vigilant
for the good of those that are under their charge, as parents are for their
children; and receive the same honor and service for their pains, which are
due to parents from their natural children, if not greater. The very heathen
Philosophers saw so far, and confessed so much (...). Zenop. Cyripaideias li.
8.
A good Prince nothing differs from a good Father. And Aristotle, Ethicorum
l. 8. ca. 12.
(...). A Kingdom would be (or should be) a fatherly government. Esa. 49.
God by his Prophet confirms the same, where he says to his Church; Kings
shall be thy nurcing Fathers, and Queens thy nurcing Mothers.

The Apostle in this place names three things due to Princely dignity,
Subjection, Honor, and Tribute: teaching us, that Princes must be obeyed with
conscience, Reverence and Recompense; with conscience acknowledging they are
ordained of God, whose will is always the only sure ground of a good
conscience. It is therefore sin to despise or refuse, their Laws commanding
that which is good, and likewise to resist or reproach their power, punishing
that which is evil even in our selves. In the one appears Gods will
directing our outward actions here on Earth; in the other, Gods hand reforming
our vices, whiles here we live, and since in either we must obey for
conscience, in neither can we resist without evident contempt of Gods
ordinance. Howbeit when Princes cease to command for god, or bend their swords
against God, whose Ministers they are: we must reverence their Power, but
refuse their wills. It is no resistaunce to obey the greater before the
lesser, neither has any man cause to be offended, when god is preferred. Yet
must we not reject their yoke with violence, but rather endure their Swords
with patience, that God may be Judge between Prince and People, with whom is
no unrighteousness, nor respect of persons.

Romans 13. v. 4.
Reverence due to Princes must come from the whole man, and have the whole man,
that is, it must have the love of our hearts, the prayer of our lips, and the
submission of our bodies. They are Gods Ministers for our wealth. They must
therefore be loved even from the heart. We must love their places appointed by
god to partake, as well with his honor, as with his power. We must love their
Persons given us of God insteede of Parents, and doing that for us, which
natural Parents cannot do. We must love their pains, procuring us greater
benifits then any we can yield to them, and so leaving us still their debtors,
when we have done our most and best service to them.

For which cause our power failing us to requite them as we ought, we must
pray to the God of all power, for the safety, peace, and prosperity of
Princes, that our prayers may testify the zeal of our hearts, and desire of
our wills, to obtain from God far greater recompense for them, then we can
any way render them. Yet may we not slack to do them all the honor we can,
as well with humility of the outward Man, as with fidelity of the inward.
When S. Peter says, Honor the King, we must not thence exclude bodily honor,
which is sensible to others, and restrain it to the honor of the mind, which
neither we can show, nor they can see, but by external signs. The
Commandments of God bind the whole Man: no part is exempted where Submission
is required.

And because it is grown a great fashion in needelesse courtesy to bow and
touch the anckle, and in necessary duty to stand stark and stiff, let us
see in a word or two, whether the Custom of this Country, in kneeling to
their Princes, be seruilitie or flattery, as some reckon it, or a part of
their due honor and dignity. Joseph suffered his Brethren to bow down to the
ground before him, Genes. 43.
as he dreamt and said they should, and yet was Joseph but the next person to
King Pharaoh, and his vicegerent. This dream and deed were both of God: when
Jacob would foreshew his son Judah, that the Scepter should not depart from
his Lineage, he said, Genes. 49.
Thy Fathers Sons shall bow down unto thee: and herein Jacob was a Prophet,
and spoke by the Spirit of God. David, after he was Anointed to succeed Saul
in the Kingdom, 1. Sam. 24.
bowed himself with his face to the Earth before Saul: and when he was King,
2. Sam. 9.
he received the like homage from Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, 2. Sam.
14.
from Ioab his sisters son, from Absolon his own son, from Arannah the
Iebusite, 2. Sam. 24.
of whom he bought the threshing floor: all these bowing themselves (upon
several occasions) with their faces on the ground before King David, and yet
was David far from yielding or accepting more then his due. Nathan the
Prophet, of whom can be no suspicion that he used flattery, or was ignorant of
his duty, 1. Kings 1.
bowed himself (says the Scripture) to King David, with his face on the
ground, when he asked him, who should sit on his Throne after him. God never
allows the outward Man to dissent from the inward in any kind of duty: the
mouth blesses, where the heart loves: and the body stoopeth, when the mind
honors.

The third point which belongs to Princely dignity, is that which the
Apostle calls Custom and Tribute, I call Recompense. The duty may not be
denied, howsoever the reason thereof may be somewhat varied. Romans 13.6.
Therefore pay ye also Tribute, says the Apostle. If we refer this to the
former words, you must be subject, for therefore pay ye tribute, then is
Tribute a sign or sequel of our subjection: For since we our selves must be
subject, all that is ours, both goods and lands must needs be under the same
condition. More worthy are our bodies then our goods, and our lives then our
lands. If the Principal be not exempted from Subjection, how should the
Accessarie? If we refer it to the words following, for this cause pay we
Tribute, for they are Gods Ministers attending their charge, the Reason is very
sound and depends on the maine proportion of Gods Justice and providence.
Parents must be requited, because they cared for us, when we could not help
our selves. Preachers must be maintained because they labor in the Word and
Doctrine; generally God would have no man attend any office, by which he should
not live. How evident a Right then is it, that Princes supplying Gods place,
and applying themselves wholly to the preservation of their People, and safeguard
of the Commonwealth, should have their pains recompensed with all honor and
abundance, and their Affairs both of peace and war supported by the goods
and lands of their Subjects?

Our Savior (when it was asked) whether it were lawful to pay Tribute unto
Caesar, gives a farther reason, in saying, Render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's: Mat. 22.
in effect, Restore him his own. A double right has Caesar to the things which
we think and call ours: one by donation, another by preservation: for if we
look to the first subduing of all countries by the Sword, and the first
endewing of each place and person by the Prince, and the strengthening and
settling thereof by the Law so long as men obey, we shall find, that temporal
things in every Kingdom, as they were first received from Caesar, and have
been continued by Caesar, so they are still enjoyed under Caesar, and must, in
cases of disobedience, by Law return to Caesar: and when need requires, by
parts be refunded to Caesar's use. By preservation, not only our goods and our
lands, but our bodies and lives are Caesar's, though he never gave them, yet
because they are kept and guarded by his power and care, that they might be
ours. Otherwise we should enjoy them but a while, if every man might freely
have his forth, and execute his fury without restraint or fear of Revenge:
malice and mischief would so fast multiply. There is therefore a Tribute or
Due to Caesar as well of our labors and lives, as of our goods and lands; all
which being preserved by Caesar's Sword and Scepter, must be employed and
expended in Caesar's Service. Whether therefore Tribute and Custom be a seal
of our Subjection, or a debt of Compensation, or a part of Restitution, it is
plainly Gods ordinance, and a manifest consequent, Argument, or monument of our
obedience to Princes.

Howbeit to lighten the burden, procure the welfare, and retain the love of
their subjects, both Heathen and Christian Princes, that have been wise and
moderate, have rather eased, then fleeced their People; and having Lands and
Revenues sufficient of their own to maintain their Royal estate, have not
imposed, nor expected Taxes oftener, nor greater then their needful occasions
required. Tiberius the Roman Emperor was wont to say; Shepherds do sheere,
not flea their sheep; and Princes be Shepherds of their People, as God said
to Cyrus, thou art my Shepherd. Esaias 44.


Fear is added by the Apostle, as incident to Princes power, not properly, but
conditionally, when we do evil. Will thou be without fear of the power,
Romans 13.3,4
says he, Do well, so shall thou have praise of the same: but if thou do
evil, fear: he is Gods Minister to take vengeance on him that does evil.
Fear of vengeance is a medicine provided to prevent sin; Praise is Prize
appointed to provoke virtue. The King, as a Father, should cherish the good
with favor and encouragement: as a Lord he should repress the badde with
fear and punishment. The righteous are the sons of God, and worthy to
receive consolation: The wicked are the servants of sin, and well deserve due
correction: both fear and praise have their uses; the one as a bridle to
restrain malefactors, the other as a spur to edge on well doers. Reward of
good, and revenge of evil, are the sinews of each commonwealth. I may not
deny, but mercy on the penitent, where the men are not wicked, nor the Offenses
heinous, is a most princely virtue, considering man's weakness, and resembling
Gods goodness: yet in sins that cry to heaven for vengeance, if severity be
not used, Gods anger is kindled, and he often spares neither Prince nor
People, where such outrageous sins are freely suffered.

The Ensign of all this Honor due to Princes, is the Crown, which is given
them of God: for as the Sword presents their Power, so does the Crown their
Glory, and both from God. The signification of a Crown David shows, where
he says to God, Psalm. 8.
Thou have crowned him with Honor and Glory: and the approbation of the
Crown, that Princes wear, he likewise refers to God in saying, Psalm. 21.
Thou did set a Crown of pure gold upon his head: not meaning, it was
Gods act, but his ordinance, that Crowns were set on Princes heads.

There remains the end, why all this power and honor is given to Princes of
God, which is the preserving of his heretage. God has not lifted them to this
height, either to forget him, who aduanceth them; or to neglect those, of whom
they have charge; but to convert all their Authority and Dignity to the
faithful discharge of their duty. And this is Gods ordinance no less than
the former: For God erected no powers against himself, but under him; neither
did he ordain them for themselves, but for others. Heads are to moderate their
bodies, Shepherds to guide their flocks, Fathers to nourish their children,
Masters to restrain their Servants; and so are Princes to govern their
Realms. In the Princes duty I may be shorter, because I speak before a
religious and learned King, who both by pen and practice these many years
has witnessed to the world, how well acquainted he is with christian and godly
government: Yet my duty to God will not suffer me supplying this place, wholly
to pass it over with silence. I will therefore rather touch, then treat the
things pertinent to the Princes charge. Wherein are three things necessary to
be remembered: the Reservation of Gods right, from whom all is received: the
Moderation of man's life, to which all must be referred: the Execution of just
judgment, by which al must be measured. The Reservation of Gods right, David
expresses in these words: Psalm. 2.
Be wise now ye Kings, serve the Lord in fear. Be wise, and serve the Lord,
notes a restraint; in fear, shows an Account: Be wise, that is, so reign
in earth, that ye may reign in Heaven; so live here, that ye may live for
ever. Let not your power or honor deceive you, your Kingdom has limits, and
shall have an end, only the Kingdom of Christ is over all, and for ever.
Serve therefore the Lord. You are great Lords above others, but there is a
far greater above you. Your Sovereignty over men must be a Service under God.
You are not called to do your own wills, but his that exalted you. His Law
must be your level, his word your warrant. If you serve not him, you serve
sin, which is an ignominious and dangerous Service for men to have so many
Masters, as they have vices. Serve the Lord in fear, not distrusting his
goodness, but reuerencing his greatness. Life and death are in your hands,
heaven and hell are in his. Men have no power to judge you, but the judgment
of God inevitable. All shall appear before him, and all account to him: Psalm.
76.
He is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, where he is neglected or resisted:
Psalm. 21.
but he makes them blessings for ever, where he is regarded and served.

The Moderation of man's life, and keeping us as well in godliness and honesty as
in peace and tranquillity, is set down by the Apostle, as the maine cause, why
powers were ordained, and the Sword authorized here on Earth. 1. Timoth. 2.
Let Prayers and supplications, says he, be made for Kings, and for all in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty: he means that by their Laws and Labors we may enjoy these
blessings under them. To the Princes charge then belongs, as well the care of
true religion, and honest conversation, as the conseruing of public and
private peace, whereby our States and Lives are defended from all hostility,
misery, and injury. What benefits redound to us by Peace and Tranquillity,
daily experience teaches us, not only by freedom from wars, Invasions, and
spoils of Enemies abroad, but also by safety from wrongs, oppressions, and
grieuances of Defrauders and Maligners at home; insomuch that where God was
neither known nor served, yet so great was the utility and necessity of the
Princes Sword, that God commanded Heathen Tyrants and bloody Persecutors to be
obeyed and honored in Regard of their power from him, by which they vpheld
civil society and honesty amongst men. And besides the procuring of public
and private peace to each place and person, it is no small service, that
Princes do unto GOD by repressing the unbridled lusts of man's corruption, and
revenging the wicked attempts of man's presumption; I mean Adulteries, Incests,
Rapes, Robberies, Periuries, Conspiracies, Witchcrafts, Murders, Rebellions,
Treasons, and such like heinous and impious enormities, which would ouerflow
each Kingdom and Country, if the Princes Sword did not take due Revenge of the
Doers and Committers of such Outrages. To these Commodities of public
Authority when Godliness is joined, that under Christian Princes we may enjoy
safety, sobriety, and piety; what greater blessings can be desired in this
life, except the inward graces and gifts of gods spirit, which he reserueth to
his own power and choice. So that no Subjection, nor service of ours to
Superior powers can match the good things which we receive by their
government, and therefore no marvel, if God so sharply threaten and punish
the resisters of his Will, Wisdom, and Providence, whereby he contains men
in their duties, and keeps the Earth from brutish Confusion.

So maine and weighty Matters pertaining to Princes charge, the care of Gods
Truth and Church must be the chiefest: for should the bodies, goods, and
credites of men be preserved, and the honor and glory of God be neglected?
Should earthly ease be so much in request, and heavenly bliss so little in
desire? Fear we the Ruin of al things, where injuries and violences to men
are not repressed by the Princes Sword; and doubt we no danger where Idolatry,
Heresy, Atheism, and Blasphemy against God go unpunished? Is Gods hand
shortened that he cannot strike? Or his will altered that he will honor those
that dishonor him, and bless them that hate him? It is a Romish Error
Repugnant to the word of God, and to the examples of the best Kings and
Monarchs before and since Christ, to restrain Princes from protecting and
promoting the true Worship of GOD within their Realms. Neither has the Man of
sin more grosely betrayed his Pride and Rage in any thing, than in abasing
the honor and abusing the power, and impugning the Right of Princes; by
deposing them from their Seats, and translating their Kingdoms to others, by
absoluing their Subjects from all allegiance, and giving them leave to rebel,
by setting his feet in Emperors necks, and spurning off their Crowns with his
shoe, by making them his Bailiffes and Sergeants to attend and accomplish his
will, and not to meddle with supporting the Truth, or reforming the Church,
but as he likes. In all which he has showed himself like himself, to yoke,
whom God has freed, and to free, whom God has yoked, to deiect, whom God has
exalted, and to erect, whom God has humbled, to challenge, what God has
reserved, and to cross, what God has commanded. Yet must not Christian
Princes for all this neglect their charge to preserve Gods Heretage. Their
Scepters and Thrones, allowed them by God, are proofs that they may and must
make Laws, and execute Judgment, as well for godliness and honesty, which by
the Apostles rule are within the charge and compass of their commission. As
for peace and tranquillity, from observing this no man may draw them, since for
neglecting this no man shall excuse them. They must not be careful in humane
things, and careless in Divine; God ought to be served and honored by them,
that is, by their princely power and care, as much before men, as his truth and
glory excels the peace and welfare of men. It wants many degrees of a
Christian Government to look to the keeping of things, that must perish, and
to leave the souls of men as an open prey to Iniquity and Impiety.

Of righteous Judgment, which the Royal Throne (wherein Princes sit) being
Gods Seat, puts them in mind to execute, much might be said, did not the
Time prefixed straighten and hasten me to make an end. It shall suffice
therefore to admonish, that Princes themselves no less then other sent and
authorized by them, do execute the Judgments, not of Man, but of the Lord;
and in that respect, as the Seat is Gods, wherein they sit, so it must be
guided by Gods Law, and they must imitate Gods steps, who sits and
judges in the midst of them; and with whom is no leuitie, partiality, nor
iniquity. They must hear indifferently, discern wisely, and pronounce
uprightly. Their ears must not lie open or easy to false and privy accusers.
If it be enough to accuse, who shall be innocent? Their hearts must not be
carried with corrupt affections. If prejudice be Justice, who shall be
acquitted? Their hands must not be armed, or aggrauated with private Revenge.
If secret mislike may measure punishment, who can be safe? By Justice is the
Throne established, which neither stoppes the ear, fireth the heart, nor
loadeth the hand without, or above desert.

To conclude, since it pleased God, not long since, to take from us to his
heavenly rest, a Prince, that with great moderation and wisdom swayed the
Scepter of this Realm 45. years, supporting truth and peace amongst us,
maugre all her opposites and enemies. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that has magnified his mercies so much toward us, as to place
in the Throne of this Land, after her, the rightful Heir of her Crown, and a
King most worthy to succeed her, as nothing inferior to her, in knowledge,
prudence, magnanimity, bounty, mildnes of disposition, zeal of true religion,
and resolution to do Justice and Equity: and has matched him with a most
noble Spouse of so rare gifts, graces and virtues, as our most gracious Lady
and Queen here present is: And GOD grant, they both may long sit on their
Thrones in all holiness and happiness of life, to their perpetual honor,
and our continuing comfort; and their Princely Progeny after them, even all
the days of heaven, if it so please God: to the glory of God the Father, the
Son, and the Holie-Ghost, to whom the only wise, invisible, and immortal
King of all worlds be all power, and praise, now, and for ever,

AMEN.
Printed at London by V. S. for Clement Knight, dwelling in Paul's churchyard
at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1603.


