A friendly communication or Dialogue between Paul and Demas.

wherein is disputed how we are to use the pleasures of this life. By Samuel
Byrd, Master of Art, and fellow not long since of Benet College.

DM Imprinted at London for John Harison the younger, dwelling in Pater noster
Roe, at the sign of the Anchor, and are there to be sold.

1580.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, Samuel Byrd wishes grace, mercy, and peace, from
God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT may (perhaps) seem somewhat strange, there being so many learned and
godly books set out, that I have not been discouraged thereby from writing: I
desire therefore leave of the good Reader, that I may be heard what I can say
for my self. First therefore it may be answered, that though a matter be
handled of never so many: yet the variety of time and place, may always
minister some new and profitable matter to speak of. Beside this, I have
special reasons, and those also many, to allege for my self in this
behalf. First, it may be said, that though the Argument here handled,
especially dice and card play, have been condemned, as it were by a general
consent of all Nations: yet are there very few found which have in
particulars unfolded, and laid abroad the ugliness thereof. They have taken
the beastliness of this game to be so plain, and so evident a case, that they
have not used many reasons in the proof thereof. And least I should seem to
affirm this thing at a venture, without some trial, only to excuse my
self: the Reader shall understand, that I have made inquiry, and that the
most that has been said of any that I can hear of, is of Pascasius, which
has entered into the secrets of this idle pastime, and has bewraied the hid
thoughts of gamesters, and their distempered affections. In this respect (I
say) he has said very much, although concerning the unlawfulness of this
game, he has said nothing at all. Daneus, a learned divine, has proved that
this game is unlawful, but yet in fewer words then can satisfy the patrones
thereof. I have not heard of many other, and I am the sooner brought to think,
that but few have taken pains in this thing, because the forenamed Pascasius,
making great inquiry, could not hear of any (as he says) that has of
purpose written a treatise of this matter. It ought therefore (as I said
before) the less to be accounted an unnecessary work, which speaks of
that, that so few have spoken of, especially in our English tongue. And I have been the bolder to take this thing upon me, because I cannot think, but that
the Lord, which cannot away with idlnesse, and has granted me so great
leisure, requires it at my hands. This my enterprise shall the less be
meruailed at, if men consider that my miserable experience in these unthrifty
games, can make me speak that, which those that want the like experience
cannot, though otherwise they be never so eloquent. Beside that, it shall make
more for the glory of God, and more against this sin, when it is cried out
upon, of him that has had his delight therein, rather then when it is spoken
against of him that has had no acquaintance with it: and he teaches well,
which would have us, Excerpere ex ipsis malis, quod inest boni. I shall also,
by this means, cheer and make glad, the hearts of those good men, whom I
doubt not but I have heretofore grieved and vexed with following this confused
and foolish gaming. Neither shall it be a small comfort unto mine own soul,
not only for the present time, but even when those that stand about my bed
can do me no good, when the women are almost ready to bind up my face in a
napkin: It will be (I say) at that time a great stay unto my soul, when I
shall consider that, that hand, that has been so defiled with the cursed
bones, and with such filthy papers, now has been at defiaunce with them, and
has writ against them. This I doubt not in my greatest extremity, will be a
witness unto me, that both hand and foot, and every part of me are purged,
and cleansed, and purefied with the precious bloudshedding of the son of God
my almighty redeemer. All these reasons being well waied of mine indifferent
Reader, this my book shall (I hope) have the better enterteinement at his
hands. Concerning the matter and substance of this treatise, my purpose was,
to set down a difference between the child of God, and a natural man, in
using the present things of this life. The natural man, as a brute beast;
looks upon whatsoever is before him, and never goes further, and as a
brutish swine, which feeds under an Acorne tree, minds only the Acornes
that lie seattered upon the ground, never looking up to the tree from whence
they came: so this people nussel themselves in the creatures, never lifting up
their heart unto the Creator: and some are so gross, that they think God is
greatly honored, when they are so much delighted with the creature, that they
are never satisfied therewith. For when their ^ares are altogether busied in
piping and singing, when they rest their souls, and lay themselves down in
the melody of Organs and quauering, they call it an heavenly noise: but it is
an earthly noise, and they are Epicures that delight so much in it. And
therefore Plautus, describing Epicures, sets them out by these words: Viuunt
musice. For why may not the dronken glutton as well say, that sweet
luscious meat and drink, have an heavenly taste? Many of these men can tell
the natural reason of earthquakes, winds, snow, hail, and rain, and of all
meteors: they can show reasons, how meat and drink does nourish our life:
but the Lord and giver of life, they will not acknowledge. They are busied
altogether in secondarie means, but the cause of all causes, the high and
mighty God that holds the stern both of sea and land, and rules with his
beck both heaven and earth, and works usually by means, oftentimes without
means, sometimes contrary to all means, they will not remember. If a man
speak of this first cause, they think there is no wit in any such talk: they
are always in their A, B, C, as Calvin that good man notes: and as blind
buzzards keep altogether below: but the learned Christian, like an eagle
mounteth up aloft, and uses the creatures as steps and stairs to ascend
unto the high God, he is the resting place of their joy, he is the stay and
center of all their delights. They pity the foolishnes of such, as make their
back and their belly, their bowling, dicing and carding their God. For how can
the vanity of these vain things help them in the time of need? When they are
sore sick, their gaie coats must be let off. When their stomachs be taken from
them, what good will their meat and drink do them? They cannot stand to
bowl, they cannot sit up to play a set at Maw. If they think that the sight
of their companions will ease their grief, they cannot have that neither: for
their delight is in pleasant things, but the sight of a sick man is altogether
unpleasant. They will not be tender hearted, they will not be like affected,
they will not weep with him that weepeth, they will not by sorrowing by thee,
bear part of thy grief. Then shall thy soul be heavy, and thou shall have
none to comfort thee, but shall die in thy sins. This shall the end of these
men be, for they shall eat the fruit of their own labor. When these things
come upon them, then shall they know that they had good counsel given them.
But I forgette my self, which reason with the belly and the back, which have
no ears to hear. I may wish well, and so forth, but there is little hope of
amendment, I will turn my speech therefore to the^ that may do good in this
matter, and have authority to punish and put down this sin. And I hu^blie
beseech all those that are put in trust with any such office under her
Majesty, that they would in this behalf discharge that duty that is laid
upon the^, in banishing this iniquity that has such a great train of sin to
wait upon it. A man (says our statute) that suffers for his gain unlawful
games in his house, shall forfet, for every day. 40. s. except he has a
placard: and the^ it shall be contained in the same placard, what game shall be
used in the same house, and what persons, shall play thereat: to this he must
be bound in the Chaunserie, before he put it in execution. The gamesters
themselves shall forfette for every time vi. s. eight pence, but if they be
serving men and men of occupation (unless it be in Christmas) they shall forfet
for every time 20. s. And both serving men and other beside this forfet, may be
cast in prison, until they be bound in a sufficient sum to play no more. The
officers that make not search every week, or at the least every month, where it
is like unlawful games are used, shall forfet 40. s. And to the end that both
magistrates, and others, might the better be put in mind of their duty in this
behalf, proclamation of this statute must be made every quarter, in every
market. If I should set down how far the officers are from executing this good
law, they might be ashamed of themselves, and hang down their heads. For what
a shameful thing is it, that they should not only not put down this sin:
but put to their helping hand to set it up. They are bound to search where it is
likely such unlawful games are used: but they give lice^se to those men to
vittle whom they know, that they will keep all kind of ill rule, and
maintain lawles pastimes. What can be more contrary to their duty that they
are bound and sworn unto? They 2. ^l. 10. 27.
should knock down their signs, and make a iakes of their houses, or a
draught house to feed swine in: but they make them sanctuaries for sin. Those
dronken beasts, to whom before it was some pain to seek up their copesmates,
now they have more liberty to riot themselves, and to call gamesters unto
them. If all the dronken beasts in the town had laid their heads together, what
other thing would they have desired? Of themselves they could not have brought
this thing to pass, and therefore the Magistrate must help them. O that men
would consider aright of this thing. We all know, that when but one private man
does commit any trust to the faithfulness of another, what treachery is it,
one to deceive the other? For the one had not been hurt, except he had
committed his trust unto the other. He hoped he would have been an aid to him. To
whose faithfulness shall he then fly, seeing he is hurt by him to whom he has
committed himself? A man may be defended against another, for he puts no
trust in him: but to take heed of him, whom without breach of love he could
not once suspect, it is almost impossible. Seeing therefore it is so heinous a
matter, for one private man to be unfaithful to another, how great treachery
and treason shall we think it is, to be put in trust of such honorable
personages, in so weighty a matter, as concerns not only the safety of one
man, but of an whole country, not only to neglect this charge, but to betray
the truth, and to strengthen the enemy against it? Bear with me (good Reader)
though I be earnest in this matter: for this cousoning gaming, that I speak
against, is the father that begets, the mother that brings forth, and the
nourse that brings up, all kind of sin whatsoever. And who can remedy
this thing, but such as have authority, and are put in trust with this matter?
The cause of this losenes is, because men would feign be accounted pitiful. If
a gamester be of any wealth, then he plays away nothing but his own; though
poor men loose their customers, and be undone with bearing them company. If
they be all poor that play, then it is pity to trouble them. The scripture
indeed does oftentimes commend the poor unto the Magistrates, they must
neither oppress them themselves in their private affairs, neither must they
suffer others to do them violence: but when poor men do injury unto the
poor, when in steed of following their calling, they follow dronkennes, and
idle gaming, never regarding whether their poor wife and children sink or
swim: when by this means besides other mischiefs, in a short time the whole
parish must be charged with the^ and their charge, who sees not that in this
case to pity them, and to let them go unpunished, is extreme cruelty? The
merciful God, notwithstanding he sets down a special charge for the poor:
yet when they are thus unruly, he straightly commands the Magistrate to have
no respect of person: Thou shall not (says he) favor the person of the poor.
Leui. 19. And again, Thou shall not esteem a poor man in his cause. Exo. 23.
He repeateth his saying for fear of forgetting.

Every man is even a beast in his own understanding. We know not what it is to
be cruel, and what it is to be merciful, and therefore we must learn of the
only wise God, seeing he vouchsafes to teach us. Punish him, punish him: seems
to be a cruel speech in their cares: but they hear not the pitiful complaint
of the poor children that call for bread and drink, and thorough the noting of
the father, there is none to give them. If the punishment that is laid upon a
poor wicked man for his amendment, seem cruel, which would also fraie those
that see his punishment, or heard of it, from committing the like fault: what
great cruelty shall we think it to be, to grieve the hearts of all righteous
Lots, that can not choose but mourn, when they see sin unpunished? What
cruelty is it to se women and children almost starued, and the whole country
grow into decaie? The merciful God open the eyes of our Magistrates, and make
the^ see a difference between merciful severity and cruel pity. We have an
English proverb, which says, that foolish pity marreth a city: but it is
little thought upon. They may perhaps think they shall be well thought
of, by suffering the wicked to go scotfree, but it can not be. The people shall
curse such a one, and the multiude shall abhor him: but to them that rebuke
the wicked shalll be sweetness, and upon them shall come the blessing of every
good man. Pro. 24. 23. For open rebuke is better then secret love. And though
the parties punished, winch a little at the first: yet he that reproves a
man, shall find more favor at the last, then he that flattereth with his
tongue. If men would but open their eyes, experience would teach them the truth
of that which I say. For, by reason of their fearfulness and looseness, this
ways men make no account of them: they despise the Lord, and therefore the Lord
despises them. Now they do nothing, they are accounted as a king in a stage
play, that only makes a show, and when he has done, he goes his ways:
whereas otherwise the Lord would cause men to love and honor them. To keep their
court dinners, or to have their men and officers to wait upon them, is but an
outward thing, and an accessarie matter to give some countenance to their
office: but the chief thing, the essential part of their duty is, to do
justice and judgment. But men are hard to be entreated in this matter. I
therefore, beseech all pastors and teachers, that they would not suffer
themselves to be deceived witht he disguised names of parson or viccar, which
names the scripture knows not: but that they would remember, that they are
appointed as continual watch men to ring the alarm bell, and to beat and to
knock at the consciences of men, especially of the Magistrates, which may do
all in all in this matter. For, it is great pity, that they should want so
great a benefit, as is the putting them in mind of their duty, especially
seeing the whole Church receives so great loss by their slackenesse. If I
spoke of mine own head, my words might be little set by: for who am I that any
man should esteem of my saying? But because they be the words of the great God,
they must be set by. Apollos was a very eloquent learned man, and yet he was
very well content to be more the^ admonished of a poor simple man: I desire my
Reader, that he would do the like. For I protest before the Lord, and his
Angels, and before all the world, that I have not spoken any thing for any
delight that I have in reproving: the truth whereof, the Reader may easily see,
if he consider that I have reproved no man's fault so much as mine own. If I
seem to be more vehement then needs, the cause thereof is, because it is
both long, since this our good statute was made, and also a contrary custom
has almost ouergrowne it. It has been smoothered and shamefully kept under of
a long time. And it is noted of one, that a Law, the farther it is from the
first authority, which is as it were the first stroke wherewith it is first
sent abroad, the weaker it is. And that a custom, the longer it continues,
the stronger it is. I speak not this, to end any should be discouraged from
laboring against this sin, (for the word of God is mighty to bring down
euerystrong hold, and every high thought, that lifts up it self against the
almighty: but that we should rouse up our selves to fight more manfully
against it, seeing it has so many, and so mighty enemies to defend it. And
because there is little hope, that the Lord will take away this losenesse of
life from us, either by preaching or by the severity and diligence of the
godly magistrate, so long as we cast away from us so churlishlie his blessed
discipline, that has been so lovingly offered: let us throw our selves down
and crave forgiveness for this our great rebellion, and give enterteinme^t to
it at the last, that the use and praise of our catholic religion may be
seen, and that it may appear in her perfect beauty. We see now, that
every body may do what him lists, without controlement. The Church may
seem to be nothing else, but a company of outlawes. And what reproach is this
to the holy and righteous Lord Jesus Christ, which is the Lord thereof? What
Christian heart does not bleed, to see open and common dronkards to come to the
Church, and to be accounted catholics? How wonderfully does this sin
prevail for want of church discipline? Know you not (says the Apostle) that a
leaven sowreth a whole lump of dowe? How many are infected, whilst the
corrupted parties are not cut off? What great commodity is the whole Church
deprived off, for want of this communication? If these filthy persons were
thus banished the Church, and delivered unto Satan, until they had
acknowledged their fault, and washed their faces with tears of repentance
before all the congregation, this fearful punishment would make others afraid
to offend. The parties that has offended shall receive a singular commodity
by this thing: for now they be not of the Church, and yet are accounted to be
of the Church: they think their case is very good, and harden themselves in
their sins, and so go to hell (as it were) in a sleep, before they be aware:
whereas by this wholesome discipline they would be awakened out of their deep
sleep, they would be made ashamed, and so repent. Thus if they were confounded
in this world, they should be glorified in the world to come: upon their
repentance they should be received again, then should they, not only be in
the Church, but of the Church: their sins which were so fast bound in heaven,
but not in earth, should then be loosed, both in heaven and in earth. These
things are confessed and wished for in our communion book, as it were by a
general consent of the whole Realm, and that many years ago: and yet we
stand at a stay, and account those good men our enemies that persuade us to
the practice of it. The Lord for his mercies sake, that sits in the heavens,
and laugheth his enemies to scorn, and that can bring to pass with the
turning of an hand, whatsoever he will, bring this thing to pass. Wherefore
shall the Papists say, We never saw the like wickedness in our fathers days?
O Lord deliver thy word from this reproach, and deliver us from the slavery of
sin and Satan, and our own rebellious practices, to freedom and liberty,
which is no where else to be found, but in putting on the easy yoke of Jesus
Christ, and in being governed by his word. We shall not the^ any longer use the
name of Christ, as men are wont to use an old cloak, which put it on when any
stormy tempest is toward the^, and are ashamed of it when the storm is over.
Men shall not then any longer use the calling upon the name of God, as they
use Aqua vitae, only when they lie a dieng: but they shall profess the calling
of his name throughout the whole course of their life: then shall not the son
of God be ashamed of us before his father. If the glorious kingdom of Jesus
Christ were thus set up, we should have even an heaven upon earth. I am afraid
I have troubled my Reader with loking an Epistle, and therefore I will here
take my leave of him, wishing him well to fare in the Lord.

Thine in the Lord, Samuel Byrd.

The sum of every Chapter.
What pleasures are lawful, and that we may offend, by using them too
little, or too much. Chap. 1. fol. 1. What games are simply unlawful. Cha.
2. fol. 12. Continuing to much at lawful games, makes ^ Chap. 3. fol 29. That
our kind of dau^sing is utterly unlawful. Chap. 4. fol. 34. Of Dice and
Cards. Chap. 5. fol. 37. A remedy against such evils, as have been before spoken
of. Chap. 6. fol. 70.
FINI^
A friendly communication or dio^loge between Paul and Demas, wherein is
disputed how we are to use the pleasures of this life.
The first Chapter.
DEmas. I am come to see how you do sir, for me think it is long since I saw
you.


Paul. It is long since I saw you in deed, but I will not say you are
therefore welcome, for if you would come oftener, you should be much more
welcome.


De: Well, because as you say, I come so seldom, I will tarry with you so
much the longer, and if it were not for hindering your study, you should have
me dwell with you this whole afternoon, for I have many things to talk with
you off, you shall see I will make you werie of me before I go. The last time
we were in company together, if you remember, there was much talk had to and
fro, how we should use this present world. And me think it was well said of
one, that seeing it is the will of God to have us live in this world: It is
likewise his pleasure to have us enjoy the pleasures of this life. And yet on
the other side, the riotous life of a great many was found fault withal, and
that also not without good cause. I would therefore gladly learn some
certeintie in this matter, I would gladly learn I say, when we use the
pleasures of this world aright, and when we abuse them. But to the end you
might understand my meaning aright, you shall understand that I call those the
pleasures of this life, not which are simply evil as adultrie is, or such
things as we inioie by stelth, but I speak of such as may be both used, and
not used without any breach of the commandment: And because I am somewhat
doubtful what those are that are of this kind, I pray you tell me what they
are, and how a man may be bold to use them.


Paul. The pleasures of this life may very well be divided into such as are
common to all men, as meat, drink, and such like: or else into such as are
used but of some men, of this kind are games, for all men you know, are not
gamesters. Concerning the first kind the Apostle tells us, that the earth is
the Lords, and all that there in is. And therefore we may boldly feed on any
thing that is sold in the Shambles. We may be bold I say to delight our
taste with any kind of foul that flies in the air, with any kind of
living thing that goes on the earth, with any kind of fish that lives in
the water, or with any kind of fruit that grows out of the earth. It is
lawful to delight our hearing, our eie-sight, our smelling, our taste, our
feeling: with the use of any thing that ye Lord has made, for example, it is
lawful to delight our hearing with the singing of birds, or with any other
kind of honest melody. It is lawful to delight our eyes with beholding ye
glorious majesty of ye heavens, yt are drawn out like a curtein. We may
behold the Sun when he comes out of his chamber, like a bridegroom to run his
race, we may behold all the host of heaven, and all the glory of the earth,
we may delight our eyes with looking upon any amiable color or pleasant
sight, we may take pleasure in any fresh and sweet smelling savor. We may
feed as I said before on whatsoever is pleasant to our taste: we may refresh
our selves with heat in Winter, and with cooling things in Summer. And 1. Tim.
4. 1.
as the Apostle is bold to call the forbiddng of any kind of meat the
doctrine of devils: Because the occasiion of giving God thanks therefore, is
thereby taken away: so I dare boldly say, that the forbidding a man to
refresh any of his other senses with any honest delight, is likewise ye
doctrine of devils, so far am I from conde^ning any honest pleasures. We may
therefore sport our selves as I have said, or to speak more particularly, we
may with delight view the earth ye is apparelled, with flowers, herbs, and
trees, and with all kind of fruit. The incredible multitude whereof is
distinguished with an insatiable vareitie, whereunto we may add fountains,
Tullie de natura deorum. 2. book.
goodly springs, clear waters, rivers, with their green banks. The huge
height of mountains, the largnesse of the wide fields: to conclude, the whole
earth, with the rich treasures that are hid in ye bowels thereof, what a comely
grace have gold and silver above other mettels? what also and how many kind
of beasts are there, both wild and tame? how trimly do the birds fall upon
the earth? the ground is divided by the diligence of man, some to pasture, some
to tillage, and some is taken up for places to dwell in. The sea is full of
fishes, both great and small. If we consider the beasts of the earth it is
wonderful, what care the dammes have to defend their little ones? how
lovingly do the hen gather her chickins under her wings? Now if we shall come
to the comely proportion of every living thing, especially of man, how
trimly are our bones knit together fit, for the moving and for every action
of the body. The senses being the interpreters and messengers of things, are
very fitly placed in ye head, as it were in a castle, ye eyes as spies,
possess the uppermost part of the face, as it were a tower, by their warning
the body, auoideth many harms. All sounds and all savors do naturally
assend upward, our ears therefore and our nostrels, which are made to receive
sounds and savors, are very fitly placed aloft. Our taste which tries all
those kind of meats and drinks which we feed on, dwells in that part of ye
mouth, where through all meats and drinks do go. Our feeling is dispearsed
throughout our whole body, by which means, if any harm come to the body by
feeling, it may soon be espied and remedied. Our eyes have a covering which
is made soft, least our eye sight should be hurt. Our ears are made winding
and have wax in them, least by being plain and empty, some thing should
enter in and annoy us. Our eyes are able to judge of the order and comeliness
of every thing they look on. Our ears can tell which is a sweet, and which is
an harsh sound, whereby were found out sundry kind of instruments, and the
whole art of Music. What our taste can do, we are taught by the sundry kind
of dishes that are daily devised. With these and all such like pleasant
meditations may we delight our selves. Now concerning the right use of all
these things that I have spoken of, we shall have a good direction, if we
consider that they are all the creatures of God, and that we cannot have the
use of any thing which is not his, for he made all, of him, for him, and
through him are all things, and therefore it is good reason that he should be
glorified in all. We do not glorify the Lord in his creatures as we ought to
do, when either we bar our selves to much from the use of those things
that he has left fit for us: or else when we use them too much. Concerning
the first kind we are to-learne that the creatures of God are as steps and
stairs whereby we arise to the acknowledgeing of ye creator these gifts of God,
are as it were his hands, whereby he does lead us unto himself, that gave them.
But how can we be lead unto him, when we refuse to take him by the hand? how
can we be thankful for that which we cast a side and make no account of? How
can we acknowledge the bountiful goodness of God toward us, when we refuse
those things which would cause us to have a sencible feeling of it within our
selves? for this cause is the forbidding of meats called the doctrine of
devils. And although this voluntary abstinence may seem to have a glorious
show in the sight of men: yet the Colos. 2. 16
Apostle is very careful to have us take heed of it. And we are to take the
better view of this the Apostles admonition, because for want of due
consideration thereof, the Pope has of along time beguiled us. For though he
has opened a gappe to all kind of losenesse of life, though he has given us
great liberty to break all the commandments of God, yet in this matter he
has been very strait two days in every week thorough out the year, and
all the Lent long we might eat neither beast, nor foul, nor of any thing that
came from either of them. Fresh fish, and the cherishing meat that is to be
sold at the Poticaries is dear and hard to come by, so that the meat that was
left unto us to feed upon, was dry and tough salt fish that has no wholesome
moisture in it. I remember, Fuccius ye Physician in his institutions, speaks
merely of this matter. It was to be feared (says he) that if the Pope had
reigned over us still, he would have made us eat haie with the beasts of the
field. This strait charge of the Pope, had a goodly outward show: but if we
look well upon the matter, we shall see it was nothing but mere Hypocrisy.
In forbidding these meats, the taming of the body was pretended: but why then
was not wine forbidden? Why were not Poticarie Iuncates and delicates taken
away? which are able to set ye flesh aloft more a great deal, the^ beef, or
mutton. Beside this saltfish is not ye best meat, to prepare our hearts to
prayer as ye Papists would make us believe: nay, this cold watrish windy meat,
does trouble and disquiet our body, and makes us more unfit for good
meditatio^s, the^ any other kind of meat. And therefore it is not without good
cause, yt the Apostle has given us this admonition. I deny not, but a man may
have a good meaning in this kind of voluntary abstinence, and yet if his
straitnes be over great he may offend. Timothy was a good man, and yet he did
amiss, in yt he weakened his body too much And therefore ye Apostle wills
him to drink no longer water, but to use a little wine, for his stomachs sake,
and his often infirmities. The Lord 1. Tim. 3
is not like a covetous householder yt co^pelleth his servants to fast, yt his
vittels might be spared, neither does he envy us our meat. He is rich enough,
and is always able to give in great abundance all such things as we have need
of. Indeed if we abstain from meat, to yt end we might be more fit to pray,
this kind of abstine^ce is very acceptable unto him: but if we faint and pine
away we too long fasting, so ye we cannot pray, or walk in our calling so
cheerefullie as otherwise we might, we are the^ in as great falt, as if we had
over eat our selves, or as if by over drinking our selves, we were made unfit
to do any good thing, and therefore when fasting is commanded unto us in ye
scripture, prayer is always joined withal. The heathen philosophers,
especially ye Stoics, were wont to speak very co^te^ptuouslie of all ye
commodities of this life: but yet we Christians like never awhit ye better of
the^: for their affections, which were not delighted with ye commodities of
this present life, were not set upon a better life: but we make some account of
them: and although in respect of Christ, we account all the world as dounge:
yet otherwise we take them as signs and scales of the favorable love of God
toward us. By them we are assured that he has greater goods in store for us,
against such time as he shall take us unto himself. We may also abuse the
creatures of God, by using of them too much: for whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do, we must do all 1. Cor. 10. 31
to the glory of God. And therefore when the lawful use of meats and drinks
is set down in the scripture, there is also mention made of giving 1. Tim. 4.
4 Romans 14. 6.
of thanks: but when we stuff our bodies, with meats and drinks, the heart
is kept down so, that it cannot ascend unto the acknowledging of the giver.
When we put on gorgeous or curious apparel, to marvel at our selves and to
contemn other, we cannot be thankful. For, how can thankfulness proceed from
a voluptuous and a proud heart? How can we lift up a thankful heart unto the
creator, when we stay so much in the creature it self that we are never
satisfied therewith? For this cause are we commanded if riches increase, not to
set our hearts upon them. Look not (says Solomon) upon the wine Pro. 23 31.
when it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup, or goes down
pleasantly, we must not make a God of our belly, for we read, that the Jews
that had such a greedy desire to their meat, died with Quails in their
mouths. For though a man have abundaunce, yet his life stands not in his
riches: Man lives not by bread, but by the providence of God. It was said to
the rich man that reioiced so much in his riches, and said to his soul, Soul
thou have Luke. 12. 17
much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy
pastime: O fool, this night will I fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose
shall those things be which thou have provided? The Lord does sometimes of
purpose lessen those means whereby he will save us, least we should stay our
selves too much upon them: for this cause, the Lord does strike the Judge 7, 2.
earth with barrenness, least our mind should be too much busied in thinking
what great crops we have had: for this cause by sickness he dot^ often take from
us, ye vigor of our taste and does mingle all our pleasures with grief, as it
were with an unsavory tongue as the book of ye preacher teaches us. He
sometimes takes from us our wise counselors, our valiant and politic
capitanes. He sometimes se^deth earthquakes. He beats down our strong holds
and castles, and all our munition of war, to ye end we might see what a vain
thing it is to trust in any earthly defense. An horse says ye Prophet is but
a vain thing to save a man's life. It is but a vain thing to trust in Princes,
for except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in vain. Our trust
therefore must be in ye name of God, that made both heaven Psalm. 127.
and earth, those yt trust in him shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed
but remains for ever. Here alone does the difference consist between ye
child of God, and a natural man: ye child of God, has his heart knit unto him
yt made all things: but the natural man is altogether linked to the creature,
they make it ye place, where all their affections have their abode, it is their
Summu^ bonum, it is their happiness, it is their only joy. The philosophers
were very diligent markers of ye goodly properties that were in ye creatures of
God, they spoke very plentifully of the virtue of herbs and metals, and of
yt nature of every living thing. They knew by ye creatures yt there was a
God, yet did they never worship him as God, neither were they thankful, but
became vain in their imaginatio^s, and their foolish heart was full of darkness.
Eue^ Tullie their chief Orator, in his Romans 1. 21.
book De natura deoru^, when he had discoursed at large, of ye great wisdom
and bountifulnes yt was to by seen in the workmanship of ye creatures, yet as
if he had been half a god himself, or only an idle looker on, and had no
benefit by the^, he uses not one word of thanksgiving. He was a very eloque^t
man, and had tongue at will, yet when he should come to sound forth ye praise
of God, he was altogether speachles: but ye Prophet David intreting of ye same
matter, breaks out into thankful speeches. O Lord says he, how manifold are
thy works? In wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy
riches. And again, I will sing unto the Lord all my life, I will praise my God
while I live. And again, O my soul praise thou the Lord, Praise ye the Lord.
Likewise Psalm. 104.
in the 8. Psalm, O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the
world? His whole Psalms are full of such meditations, for this thankfulness
that I speak of, was always the foot of his song. O that the Papists would
but advisedly consider this thankfulness of the Prophet David, our
controversy then about Organes, and chaunting of songs, would soon be at an
end. They can readily allege, all the kind of instruments that David used,
but they will never remember withal, that he praised the Lord in them. They
may understand if they will, by the 14. of the first to the Corinths, that
there was made a distinction in the soundes, and that the people knew what was
piped, and what was harped. Psa. 106. 4^
But they think it makes no matter though English men sing a song in the
Latin tongue that they understand not. The note is the thing that they take
pleasure in, so that as we see they sing not to the Lord, but to their own
ears. And that makes them speak so baselie of our songs. We all with one
voice in a plain and distinct note sing lustily unto the Lord with a good
courage. And that they like not of, their hearts are set upon the melody of
the descant: they worship him that made the note, they do not sing to the
Lord. Where do they find that the songs of David, used in ye service of God,
were of five or six parts? Where do they find that they quauered and divided
the note so, that the people could not understand what was sung. In the 25. of
the first book of the Chronicles, the order of music that the Jews used in
the service of God is set down, but there is no mention made of ^uch babbling
music. The end wherefore their songs were sung, is directly against this
chaunting. 1. Chro. 16. the. 4. and. 7. verse. The Lord will be worshipped in
spirit and in truth. And if we will sing David's Psalms, we must bring David's
spirit, or else the Lord cares not for our melody. Our delight must not rest in
any thing but in the Lord, he is the Lord our God, and we must have none other
Gods but him. The Lord himself has commanded us to honor those that he has
set over us, and the Apostle teaches us, that it is the first commandment with
a promise to obey our parents. And yet he yt loves father or mother better
then Christ, is not worthy of him. He yt takes more pleasure in his parents
then in Christ, is rejected of him. Likewise we must have in estimation the
ministers of the word for their works sake, yet we 1. Cor. 3. 21.
must not absolutely rest our selves upon the^, we must not rejoice in me^,
but we must rejoice in God yt works by men. Now if the Lord will not have us
depend too much upon men yt sow into our hearts yt immortal and Psa. 014
incorruptible seed of eternal life: how greatly shall we think will it
displease ye Lord, to delight so much in yt dunghill 1. Cor. ^
things of this world which perish with the use? We may rejoice (as I said
before) in using these corruptible creatures of God, for wine makes glad the
heart of man (as the Prophet says) but yet we must rejoice as if we reioiced
not. For if it be too vehement, the Lord cannot away withal. Woe be unto you
(says Christ) that Lu. 6. 2. ^
are rich, for you have received your consolation, woe be unto you that are
full, for you shall hunger, woe be to you yt now laugh, for you shall wail and
weep. They lie upon beds of Iuorie (says ye prophet Amos) and stretch
themselves upon their beds, and eat the Lambs of ye flock, and the Calves out
of the stall, they sing to the sound of the violl. They invent to themselves
instruments of Music like David. David was never so busy in devising
Instruments to serve Gods glory, as they were in devising of them to serve
their wanton lusts. It is lawful no doubt to laugh. It King. 18.
is lawful to eat a fat Lamb or a fat Calfe. It is lawful to delight our
selves with music, for the earth is the Lords, as the Apostle says. Yet unto
that people yt bathed themselves in these pleasures, that wallowed and laid
themselves down in them, never remembering the Lord that gave them, these
terrible woes of the Prophet are thundered against. The reason why the rich
glutton being in torments ^uke. 16, ^uke. 8.
could receive no comfort was, because of the pleasures that he enioied in this
world. Remember (says Abraham) that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy
pleasure, and likewise Lazarus pains, now therefore is he comforted, and thou
art tormented. And we are to consider that one kind of men that hear the word
unprofitably, and remain still in their cursed estate, are those into whose
hearts voluptuous living enters in, and makes the seed unfruitful. And
therefore Christ our Savior setting down unto us the suddenness of his
coming, wills us in any case to take heed of surfeiting and drunkenness.
I would to God, we would wisely consider of this admonition, we should not then
surfeit as we do, we should not then have so many and so sundry kinds of
dishes as we have. We use to say, do not men know when they have eat
enough, and may not a man eat of sundry dishes without surfeiting? They
always mark what may be done, but they never consider what is like to be
done, and what is commonly done. They think that because no man will be known
of it, when he has eaten too much, that therefore men seldom or never over
eat themselves: But our savior Christ would have us to suspect our selves. He
gives us a watch word, Take heed, says he: If there were no danger in the
matter, this warning had been in vain. How is it possible but that at our
feasting, as we use the matter, we should offend against this commandment of
Christ? First we must have brawne and muscadine, next to that we must have
stewde meat, (the rest of our meat must not be seen all this while) when men
have well dined with these two services, then must we have roast meat and baked
meat: last of all, we must have a new dinner with sundry kind of fruits. I
grant at such meetings we may have a more liberal diet then we were
accustomed, neither are sundry kinds of meats to be misliked of, if they
come roundly in together, so that every man may eat where he thinks good.
But if our sundry dishes, come at such sundry times, with such a pause
between them, it is a thousand to one, that we shall break this
commandment. It is not for naught, that the godly man Job was afraid that
his sons had offended at their banketting. This rioting sets us altogether
upon the hoigh, it steals from our hearts the consideration of our own
vileness, and so long as we are thus aloft, we can have no thankful
remembrance of him that gave these things unto us, for thanks giving if it be
in truth, is done with the beating down of the heart, and with abasing of our
selves. And therefore the wise man says, It is better to go to the house of
mourning: then to the house of feasting: this reason that I speak of is added,
because says he, this is the end of all men, and the living shall lay it to
his heart. And again, Anger is better then laughter: for by a sad look the
heart is made better. The heart of the wise Preac. 7. 4.
is in the house of mourning: but the heart of fools, is in the house of mirth.


Demas. The proofs that you have brought are plain proofs, I cannot say
against it: And yet I have a probable reason, which may seem to make somewhat
against that which you have said, my reason is this. I think, you nor no man
else of any judgment, will deny, that he that teaches, that it is not
lawful for any man, at any time to eat any kind of meat (so that in the
forbidding thereof respect be not had to the common wealth) sets down the
doctrine of devils, although he neither forbid all kind of meat, nor at all
times, nor to all men. How then can you say, that it is not lawful, when one
has comforted himself sufficiently with some kind of meat, to have the use
of new delicates without being in the like fault?


Paul. The Papists I grant you in forbidding flesh and white meat in Lent,
and in forbidding Priests (as they call them) to marry, taught the doctrine of
devils. For they forbadde meats, they forbadde marriage. And although they
forbadde not meat at all times, nor marriage to all persons, yet they forbadde
both: and as Master Jewel tells them, Magis and minus non mutant speciem.
For as he that kills a few men, is a murderer: so he that forbids meat
at some time of the year, forbideth meat. But I do not forbid any meat to
any man, at any time. For when I see a man that has eaten enough, and yet is
ready to eat more, if I forbid him, and tell him it is gluttony to do so:
do I by so saying forbid any kind of meat? Who sees not that I forbid the
stuffing of his body with gorge upon gorge, and not any kind of meat, for if
his stomach were empty, the meat were lawful enough, even at that time, for
that person.


Demas. Yet I do not see how you can call it unlawful, when a man exceeds
in eating. For where is then that difference, between lawful and 1. Co. 10. 29
expedient that the Apostle speaks of?


Paul. The Apostles meaning was not to tell us, that abusing of any
indifferent thing was only not expedient, but not unlawful. His purpose was
not to make any such nice distinction, but only this, that all indifferent
things, though in themselves they were lawful, yet the circumstaunces might
make them unlawful. The Apostle bestows three or four whole Chapters, in
teaching the Romans and the Corinthes, how to use indifferent things. He
tells Cor. 8. 12.
the Corinthes, that by using their liberty too much, they did sin against
Christ, so that as we see, they say no thing, which when a thing is
indifferent, say it makes no matter how it be done.


Of gaming. The second Chapter.
DEmas. You have spoken sufficiently of those pleasures that are common to all
men: speak I pray you in like manner, of such as are used but of some men, of
gaming I mean.


Paul. Gaming is an exercise, which a man takes in hand to delight himself
withal. By calling it an exercise, I make a difference between it, and other
pleasures that are alredie spoken of, for we do not use to call eating,
drinking, smelling, and such like delights, by the name of exercises. And I
make a difference between it and the continual exercises which we daily
labor in, when I say, that the end of gaming is to delight a man withal,
for other exercises do especially respect profit.


Demas. I pray you sir, what think you of this matter? some me think are
very strait which would not have us spend one minute of an hour in any
recreation: they bring their reason out of the Apostle, Ephe. 5. 16.
which would have us redeem the time, because the days are evil.


Paul. It is a clear case, that a man does redeem the time sufficiently,
when he makes any lawefull delight, an occasion to lift up a thankful mind
unto God for it. And it is certain, that the dumpish sadness which dries up
a man's bones does displease the Lord. The Lord was not one whitte displeased
with the inward fretting, and 1. Kings. 21. 4.
pensiveness of wicked king Achab. He likes well enough of a merry and
cheerful countenance, and if a man's talk be witty, and has no unsavory
vanity in it, though it be pleasant, the Scripture will bear a man out in it
well enough. Notwithstanding, thus much one may well gather by that place.
Because men commonly run at riot, and make themselves dronken with delighting
in the creatures: For this cause the children of God ought to use them warily,
that as on the one side, the evil example of many is of great force to draw
them to inordinate desire to them: so on the other side, their watchful and
wary taking heed, should be as forcible to drive them to godly moderation in
them, and this is it that the Apostle calls the redeeming of the time. Now,
concerning gaming, to ye end we may know what games are lawful, and what are
unlawful, we are to consider, that all games whatsoever, must be made suitable
to the commandment, they must agree in every point with Christian doctrine.
Even an heathen man by the light of nature could see, that this rule Tullie. 2.
his office, 1. book.
is to be observed, and therefore it is a shame, that we Christians should
refuse it Our play, says he, must not be, Alienus ab honestatis actionibus.
Seeing therefore this rule must stand, we may be bold to condemn all the
whole rabble and rout of games that are used at Christmas as we call it. We know
that Christ was never any Christmas Lord, he was never Lord of misrule, why
then do we celebrate his feast with unruly gaming? Toward Christmas the
scholars may shut their master out of school. A fellow whom they call
the Christmas Lord, may be checkmate with his betters. But the Lord Jesus
would have us to show in outward behavior, that reverend estimation that we
have of our superiors in our hearts. This unruly fellow, may cause those
which offend against his unruly laws, to have ten pound and a purse, to be
stockt or pumpt, which they call beheadding. At this time, if men can get a
simple fellow, and put him to pain with mumling a sparrow, they think it is
trim sport. At an other time of the year, women have a day, which they call
rock mundaie, then use they to bind, and otherwise to abuse such men as Deuteronomy.
22. 7.
they can master, but our Jesus Christ abhors all kind of cruelty. He
will not have us deal cruelly, no not with little birds, how much more then
does he hate it toward men, which are made according to his own Image? There
be also games that be filthy which tend to the overthrow of yt commandment
wherein all uncleanness is forbidden. Of this kind are our light kind of
daunsing, sawing of green timber, serving men in sackes, and such like. But
the Lord Christ commands us to have Mat. 5.
chaste hearts, chaste eyes, and chaste hands. The Lord so abhors this
ribauldrie, ye when men strive together one with an other, if the wife of the
one come near for to rid her husband out of the hands of him yt smites him,
and puts forth her hand, and take him by his priuities, then says the Lord
Deu. 25. 1^.
to the magistrate, thou shall cut off her hand: thine eye shall not spare her.
We see the self same filthiness that we use, was revenged with the loss of a
hand, notwithstanding the party that offended meant thereby to deliver her
husband from violence. We have games also which consist in getting moneie one
from another, and yet the Lord Christ has forbidden all covetous desires. We
have games wherein we make some or other laughing stocks to the whole
company. Of this kind are hinch, pinch, and laugh not, and such like: But the
Lord Christ would have us maintain as much as we can, the good report of our
brother: and how is this done when we go about to make the company believe,
that he is a fool, and deserves to be laughed at. In the five and twenty of
Deuteronomie we are commanded to keep a moderation in correcting a man,
although he does deserve, and ought to be punished, least he should seem
despised in our sight, how much more ought we to avoid this thing, when our
brother has not offended? We Leui. 19. 14
must not speak evil to him that is deaf, the Lord under this one kind
forbids us to twit our brother by any of his infirmities or wants, we
therefore sin against the commandment, when by any kind of sport we
vpbraide him with simplicity, and want of wit, we ought to be feet to the
lame, and eyes to the blind, Job. 29. 15.
wisdom to the foolish, and not vpbraide them with their wants. Men I know
will make but a light matter of it, for fools count it but a sport to sin,
they think there is no harm done, except there be an arm or a leg broken.
But the Lord does make more account of his commandment then so. When Adam had
eaten of the forbidden tree, there was no harm done, as they call harm. Yet
this sin, that they make so light account of, waied him down to the pit of
hell, and if he had not had a redeemer, he and all his posterity should most
certeinlie have been swallowed up of eternal confusion, and Christ came not to
destroy the law, but to fulfill it. Whosoever says Christ, breaks the
least commandment Mat. 5.
and teaches men so, he shall be least in the kingdom of God, that is to
say, he shall not be in the kindgome of God at all, for it follows
immediately, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharesies, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: and we
know that their righteousness had respect to outward murder, to outward theft,
till heaven and earth perish, one iotte or title of the law shall not escape,
till all things be fulfilled. I read not long since a learned and a godly
treatise, wherein is contained a speech belonging to this matter, which because
it is excellent, and because a notable judgment of God did follow upon the
preaching thereof, which did as it were from heaven, feel the truth of it, I
will repeat it unto you. Has Jesus Christ come into the flesh to lay the
bridle of our necks, to run after our own vain devises? Has he obtained by
his coming twelve days of God the father, for carding, dising, masking,
muming, for mocking and mowing, for crieng and laughing, for the practicing of
every vain devise that comes to our heads all the year. Or do we think
that this profaning of so earnest a matter, this turning of the grace of God
into license and wantonness, shall be unpunished? What is this but even to
give a reed into the hand of Jesus Christ, and to mock his kingdom? What
crowning of him is it in this vain mirth and wantonness, but with briers and
thorns to prick his head? Is this the joy spoken off by the Angel that came
to declare his birth, told he tidinges of this gladness? Is this the
benefit that thou have purchased to us by that wonderful mystery of thine
incarnation, O Emmanuel? Oh I am ashamed that it should ever be heard of among
the Jews and Turks, that the Christians at that time of the year when their
savior was borne, should give themselves for many days, from their ordinary
modest, and shamefaced behavior, from walking ordinarily in their vocation
and studies, to immodest and shameful practices, to immodest and waking, and
all for vain and unfruitful works of darkness. Wherein differs our
celebration of the nativity of Christ from the popish Christians? How do we
look to call Papists from their vain conversation: when we are not our selves
a foot from them? I think if but thus much were spoken amongst the Heathen
against so great an abuse, they would repent in sackcloth and ashes. And yet I
know that this people will not be brought from this vain conversation, for
they love it and delight in that: without these things, they complain that it
is but a dead Christmas. These men will never confess the truth of this
doctrine, till God have sealed it with some plague or other. This plague of God
was threatened by a godly learned young man in a sermon that he made at
Trinity College, somewhat before Christmas, after Christmas the plague that
was threatened fell. For a scholar of Trinity College strangled himself
right over the place where he with other kept such revel route. Who is wise
says David, and will mark these things? The sin which before seemed as
light as a feather, did then lie heavy at his heart, his merry companions
could not take away the sting thereof from him, this sin so troubled his
mind, that the violent renting asunder of the soul from the vodie, seemed
nothing so grievous, nay, he used this violent renting that I speak off as a
remedy to ease himself of the other. The Lord would awake us by this his
fearful judgment out of our deep sleep of sin, least we should go to
hell as it were in a sleep before we are aware of it, and yet we are still
foolish, and can take no profit by it. Because these judgments of God come so
seldom, we soon forgette them: but if the Lord should thus daily punish
us, we would not think that there is any judgment to come. Because this
fearful plague was not executed upon our own persons, we are therefore without
fear: but it pleases the Lord to admonish us by this his judgment: and how
could this thing have been, if we our selves had been thus punished: we think
we have wit enough to avoid this thing, but in thinking so we think amiss,
for the Scholar had wit enough: and if he had not, I am sure Achitophel had,
and yet did he thus violently destroy himself. When the judgments of God
fall upon us, all the wit we have cannot avoid them, the only way to
avoid the fearful judgments of God, is to forsake our rioting, which is the
cause thereof.


Of continuance at gaming. The third Chapter.
But I will go forward and speak more particulerlie of gaming, Games me think
may very well be divided into such, the chief sport whereof consists in
looking on, of which kind, are hunting, hawking, stage plays, and such like.
And into such wherein men are the chief dooers, of which kind are daunsing,
dicing, tenesing, and such like.

Demas. I pray you sir, what think you of hunting? do you think it an
unmeet exercise for a Christian? I have heard that some have utterly disalowed
of it, because Esau a wickedman hunted.


Paul. What some men do I cannot tell, for my part I dare not condemn it: as
for the reason of Esau, his hunting it is nothing worth. For as every thing
that a godly man does, is not by and by to be allowed off, so is not every
thing that a wicked man does always to be misliked. Beside this, though Esau
being a wicked man hunted, yet he did it at the commandment of his father
which was a good man, my reason wherefore it ought not to be condemned is this.
The Lord has given the free use of all his creatures to us Christians, we
may safely feed of them all. In giving therefore the use of the^, he allows
of the means whereby we come to have ye use of them, for otherwise he should
but mock us. Only the faults of hunters and fawkners I will not take upon
me to defend. The spoiling of men's douehouses for the provision of their
hawks, the spoiling of men's corn, with the entering of their hawks, at the
beginning of harvest, the breaking of gaps, whereby men's ground is laid open
to the spoil, these things cannot be allowed off, for if the Lord cannot
abide that we should profit our selves by the hurt of an other, he can much
less abide that for our pleasure we should be an hinderaunce to any. The
general thing that is to be observed in all games is this, that no man bestow
too much time in them although they be lawful, for every man without
exception, must buisie himself in some certain and daily calling, but those
that follow gaming cannot do so: therefore no man must follow gaming. But to
the end it might be known what I mean, I term this a calling (not to pay
to every man that which is his, or to do as a man would be done to,) for
that is a general thing whereunto all men are called, but daily to exercise
himself in some certain trade to the profit of others, this is it which I
term a calling. But because you do not yet understand my mind, I will speak
more plainly. This calling which I speak off consists either of the daily
labor of the mind, or of the daily travel of the body. Those callings
which consist of the labor of the mind, are Physic, Law, or Divinity. He
which does diligently seek wisely to apply those Physic helps which the
Lord has appointed for the preserving or restoring of our health, he behaueth
himself well in his calling. In the profession of the Law likewise, he which
bends his pleading, his counselling or giving of sentence, to this end that
every man may enioie that which is his, he lives well in a good calling. In
Divinity he which feeds his flock diligently, lives honestly in an
honest calling. He I say which exercises himself painefullie in any of
these professions, or teaches the tongues, or any liberal art, whereby men
may be made fit to practice more profitablie any of these professions. He
lives in an honest calling: the like may be said of any occupation or
bodily travel, whereby the necessities of this present life are conuaied unto
our brethren. But every body will not grant me that every man is bound to
labor in some one and certain calling, and therefore I will stand somewhat in
the proof of it. The Scripture says, that man is borne unto travel. And Job.
5.
it was said to Adam, and in him to all his offspring, In the sweat of thy Genesis
3.
face shall thou eat thy bread. Every man will grant that this
commandment, lays hold of that offspring of Adam that is poor, and not
otherwise able to maintain it self.

But whether it lays hold of those that have sufficient to follow their
pleasures, that is a question with some. Belike they think that if a man have
enough for himself he needs not to have any care of other. Every man for
himself as they say, and God for us all. But whosoever says so, God will not
subscribe to this their saying, for it is flat contrary to his
commandment. Love says the Apostle is the fulfilling of the Law, not that
love that has respect to himself, but that love that has respect to others.

And the Scripture binds him Ephe. 4. 28.
that lives even of his handie work to labor, that he may have to give 2.
Cor. 8. 13.
unto him that needs, neither yet was it the Apostles mind, that others
should be eased, and he grieved, but that that which remained of the honest
provision for him and his, should be bestowed upon such as have more need,
of such I say, as either by reason of age, or sickness, could not labor for
their own maintenance.

Now, if the Apostle asks thus much at the hands of a laboring man: shall
we not think that he would have that money which is spent upon superfluous
gaming bestowed upon the poor? If this be true, as it is most true, then is
not a man to make an ordinary trade in sporting himself any way, seeing
that asks great charges, which might be bestowed much better upon those that
have need. Neither is he only to abstain from these needless expenses: but
he is also to see that his house be well governed. He is to have a care not
only to those revenues which he has: but also by all honest means to
increase them, not that he might enlarge his worldly delights, but that he
might have to minister to such as have need, as the Apostle commands. In the
last chapter of the Proverbs, where the properties of a virtuous woman are set
down, it is said, yt she labors cheerefullie with her hands: And lest some
should cavil, and say, the scripture speaks of a poor woman which could
not otherwise live. We are given to understand, that it speaks of a wealthy
woman, she makes herself carpets says the text: fine linen and purple is
her garment, she stretches out her hand to the poor, and puts forth her
hand to the needy. Naie, though there should come no profit either to a man's
own self, or to any other, yet labor is so well pleasing in the sight of
God, that he will have a man occupied in it. He will not have a man's mind
wander about he cannot tell what. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy
bread, says he unto Adam, although he had all the earth before him, and had
none to provide for, but for himself and his wife. Even before man sinned,
when the earth brought forth all things of her own accord, when there was no
need to labor, yet the Lord would not have him live idly, but put him in the
garden of Eden, that he might dress and keep it, how then dare we say that a
Gentleman and one that has enough, may live idly, and as he list? Does not
the Scripture tell us plainly that the Ezech. 16.
sins of Sodom and Gomorre, were pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness? Does not I say, the Scripture tell us, that idleness was one of
those faults, which pulled fire and brimstone from heaven upon the stinking
Sodomites? The Cities of Sodom and Gomorre were fruitful Cities, they were as
the garden of the Lord like the land of Egypt, as thou go unto Zoar, and
the people thereof had as little need to labor for their commodities by
reason of the fruitfulness of the soil, as any people under the Sun: yet
was idleness one cause of their destruction. Why then should a man that has
all commodities brought him to his hand, think he may live idly? There is no
man whom the Lord has created for naught. He will have every one placed in
some calling, that one may be for the benefit of another: those therefore
that follow gaming what do they but trouble the order that God has
appointed. And therefore the Apostle speaking of those that lived idly, says,
that they lived inordinatelie: 2. The. 3. 11
thereby he gives us to understand, that it is an order set down by the Lord,
that every one should labor. But men are marvelous subtle now a days, and
very cunning to deceive themselves. They will easily grant you that a man
which sits buzzing all day long lives idly: but he which uses such
pleasures as ask the exercise of the body though he does nothing else, yet
it will not sink into their heads that such a one lives idly. Shall we
think then that the idle Sodomites did nothing but lie and tumble all day
long? Naie, the Scripture tells us that an idle body does occupy himself
more in his kind then any laboring man. He makes a sign with his eyes,
he signifies with his feet, he instructs with his fingers, lewd things
are in his heart, he imagines evil at all times, and raises up contention
says the holy Ghost. The Apostle calls those which lived idly busy
bodies. And none commonly meddle more with other men's matters, then those that
have no business of their own. You shall hear them talk of any Pro. 6. 13.
thing that can come in question, for as Solomon says, A sluggarde is 2. The.
3. 11.
wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason. We see
therefore, contrary to that which they suppose, that a man may live idly and
yet be occupied. When we have done our necessary affairs, we use to say,
that we are at leisure to do such things, as are not of the like importance:
but he which is always thus at leisure, what is he but always idle,
notwithstanding he move his body sometimes. For what other thing is
idleness, but not to busy a man's self about same profit. He which plaieth at
football or at tennis, though for the time he labors as sore as he does yt
goes to plough: yet we make a difference between these labors, for the one
is a travel, and the other is a recreation: of the one there comes some
profit: the other is but a pastime: so that though we move our bodies, yet we
may be idle. And if we will define idleness to be a continual quietness
both of the body and of the mind: we shall not find out an idle body in the
whole world even Sardanapalus was never so idle, but that he would spin
sometimes amongst his harlottes. Neither do I think that there was ever any
glutton so lazy, but that he would exercise his body sometimes before
meals, to make his meat go down more pleasantly. He alone may truly be
said to be no idle body, which betaketh himself to some ordinary trade. He
(I say) which gives not himself liberty to do whatsoever his wandering head
shall by fittes move him unto: but sets down some certain, and daily
kind of exercising, either his body or mind to the profit of others, and
tieth himself thereto, such a one lives in an honest calling. A man may use
recreations, as I said before: but this honest calling that I speak of, must
have the chief part of his life. It must always have the upper hand, we see
that husbandmen and all such as use any honest trade are an help unto us: For
by them the necessities of this present life are conuaied unto us: But an idle
body, what good does he? Why is it set down in the Scripture that Caine,
Abel, Noah, Lot, Isaacke, and Jacob, were husbandmen? Why are we taught that
Genesis 3. Tit. 3. 13. Col 4. 14.
Tubulkan wrought cunningly every craft of brass and of iron? that Iubal was
a maker of tents, that Joseph was a Carpenter, that the Apostles were fishers,
that Peter's host was a Tanner, that Luke was a Physician, that Zeans was a
Lawier, that Joseph, Moses, David, and others were Magistrates, and governed
the people? The Scripture is short and tells us in a word, that these all had
a set calling wherein they exercised themselves. This no doubt, as all other
things was written for our learning: And what other thing can we learn
thereby but to do the like? what though a man may recreate himself sometime,
may a man therefore do nothing else? Do not men make a God of play, when
they know no other pleasure but it? If the morning be fair and calm, come
say they, here is a goodly morning to have a game at boules in. If the
weather be boisterous, then it is a iollie close day, to have a game at cards
in, no weather comes amiss, fair or foul, they can pass away the time
well enough. If dinner be once done, come then, what shall we do? for the
time they think is lost that is not spent that ways. After supper they cannot
sleep, except they first play a set at Mawe.

Thus when they are at play, then their mind is upon their game, when they
are from play, then must they tell what a game they lost with dalieng too
long, or for not crossing a trumpe in their fellows way. Then must they that
are present continue the talk, with telling the like luck that they have
seen. If their sport be hawking, then must all their talk be of the fair
flight they had. The like may be said almost of all other games. So that, as
you see, all their thoughts are taken up of play. And what a miserable life is
this, that when there are so many good things to enquire after, yet that men
should choose to spend all their thoughts upon so vile and so base a thing as
play is. I have heard men speak much against Atheistes, and Epicures, which
thinking that there is no other life after this, embrace and give themselves
over to the delights of this present world: But if both their doings were
inquired after, I marvel what difference a man could find, between them and
the gamesters of our time. They may say they look for another life after
this: but let them show me their faith by their deeds. No, no: if they
thought not that the second coming of Christ to judge both the quick and the
dead, were a tale of Robin hood, they would never do as they do. The rich
revenues of Noble men and Gentlemen, are as it were the store houses of the
Lord, by these master conductes, he conuaieth food and raiment, and other
necessaries unto every man. The Noble men therefore, which have so great trust
committed unto them, ought to live carefully and faithfully in their calling:
they ought to have an eye to their offices, least they abuse their tenaunts:
they ought to look that nothing be spent prodigally, but to good purpose.
Let nothing be lost, says John. 6.
Christ, for that is the best housekeeping when all is done. Then shall they
make men reverence them indeed, when they thus show themselves fathers and
nurses of whole countreies. I speak of them, because I am occasioned by that
matter which I have in hand: for their hands are chief in this trespass.
They do not only follow gaming themselves, but they cause their whole
train to offend with them: And because all men will willingly follow the
examples of the best, all the whole countreie almost, by means of the
outrageous gaming of their superiors, are brought to set their hearts upon
the like vanities. If they would consider well of the matter, they might soon
perceive that they are placed in so high a calling, for a far more excellent
purpose, for they are God his stewards, and shall no doubt give account of
their stewarship. If all that which they possess, were for themselves alone,
what good could come to the owners thereof, but the beholdding of it with their
eyes? The great mass of wealth therefore which they have in their hands, is
not for themselves alone: but they have the ordering of the matter only, and
are to see that the Lord his provision be bestowed, upon his people.

If they were thus careful in the Lords matters, and would not negligentlie
give over this their charge unto others, a great deal of their time which is
now lost in riottous and superfluous gaming should be very well bestowed, and
to good purpose.

It is reported of my old Lord of Oxford, that he kept Lawiers in his house,
which might judge between plea and plea, ano take up the controversies which
might fall out between his tenaunts, or those which were under his government.

If the Noble men in our days would follow this worthy pattern, men should
not be hindered so in their calling with following Law matters, their eyes
should not be so wearied with waiting and looking Term after Term for a
day of hearing.

If they would leave of from following so greedelie their pastimes, and bend
themselves to ouerrule such troublesome fellows, as without cause molest
simple men. If they would deliver the poor, the fatherless, and such as have
none to help them.

If they would, (as Job says) Job. 29. 17.
break the chawes of the unrighteous, and pluck the pray out of his teeth, I
dare be bold to say, that the tongues not only of those that receive
benefit by this their honorable pains, but even as many as heard of it,
would bless them: the spending of a thousand pound at a Christmasse, will not
do them half the like honor. It is meet, I grant, that in their diette, in
their apparel, and in every part of their civil behavior, they should have
some outward mark of eccellencie above the rest: they may hunt, they may
hawke, or use any other kind of moderate exercise: but the executing of
Justice and Judgment is the thing they are called unto, and it is an
honorable calling. This laboring in some honest calling, is so well pleasing
in the sight of God, that beside the profitte which comes thereby, he makes
men take great delight in it. You shall oftentimes hear one that goes to
cart, make a more cheerful sound with whistling, then any idle fiddler that
goes about the country can do with his instrument. The Tailers, Schomakers,
and other men of occupation, that sing at their work, how merry are they? for
their labor, by reason of the diligent minding of that they go about, is not
perceived of them. And when a man has fully purposed with himself to do any
thing, he does it then cheerefullie without any buisinesse, he sets
himself to it, and delights his mind therein. On the contrary part, an
idle body has always a variable mind: Because he is not thoroughly
persuaded to go through with any thing, his mind cannot tell what to do.
The sleep says Solomon, of him that trauaileth Preacher. 5. 11.
is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the sacietie of the rich will
not suffer him to sleep. The thing that deceives a great many is this: they
think, because the matter, where about gamesters and laboring men busy
themselves is all one, because they both do perteine to this present life, they
think it makes no matter whether they follow labor or gaming, but they do
not consider wisely of this thing. For labor is commanded of God: And
therefore though labor in it self seem to be but a base thing, yet to obeie
the voice of the great God is a precious matter. Beside this, though we inioie
profit by our labor, yet our brother also is profited thereby: we do good
to some, and harm to none. The like cannot be said of us, when we follow
gaming, though we use no deceit in it: but if our labor be without deceit,
it may truly be said of us. The most that can be said for games is, that
we may use them, and it is already granted, that a moderate use of such
games as are lawful, ought not to be condemned: but we have no commandment
for them, as we have for laboring in some honest calling. Amongst other
mischifes that come by following play, this is not the least that men thereby
fall into evil company, even amongst such as scoff at all religion, and
goodness, which thing is of great force to drive us from God. He that delights
so much in play, he cannot always have his choice of company, but for the
most part is feign to take such as come next hand, and therefore gamesters use
such places as are open and common for every body. Though a man be never so
wicked, yet if he be a gamester, he is a good fellow, unless he be a rascal,
for that is some discredit to them. But otherwise though in the sight of God he
be as vile as any loathsome beggar that goes from door to door, his company
is good. They never mark the common proverb, which being rife in every man's
mouth, is noted of all men to be true, that a scabbed sheep infecteth the
whole flock. Know ye not says the Apostle, that a little leaven leaueneth a
whole lump of dowe. And what is 1. Cor. 4. 6.
it but an intolerable pride, to think our selves so strong, that no company
can infect us? We may, I grant, have to do with the wicked, so far forth
as we shall be constrained by the necessities of this present life: for
otherwise we must go out of the world, as the Apostle says: but yet we must
be no companions with Ephe. 5. 7.
them. We may, I grant, have an other purpose in keeping company then to be
infected with them. But as one that walks in the Sun, shall be sunburnt,
though the end of his walking in it be not to be sunburnt, so likewise will it
be with us in keeping company with ye wicked.


Demas. I but sir you know we are all sinners, why then should I avoid an
other man's company, when I am a sinner as well as he?


Paul. We are all sinners in deed but all men do not make a sport of sin,
if there were no difference amongst sinners, why should the holy Ghost
forbid the godly to use the company of the wicked?


Demas. But how can I judge, when a man is such a sinner as ought to be avoided.


Paul. The judgment of this matter is easy enough. For though I be forbidden
to epsy a mote in my brothers eye, when I can well enough abide to have a
beam in mine own eye. Though I must not judge before the time, but think the
best, so long as a thing may be well taken: yet must I not be without all
judgment. Though love be not suspicious, yet it makes not a man a fool. When
I hear a man spew out blasphemies, when I hear him talk filthilie, when I
hear him rage, shall I not judge him to be a wicked man? When Abraham came
into Gerar, seeing the peoples conversation, he said: Genesis 20. 11.
surely the fear of God is not in this place: yet we must not accuse him of
rash judgment. O it were a fearful thing: if the Lord when he comes,
should find us eating and drinking, with publicans and sinners. And why
should a man be so greedy of their ^^mpanie? for though they can be content to
use the company one of an other, and by keeping company together, to pass
away the time pleasantly. Yet, when the company is broken up, and every man
gone to his several abiding place, If then any thing shall be spoken in the
commendation of any of their companions, they cannot abide it: for by and by
they think they are dispraised by it. They will then use such words as tend
to the abasing one of an other, and what good fellowship call you that? But the
love of good men, though it be imperfect: yet it is in truth, the difference
between the evil and outward courtesy of worldly men, and the Christian
unity of such as fear God, is marvelous great. Who then would not rather
wish to be of this company? The worldlings at their feasting use curious
delicates, They feed the eyes of their guess with a great many trim things,
to the end they may make report, that other men of their wealth, have not the
like furniture and provision that they have. But the children of God eat their
meat together with gladness, and singleness of heart, without any such
curiosity. Whether a man be poor or rich, he is neither envied nor disdained
of them. The love of Paul the Apostle, though he were an excellent man, was
yet marvelous great toward Oenesimus being a servant.

For he writes thus, I beseech thee for my son Oenesimus whom I have
begotten in my bonds, receive him that is mine own bowels, receive him as my
self: If he has hurt thee, or owes thee ought, that put on mine accounts:
yea brother, let me obtain this pleasure of thee in the Lord, comfort my
bowels in the Lord. The like abundaunce of more then motherlie affection did
the faithful at Ephesus show toward the Apostle, being most sorry, because
he said they should see his face no more. Neither are they only tender
hearted toward the godly, but even toward the wicked. The wicked Jews
persecuted Hieremie for discovering their sins, but when the judgments of God
were upon them, his eyes cast forth tears and ceased not. Men of the world
will be sorry, when they have lost a daily friend, or a merry companion: but
the children of God are sorry without any such respect. When wicked Absolon a
false traitor, and an open rebel against his father, was taken away by death:
yet the Prophet David could not but be moved, He went up to ye chamber over the
gate and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absolon, my son, my
son Absolon, would God I had died for thee, O Absolon my son, my son. Who
would not wish to be amongst this loving company, whose talk is, how they
might obeie the voice of the great God, when other talk of trifles? They sing
Psalms and hymns together to the Lord, for all his goodness yt he shows
unto the children of men. The godly are ready even with cheerfulness, to do
a man good: But the wicked will not be at leisure, every little thing will be
an Pro. 12 10.
hinderaunce in the matter, so that even their mercies are cruel. Why then
should a man be so greedy of their acquaintance? Why should a man forsake an
honest calling, to follow their fancies? And why are we so fond of these
worldly delights? Are they not common to us with all Turks and Infidels? Is
not the Turk better able to have all kind of glorious triumphs, then any of
us? May he not have whatsoever is pleasant to his eye, or delightsome to his
taste? May he not have whatsoever in this world his heart can desire? Has not
the beast of the field pleasure in eating, in drinking, in sleeping? Do not
the birds sport themselves with singing among the green branches? Do not
the young bullockes skippe and leap in the green meddowes? naie, do not the
beasts of the field go beyond us in this thing? Does not the hawke take a
greater delight in following her pray, then ye fawkners do in looking on?
does not ye hound or the spaniell take delight in an higher kind, with ye hope
of obteining their pray, then the hunters do in hearing or beholding the sport
a far of? Why then are we so greedy of gaming.


Demas. This your treatise of continuance at gaming, has been very long, and
therefore, for memories sake, I pray you gather your reasons that you have used
into a narrow room, y^ I may ye better carry them away. Paul. The sum of
that which I have said in this treatise, is this: seeing every man without
exception, must exercise ye most part of his life in some certain and daily
calling: seeing continuance at play cannot be maintained without infinite
charges, which ought rather to be bestowed upon such as have need: seeing the
Lord has joined an honest delight, to a daily calling, which continuance at
gaming does want: seeing by co^tinua^ce at gaming, men must of necessity fall
into evil company, which is of great force to drive us from God: seeing by
this means we bar our selves from y^ loving company of ye godly: seeing by
following our daily calling, we obeie the voice of ye great God, and do some
good to our brethren, which cannot be done with continual gaming: last of all,
seeing yt delight yt we have in gaming is common to us with all Turks and
Infidels and with the beasts of the field, I conclude, yt no man must follow
gaming.


Of daunsing. The fourth Chapter.
DEmas. You divided games into such, wherein men are the chife doers: and into
such, wherein they are the lookers on You have spoken of ye first kind, though
in few words, yet in as many as I desire: I pray you speak now of the other
kind, of this kind is daunsing: what think you of it?


Paul. Peter Marter upon ye last chapter of the Judges, speaks of many
kinds of daunces. But if you speak of yt kind of dancing, yt is received with
us in every place, where dau^sing is used, all good consciences must needs
condemn it. For, is it a seemly thing (think you) that a Christian man, or
a Christian woman should be so much delighted with hearing a profane, and
sometimes a filthy song plaide upon an instrument, that they should leap for
joy at the hearing of it? Shall the Lord thunder out his terrible judgments
against the stinking sin of adultery, and shall we hold it lawful to lay
baits and allurements to intrappe our selves therein? In the long pausing that
is used in mas king, between dance and dance, do they not use all kind of
filthy talk that they can devise? In other kinds of daunsing where they do
not use to talk together, what wanton iestures are used? The young man must
show himself as youthful as may be, his turning on the toe, his capering,
and all his other tricks want their grace, if they be not done in the sight
of his lady. The woman must set out her body, and minse it far unseemly,
either for the bashful modesty of a virgin, or the chaste behavior of a
married woman. A man may suppose in deed that fire and flax may be together
without any danger: But what a strange fondness is this? We condemn the
popish Pharesies of intolerable pride, for lifting up the power of man, and
for saying that they are able to keep themselves from any sin: And yet we
think our selves so strong, that we may delight our eyes with gasing upon
any woman, yt we may behold any kind of wanton look, or light iesture
whatsoever, without any harm done: or any wicked thought, so much as once
conceived thereby, either of the dauncers themselves, or ye lookers on. If we
thought not our selves so strong, why would we suffer such prouocations which
are as bellows, to inflame the hearts of young men, and to set on fire the
hearts of young women toward them again. He that loves danger must needs
fall into it. And the devil knows that temptations come no way so
forcibly to our fancy, as by the eiesight: And therefore he did not tempt
Christ, by describing unto him in many words the glory of the world: but he
takes him up on high, and shows it him: he knew Math. 4.
that this was the better way. The courtier confesses that a wanton look is
of greater force to inge^der filthilie lust, which he calls love, then a
thousand words. The godly man Job, knowing the weakness of man, how great it
was, had always a godly suspicion of himself, and was so far from using
trifling words, or light gestures toward any woman: that he made a covenant
with his Job. 31.
eyes, least by looking wistly upon her, he should think on a maid. How
dare any of us then give over our selves to daunsing, where such light
gestures are not only used, but also openly professed. How Esaie. 3. 16.
can we behold the stretched out necks, and the wandering eyes: but that (as
Solomon says) we shall be in as great danger, as one that sleeps in the
midst of the sea, and as he that sleeps in the top of a mast? And yet he
that shall find fault with us for it, is a new fangled fellow, and nothing
can please Pro. 23. 34.
him. In other things we will easily grant ye force of temptations by our
eie-sight: see for your love (say ye merchaunts) and bye for your moneie. They
know by looking upon their wares, we are sooner brought to bye them: and
therefore the thriftie husband gives counsel to keep purse at market, only
in this thing we will acknowledge no such matter.


Demas. Yet we read, that godly women have daunced: And David, Exo. 15. 20.
a man according to God his own heart did dance.


Paul. The modest and sober daunsing that godly women used, a part by
themselves after some notable victory, to give thanks therefore, ought to be
no cloak for our wanton daunsing. For we count it no sport, except men and
women dance together: whereby is easily perceived the filthy end of our
dancing. David daunced in deed, but is his dancing and ours any thing like?
David lift us his body, and daunced before the Arc: because, being a sign
of the favorable presence of God, it was brought home from the Philistines,
unto the people of God again. But mark (I pray you) what the text says:
Michol saw his dancing, and mocked him: belike it was no courtly dance, for
then it should have pleased her well enough. And David aunswering her 1. Sam 6.
mockes, says: I will be yet more vile then thus, and will be low in mine
own sight. We use to brave it, and to show our selves as gallant as may be
in our dancing: But David abased himself in his dancing, and for this cause
was he contentemned of Michol. He chose no wanton Dame to dance withal,
neither daunced he after any vain Heathenish song: but after a Psalm of
thanksgiving. Never compare David his daunsing with ours, for there is no more
likelihood between them, then is between heaven and hell. David caused not so
many instruments to be made to serve God his glory, as we do to serve our
wanton lusts: as the prophet Amos tells us. So that, if we will have our
daunsing approved of the Lord, we must use some other kind. For I dare boldly
say, upon my reasons alleged, the word of God is my warrant, that the
daunsing we now use, is abominable. Those that are desirons to hear more of
this matter, may read a learned treatise written in French, and dedicated by
the French Ministers of the reformed Churches, unto the king of Navarre: the
argument whereof is altogether against our filthy kind of daunsing.


Of Dice and Card-plaie. Chap. 5.
DEmas. You have proved that we offend in daunsing, not only as we do in
hunting and hawking, by using of it too much: but that we offend, if we use our
wanton kind of daunsing at all. There be other things, wherein I would gladly
have your judgment: but that I am afraid I have troubled you too long
already. I told you when I came, I would make you weary of me before I went,
and I am afraid I have been as good as my word.


Paul. Naie truly sir, you do not trouble me, and therefore I pray you do
not think so: we meet (you know) but seldom, and therefore I would be loath
to part from you so soon.


Demas. Seeing you will needs have me trouble you, I will go forward with
that which I was about to speak. Among all games that are used, Dice and
Cardplaie are worse reported of, then any other kind of game: and yet is no
other of game used half so much. Either gamesters themselves for using this
game, are much to blame: or else those that give it so evil a report, I pray
sir, how think you?


Paul. I will tell you Demas, if we will well mark the riotous and outrageous
dice, and card-plaie, that has spread it Self, and now ouerfloweth every
part of the land: If (I say) we shall way with our selves vprightlie, the
innumerable sleights and falsehoods that are incident to gaming, and the
infinite mischiefs that have come thereby, both to ye church of God, and also
to ye common wealth: we shall not one whit marvel, if ye godly sorrow that a
Christian heart conceiueth thereby, makes him even to cry out upon the^. The
devil indeed does cover his crafts in all occupations: but he is nener lightly
so subtle, but that the chapmen, in using those things they have bought,
evermore lightly spy him out: Only in this kind of Merchandise he does
excel, he has showed here what he can do. A man shall be deceived, yet can
he never lightly tell who has hurt him. The Cards must be clipped for some
kind of games at the tops, for some other at the sides. When it comes to a
man's course to deal, he has taught us how to pack: when another deals, he
has taught us how to deceive by cutting. If more play then two, then comes
in cousoning: two must deceive the third, or three the fourth. If the fillie
soul begin to be weary of this pastime, because it is to dull a game, and had
rather hear ye rattling of the Dice: or if changing the game, he hops to
change his luck: they are then also ready for him. Their dice are ready ground
or stopped: They have high men, they have low men, they have ^ard cater traies.
So that whether he be disposed to play at Hazard, Primero, Nouem, Passage,
Ticke tacke, Irish, what game soever he chooses, they are with him to bring. I
will not take upon me to tell all. For those that have practiced gaming of a
long time, and have been at it early and late. Those that have inquired after
the sleights thereof, and have meruailouslie profited that ways, are
oftentimes to seek, and sometimes also overtaken thereby.


Demas. I but sir, do you not perceive, that these are the faults of those
that abuse the sport: and not of gaming it self. There is deceit used in
every occupation, there is craft (as they say) in dawbing: will you therefore
condemn all occupations. Paul. The craft that is used in occupations, is in
the persons, and not in the thing it self: but you cannot say so of
Diceplaie. In every trade, there is some honest end: for they are instruments
and conducts (as it were) to serve the providence of God, toward the
maintenance of our life, and defense of our body: They tend (I say) to the
maintenance one of another: But gaming has a contrary end. It does not
yield any commodity to his brother for the moneie it receives, but they
stake down their money then must it be yours or mine, win it and take it. A
great many men think, because it is not said in precise and express words,
that the Lord will have no man play for moneie, that therefore there is no
Scripture against it. These men should consider in like manner, that it is not
expressed in the Scriptures, that there be three persons in the Godhead, that
Christ is both God and man, that our infants ought to be baptized: yet none of
us doubts, but yt these things are set down as certeinlie, as if they were in
most plain words expressed: so likewise is it with the thing I have now in
hand. The holy ghost setting down the property of love, tells us that Cor.
13. 5.
it is so desirous to pleasure the party it loves, that oftentimes it seeks
not his own. If to hazard our money to put in danger the moneie of our
brother, be not flat contrary to this property of love, I know not what is
contrary. All base gold, and cract silver is current money: belike they
think it is good enough for the wares they utter. So that, to set the faults
that I spoke of before aside, you see gaming it self has no good end. But (I
pray you) tell me, because you say these be the faults of men, and not of the
thing: where do you know any, if he has been a gamester of any long time,
but that he has been infected with these sleights? Are not these words
usual amongst gamesters: At cards I will deceive mine own Father, if I can:
At Dice I will not trust mine own brother.

They know that the opportunity of a pray, is able to make half an honest
man a thief. Because therefore this kind of play ministers such
opportunity to deceive, they will not trust a gamester though otherwise he
be a reasonable honest man.

I have been a gamester my self a great while too long, and I have marked some
men of all degrees, both high and low, how they have behaved themselves at
play: yet can I not say, either of my self, or of any that I have seen,
(and yet I have seen a great many) that they have been free from winking,
cross, discarding, or from some deceit or other, and indeed, to say the
truth, this kind of game is nothing else, but a profession how to deceive
cunningly. I do not only speak what I my self have seen: for many that
have been gamesters of a long time, and have reformed this their corruption,
will witness with me, that that which I have said is true. Paschasius
Ecloulensis, a Doctor of Physic, being a trauailer in Spain, for many
years, was a daily beholder of courtly gamesters, and others. (He being a
trauailer, marked things more narrowly, for yt was the end of his travel,
and we are all given to mark things more neerelie in a strange place, then at
home.) This Paschasius that I speak of, says plainly of all gamesters, Noble
men and others, that there is none but he will deceive if he can. For though
many care not greatly for the moneie, yet because they disdain to leese, and
the victory is somewhat, they will not stick to help themselves as much as may
be. This is their order. Young gamesters, by reason of their unskillfulness, or
else for that they are so sharp set, that they can not match themselves, but
with disaduauntage, always go by the worst. And when they have been bitten of
a long time, those that have cousoned him, will make him some part of amends,
with making of him privy to his sleights, that they may pray upon young
nouises, as they before were a pray to others. Men are soon brought to this
lure. For what gamester holds it unlawful, to get again by the same means,
all that which they lost to others before? Nay, though at their first sitting
to play, they mean honestly, and purpose to play no otherwise then the
cards serve: yet if they be much in loss, they think it a marvelous folly,
by some knacke or other, not to seek to recover themselves again. So that a
man can hardly trust, not only shifters, which live by play: but even
civil gamesters: those which pretend no other end of play then good
fellowship. And I pray you do not their own conscience tell them, that the
winnings that come by play, are unlawful? For if one owes them money that
ways, they make no account of it, but as of desperate debt, though the party
that owes it them, be a man able enough: and to take up a man's stake, when it
is lost, is yet accounted fairer play. I appeal to the consciences of all
those that use this kind of game, whether ye things that I say of them be
true, or no. And if they be true, I ask them, with what face they can defend
themselves.


Demas. I but sir, I pray you let us reason of the matter, before you come to
give sentence. Indeed (as you say) though some gamesters say they can play
without deceit: yet I think it is but Hypocrisy in them. For, though they can
be content to use square play, so long as the Cards go on their side, (for
they can but win, though they should use deceit) yet when luck (as they
call it) goes against them, they will be sure to save themselves from
loosing: so that the party with whom they play, shall be sure to go by the
woorst. But you know, many times the parties that play are cunning all alike:
for gaming has no such wit in it, but that it may easily be found out, if
men would bend themselves to it.

There is nothing then that bears the swaie, but the chance (as they term
it) of the Dice: for one wins one day, and another another day: They win
(I say) and loose by course, as it falls out. What then (think you,) is the
thing that moves men to play, when they have no advantage of him, with
whom they play.


Paul. The thing that moves men to play, when they cannot deceive, though
they would, I think is an over well conceiving of themselves. For, though they
see no reason why, yet because they like better of themselves, then of the
party with whom they play, they think the Dice must needs go on their
sides: for they suppose that the victory shall always be bestowed upon the
worthier person. Why (say they) should not I win as well as he?


Demas. Yea, but though men do leese at this lotting, and square play at Dice
and Cards, yet will they continue play still: what think you is the cause of
this?


Paul. Even the same pride that before I spoke of, and therefore the party
that loses, calls the victory of him, with whom he does play, Nidgits
luck. He sees no witty endeavor of the conqueror, which might drive him to
confess, that the party with whom he plaieth is too hard for him: and being
still the worthier person in his own conceit, he thinks that at the last
the Dice will remember him, so they never make an end of play. If therefore we
look upon the first cause that moves men to play at this game, we must
needs mislike of it. Now, if we look upon the matter whereupon this game
does consist, and without the which it will not be, we shall see it is money.
For they hope to win, or else why should they play? and you know that hope
is covetous.


Demas. Yea, but I cannot so soon yield unto you in this matter. For many
rich merchants, and Gentlemen do use this kind of sport, which I think make
no great account of moneie.


Paul. You speak, as if rich men were not covetous. Does not the Poet say,
and does not daily experience teach us, that Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa
pecunia crescit? It is a popish presumption to think, that we are not prone to
covetous desires, as we are to all other sins. But plaieng at this moneie
game, does allure us to this sin, which thing we have little need of. and
therefore it is the will of God that we should avoid such allurements.


Demas. Yet gamesters, of all other men are commonly frank fellows: and
therefore of all sins, I cannot see, how you can charge them with the sin
of covetousness.


Paul. They are frank indeed, when at their hosts, or at a Gentleman's house
the pay the box, or give to any that stand by, or spend it in good cheer,
but their franknes comes always out of another man's purse: so that they are
covetous, but yet after a more gentlemanlie manner, then the miserlie people in
the country are You may call it, a stately and a lofty kind of
covetousness: yet (as you say,) there is a kind of riot joined with it: for
they hazard their money, to satisfy their affections. But because you are
somewhat doubtful in this point, I will prove unto you by a visible
demonstration, yt all gamsters are covetous. All gamesters, though they had
rather play small game, the^ sit out: yet if they have used frank play, and
are driven either for want of moneie, or else for that the party that plaieth
with them will not venture much moneie, if they be thus driven to play for a
small sum, they play not with half the delight they were accustomed to play
with all: neither care they to play with him whom they love dearly. By ye
which things it is evident, that there sport is to win moneie. Thus, whether
you look to the first cause ye moves men to this game, or to the matter
whereupon it does consist, we see it cannot be allowed of. And if we look
upon the formal cause. If (I say) we will look upon the form and fashion
of the game it self, we shall find, that it deserves as little favor as
the other two causes that are already spoken of. If one be ouerseene at Mawe,
and against his will loose his dealing, shall he not loose four? At Ticke
tacke if a man touch the wrong chip, does he not loose ye game. The like may
be said of the rest: for what fairer play then dotage. But in bargaining if
the like advantage be taken, though the common Law allows it, yet our Law
of conscience does ouerrule the matter. And who is he that will not cry out
upon a man, and give his friends warning of him, if takes vauntage of an
Obligation, when by forgetting the day, the money is brought a day after the
date? And yet who sees not that there is the like equity in both? For if they
say that the party that is ouerseene, and of whom the vauntage is taken, did
agree upon the matter, at their sitting to play, and that he knows well
enough that it is the order of play, and that it is lawful for him that is
overtaken, to take the like advantage of him that has the forfeiture: every
man knows that a man may as truly say the same of the forfeiture of an
obligation. If answer be made, yt the one is a serious matter, and the other
is done in sport: ye word of God, which is a touchstone to try every deed,
every word, every thought. This word of God allows no such distinction,
sin is sin, whether it be committed in earnest or in sport. Take heed of
this distinction, if you will, for it is the mere sophistry of Satan. And (I
pray you) what occasion of wrangling is given, even by gaming it self? If a
die stand a wrie at the fall, how many gamesters can tell whether the fairest
to the caster, or the fairest to the sky should be the throw. At Mawe, if the
ace of hearts be turned up, when he that is to make, makes this for it, then
does a marvelous controversy arise, whether he that turns it up should win
the set, or he that wins five tricks: then must wagers be laid. I remember
once there arose such heart-burning between two, for the like blind
controversy, that being daily companions before, they met not together, of a
quarter of a year after. They had both likely games, the one asks a card,
an other for me (says the other:) thus they both asked so long, till the whole
bunch was out. The question was, whether the trumpe that was turned up at the
last, should be a void card, or no. The devil has entangled every game with
the like doubts, and we carry a waiward nature about with us that will soon
be provoked, and harm needs little help, and thus much for the formal cause,
and for the game it self. Now, if we shall come to the end wherefore this game
is used, we shall also find sufficient matter to condemn it, the end that is
pretended, is a recreation, let us therefore consider, whether it be so or no.
Every recreation does refresh and quicken our spirits, but Dice and card play
is so quiet, and so drousie a pastime, that if the desire of winning did not
keep them awake, the gamesters would be oftentimes ready to fall a sleep. I
will not say against it, but some one that uses to play for moneie, may be
earnest at play sometimes, though he plaieth for niflles: but the cause of
this his delight, is the calling to mind of his former sport: or else to make
himself the cunninger to win his brothers moneie the next time that he
plaieth. But if it were agreed upon, that all play for moneie should cease: In
a short time men would have as much delight to look upon a spade or a clubbe,
or to turn one chip out of one table into an other, as they have now in
peeling of strawes. It is not so in shooting. It is not so in tennisse play,
in running, in riding, in throwing the bar, or the hammer. It is not so in
games that ask the exercise of the body. I remember master Ascham has a
witty In his book of shooting.
similitude against such deceiving pastimes. We do not use (says he) to
whette our knife upon a chalk stone, for that would not sharpen it, but make
it more blunt: neither (say I) if we wuld refresh our wits, are we to go to a
pair of cards, for they will not quicken, but dull them, It is not so with
shooting. It is not so with any manly kind of exercise, for they stir up a
certain liveliness in a man. Thereby he is made quick and ready to take in
hand any commendable thing: so that the abuse of plaieng for money being
taken away, there may be a very good use of them: neither can those whose
labor does consist in the exercise of the mind be well without them.


Demas. Your mentioning of shooting has brought to my mind a reason against a
great deal of that, which you have said. For shooting (as you your self
grant) is a commendable thing, and if it be not continued, England shall be
bereft of a notable help against the time of war. But how can it be
maintained, except men play for moneie?


Paul. I am not against it, that shooting should be maintained: but the means
whereby you would have it maintained, is a chargeable means, and would skant
quite cost. For though the common wealth be helped by the thing it self, in
the time of war: yet the means that you speak of, will help to pull it
down in the time of peace. Beside this, seeing the skill, and strength to use
auie weapon, has his force from the blessing of the Lord. How can we look
that the Lord will bless this skill: when the means whereby we attain
thereto are not allowed of him? Thanks be to God, there be means enough to
train up a sufficient number that ways, though the ventering of our moneie to
get our brothers moneie from him be laid aside. But why do you speak so much
of continuing any sport? Know you not that when men continue any long time
at play, that it is no longer a recreation, but a labor? When men upon
pleasure will row upon the Thames, after supper, in Summer time, we call it a
recreation: but we do not use to call it a recreation in the botemen, whose
daily labor does consist in rowing. Whereby it is easy to see, that the
difference between a recreation and a labor, does consist in the shortness
or length of time yt we bestow upon either of the^. And amongst other
mischifes yt come by plaieng for moneie, this is not the least, yt by this
means they are held to long at play. For when a man loses, it is never
lightly seen that he will give over: and he that wins shall be accounted a
foul gamester, if he leave ye other in the lurch. So yt beside ye loss of
time, which might otherwise have been better spent, they are oftentimes a
torment to themselves. It is strange to see, what sodeine alteraions there
arise in their outward looks. If the cards go against them, then is there
biting of ye lip: but if ye cards alter their course, then is there clapping a
taffaties, and give me a hand, there is (I say) then ye uncomely ieasting that
the Apostle speaks against, which is vain and Ephe. 5. 4.
unsavory, but what do I speak of outward looks? There is wr^ught through
fear and hope, a confusion of ye whole nature of man, you shall hear them
oftentimes complain, yt their back aches with stooping, and that their legs
are benumbed, their heads are pauled, and their whole body is distempered: and
yet this game must still be accounted a recreation. Is not x. or a.xi. a clock
at night a fit time (think you) to use recreations? And yet is this dark
time of the night, dedicated to this work of darkness, which they call a
recreation: neither are they troublesome to themselves alone, but to ye whole
house where they play, and to ye whole houses where they dwell. They turn the
day into night, as the Prophet says: they turn topsie turnie, ye whole order
of ye providence of God. For ye Lord has made ye day for labor, and the night
for sleep: but they watch in ye night, and sleep in ye day. Thus if we look
into ye efficient cause yt first moves them to lotterie, or square play, it is
pride: ye substance of it is a moneie matter, the form and fashion of it is
to take advantage of our brothers oversight, and to minister occasion of
wra^gling: whereto may be added an invincible argument, which now comes to my
mind. All the games at dice and cards either go by skill, or by mere
lotterie. If they go by skill, then is it a shame, that our skill that should
be for the benefit of our borther, should turn to his hinderaunce: But if
that go by lotterie, it is against the third commandment.


Demas. Truly sir, I do not well understand your reason. I know (indeed) yt
our skill must not hinder our brother: for not only the law of God, but the
law of nature, and of all nations is against it: but that which you speak of
the third commandment, I cannot tell what it means.


Paul. We are there commanded, not to take the name of God in vain. You
know what a name is. A name is a thing, whereby any thing is known. Solomon
is known by his wisdom. And if I say the wise man says so, you can tell
whom I mean. So likewise is the providence of God, the name of God: it is a
thing whereby he is known. Now, if I call for his name to witness a trifle,
what do I but take it in vain? When I must needs have a special determination
immediately from the providence of God, whether a testar or a shilling shall be
yours or mine, what do I but make a mock of his wisdom, which distributeth
to every man as it seems best unto him? What dalieng is this with him?


Demas. Yet we read, that Joshua divided their land to the Israelites by lot.


Paul. I do not condemn all casting of lots, no more then I do all kind of
swearing: but to use any of them both, when there is no need, must needs be
condemned. I think it were very good, if all our demurs Pro. 18. 18.
were ended by lot: for when the Judges stand at a stay, and cannot, or will
not make an end of a matter, when a matter cannot be ended by any ordinary
lawful means, what should men pause and spend their money to no purpose? In
such a case (I grant) we might have a very good use of casting of lots: but
what makes this for our common kinds of lotting? Joshua (you say) did cast
lots. The land of Canaan was to be divided among the Israelites, to every
Tribe a portion: now, because there could be no such equal division, but that
there must needs be some odds in their portions, it was wisdom both to put
bye all suspicion of partiality from Joshua, and envy from amongst the people.
It was wisdom (I say) for these causes to determine by lottes, what several
portion that should be, that every several Tribe should have. But we, when we
have money in our purses, cast lottes whether that which we have should be
none of ours, or whether we shall have more to it. You see there is great ods
between these two. Oaths and lots are to end controversies, and not to wait
upon our fancies. So that, to come again to that which I was about to say,
the efficient and natural cause of this play, is pride and covetousness. In
the form is hard dealing, occasion of falling out and breach of the third
commandment. The end is distempering of soul and body, so yt whatsoever you
have respect unto in this game, it is naught. Men will not stick to think ye
they have marvelous hold of themselves, when they begin to play, they will set
down a quiet kind of play, how much they will play for, and they will make
an and at a very good time: but when the affection is once up, all these
things are clean forgotten. Naie, though one having more care of his health,
the^ an other, makes mention of ending play: yet if an old fellow come out with
a wooden jest, and says that is but a foolish custom to go to bed a nights,
this wooden jest shall be of force to keep them up all ye night long. Truly
it is a wonderful thing, and almost incredible, but yt it is so manifest, yt
men should take such delight in hurting of themselves. Their ordinary play
delights the^, but when there is a meting pitched, when they make a day of it
(as they say) and sit by it, that is accounted a gamesters feast: they are
troubled then with surfeiting more then they were accustomed, they make
themselves dronken with it, and yet they take such delight in this gossopping
gaming, that you shall have there talk of it a great while after. All other
delights are nothing, where this gaming is away. For as it is with a man that
has a bile upon him, as then all the other parts of the body seem to be
without feeling: so other honest delights seem to be nothing, in respect of
that. Though they be among those that love them, yet if they be no gamesters,
they are not in the right crew, they are not (they think) where they should
be. Naie, this their itching desire is of such power, that though (by reason of
their losses and surfettings) they for the time are weary of it, though they
make a vow, and shall forfet money when soever they turn to their vomit again:
yet cannot these bars hold them from play, for their desire in deed is
unnatural. I have heard and seen men casting their peniworths, how they might
make this kind of game a recreation, and not a toiling. I have heard (I say)
that many, even those that were thought to have more hold of themselves then
a great many other have devised to bring this thing to pass: but it could
never be. For as Parmeno says in an other matter, Incerta haec si tu postules,
ratione certa facere nihilo plus agas, quam si des operam, vt cum ratione
insanias. Thus have I, as well as it has pleased God to make me able, unfolded
and laid open the ugliness of this beastly game, to the end that gamesters
seeing what a mishape^ thing it is, might turn their love from it, to a better
thing.


Demas. You have proved that dice and card play are, no recreations, as they
are pretended: but you have not yet spoken of the mischiefs that come of them.


Paul. Their mischiefs in deed are infinite, and to speak in a word, they
breed contempt of all religion and goodness. For what gamester makes any
account of religion? What gamester will hazard the loss of a friend, or the
loss of any worldly comfort, for the honor of his God? Naie, a man must be
conformable, and apply himself to every company, or else he is no meet man
to be a gamester. Talk of God who list, they will talk of gaming. Naie, even
in prayer time, when they have given ear a little, they must talk of
yesternights good fellowship, and what they shall do in the afternoon. Good
Lord what serving of God call you this? Would not they think it an absurd
thing, to talk of any matter of divinity, when they are set at cards? And
is it not much more absurd to talk of card matters in prayer time? I tremble
at the remembrance of that irreuocable sentence that shall be pronounsed over
them, when they shall be called to judgment. The Lord for his mercies sake
take the mist from their eyes, and then I know they will see their sins, and
repent.


Demas. Amongst all other evils, me think this game should bring beggerie. For
the game it self asks great charges, and they are hindered by this means,
both from doing good to others, and from getting any thing in their calling:
so that except they play upon the vauntage, it is an hundred to one that they
shall be baggered by it.


Paul. You say true, for when they win any thing, yet because it comes so
lightly, it must go as lightly and (as Tullie says) Quod adopti sunt per
scelus, per luxuriam offendunt. The thing that deceives them is this.
Whatsoever they win, it comes unlooked for, and that is trim. They never
mark that when they win, somewhat goes out: and that when they leese,
nothing is given back. They never mark what griping usurers dice and cards
are. For if you receive any thing of them to day, you must not look to go by
the year, nor yet by the month: you must pay your principal, and twice so
much more perhaps to morrow. It is wonderful to see, how blind, and how foolish
men be. For when they have a mind to a ring* or to any pretty conceit, they
will venture their money for it with some loss, when they refuse to bie it right
out. Hereof comes it, that scholars coming from the university, may
rifle away their books, when they cannot sell them, and what fondnes is this?
Every man knows that it is great folly, to hope certainly for an uncertain
thing: but to lay a wager of it, that yt which they vncerteinlie look for,
shall certeinlie come to pass, is mere madness. It is thought a goodly matter
of poor men, if rich men will take them as their companions: so likewise is it
with gamesters. For though many of them be men of no great wealth, yet hope is
rich: and so long as they play, they shall be accompanied with rich hope.
Though they be in loss, yet luck they think may turn. Their prophesieng
is like the southsaieng of a countreie Astronomer, that I have heard of, which
thought that after a day or two of rain, we shall have fairer weather: but
sometimes (this last harvest for example) his southsaieng deceived him twenty
days together. So gamesters think, that after an hour or two of ill luck,
the Cards will go on their side an other while: but their prophesieng
deceives them so long till at the last it can deceive them no more. You shall
sometimes see many lusty gallants, that because they will give the company
to understand, that they are able to maintain frank play, and that they are
no pidlers, they loose all the money in their pursse: then must they borrow
upon usury, by which means they run so far in the lash, that their
revenues must be sold, and they stripped into their dublet and their hose.
Play must they needs, and that they play for is in hazard, so that they can
not rightly call any thing theirs. For their watching so pauleth them, and the
love of sport and company so occupies their head, that they have no leisure
to consider what the issue will be. Afterward when they can get no money to
continue their sport, they begin to awake out of their sleep, and to consider
more deeply of the matter: and when by waieng the matter well, they have
found that a man can not live without some maintenance, then consult they with
themselves how to get somewhat. And because they either know not, or being
Gentlemen, are ashamed to labor in some honest trade: They begin to
complain of the griping and hard dealing of covetous men. What a world is
this (say they) that a company of loutes should have so much lieng by them?
Why do we continue thus like slaves? Let us rather show our selves to be men
of courage, let us lay for some booty, that we may brave it in Poules or in
Cheapside as we were wont. Their friends ind^ed oftentimes make friends, and
keep them from the gallows: but Pro. 11. 21.
yet (as Solomon says) though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be
unpunished. They booty it so long, till at some gallows or other, they become
an open spectacle of the judgments of God unto the whole world, and a
fearful warning (if they be wise) to all those that follow their steps.
Examples they say are very fit to teach withal, and yet we are so doltish
in learning any kind of goodness, that manifest and plain examples can
teach us nothing. I remember, whilst I was in Cambridge, A simple man at his
execution willed scholars in any case to take heed of gaming, that brought
him to that shameful end: and yet, because in his exhortation he used an auke
phrase to express his mind with all, I am afraid (said he) you will forgette
my exhalations, as soon as you are out of the Castle gates: Because (I say)
he spoke a word amiss, we iested at the phrase, and so by this means, the
goodness that we should have learned by his fearful end, was put by:
whereas if we had looked upon the matter well, his words, at that time, ought to
have been of as great authority, as any Doctors word in Cambridge. But this
mischief does not rain in London and Cambridge alone: for every town,
especially if it be of any bigness, is infected with this evil. Even in
this town not long since, there was a man that had a good dowry with his
wife, and was very well to live of himself: yet by this mischievous gaming,
he was quite undone: and to redeem himself out of prison, his wife and his
children were thrown out of doors. Surely it would have pitied a man's heart
to have seen it: he himself being left to the wide world, no man knows
what will be become of him, where by the way are confuted y^ fond pitiful words,
which are wont to be used in defense of such riotous persons. Alas (say they)
it is great pity: he was no man's foe but his own: for here we may see, that
they are foes to a great many. The common wealth might well look to have some
relief toward the maintenance of their poor: but now must they and their
children be kept with the goods of the poor: so that the poor in the parish,
which should otherwise have been well provided for, are pinched, and miserably
vexed, and all through gaming. How true do we find that, which the Scripture
says, He that loves pastime shall be a poor Pro. 21. 17.
man. Men may call it a sport, but it was the waightiest matter, that ever he
dealt withal in his life. If men rioted in apparel, or in meats and
drinks, because a man's undoing this way is not so soddaine: men commonly are
their friends, by counsel to remedy the matter, before all be gone. But the
undoing of a man self by play is so sudden, that he is under the Ice,
before a man can be aware of it.


Demas. Indeed as you say, many come to beggerie by this means: but yet all
do not.


Paul. Though men of large revenues are not beggered, yet they beggar a great
many by this means. Their tenaunts are miserably pinched through their
Landlord his folly: whereas, if this vile moneie game were left, they would
no doubt deal better with them, and be more bountiful Lords to poor men: we
should not then have such forfeiting of leases, and such oppressing of men as
we have. What an absurd thing is it, that men should keep such a coile for
moneie, and when they have it cast away? I know there be a great many
penny fathers, which though they loose nothing at gaming, yet gripe poor men:
but yet I know there be a great many, that if they lost and spent not so much
at play, would be more frank-hearted to poor men, then they are. Does the
Lord find fault with the unprofitable servant, that laid not out his talent
to his masters advantage, but hid it in the ground? And will he not judge yt
servant that wastes it upon trifles? The holy Ghost commands us to honor
the Pro. 3. 9.
Lord with our riches. And the Jews, to give us to understand, yt they were
ready to bestow their goods at ye Lords appointment were willed to pay the
first fruits to ye Lord of all that ever they had: but do we honor him with
our goods (think you) when we trifle them away at cards and tables. But sin
has no stay with it. For it is not enough for us, thus unthankfully to abuse
ye good gifts of God, except we sin directly against himself. What cholarick
passions (I pray you) are ye loosers tossed withal, gentlemen or other:
insomuch yt he yt cannot chafe, is accounted a senceles block. And because they
dare not give ye whole disposition of yt dice unto ye Lord, least in finding
falt therewith they should open their mouth against him: they set up an Idol to
their imaginations. I will set out his hand (say they) in despite of the dice.
Did ever man hold out so long, having so many points to enter? What fortune is
this? What luck is this? I care not so much for the money, but to see what
spiteful luck I have. Then must the Cards be rent in pieces, or the Dice
thrown into the fire: and yet they will laugh at a little child which beats
the ground for giving him a fall. I speak favorably of them, for they are so
far from thinking that they shall give account for every angry and idle
word, that they think of no account for foming out such blasphemies against
the blessed name of God: and that also not in vain alone, as others do, which
are no gamesters to confirm every trifle, (for they swear not to end any
controversy,) but because God orders the Dice no better for them, therefore
do they spue out blasphemies against him. For why else should they swear by
him? Naie, they themselves render this reason that I have brought, why they
swear. It would make one swear (say they) to have such luck. Of a truth,
God is long suffering, to see if they will repent. For else he would never stay
to take them away by ordinary sickness, as he uses to deal with others: but
he would cause the earth to swallow them up into eternal confusion, even
whilst the oaths are in their mouths, such open contempners of him. And
although ye party that plaieth with them, begins to tremble for fear: yet
he must not reprove him. For then he looks upon him with fiery eyes, and is
ready to thrust his dagger into him: he accounts then that he has great
injury, for loosers must have their saying. So that a man must, either by
reproouing be in danger of outrage: or else, by his silence he must be
accessarie to open treason against the almighty. So that whether you look to
the winner, or to the looser, they are both guilty (even by the judgment of
sinful flesh) of most grievous sin against the Lord God. What is the cause
of drunkenness, but this beastly game? For if the company were not continued
with flush, and ace of spades, king a diamonds, and such like stuff: if I say
men were not kept still at the Alehouse with this fond talk, by that time they
had been together a little while, they could not tell what to say one to
another: they would then go from their cups, before that staring and Pro. 23.
29.
redness of the eyes, that the scripture speaks of, came upon them.


Demas. When a man does tell gamesters, that these fruits that you have spoken
of, come by play: their answer is, that these be the faults of men that
abuse their sport, and not of the game it self.


Paul. Those that answer so, you may ask them, how they themselves know
any thing: for example. How do they know that a talebearer causes
contention. They will answer, by the effect of the matter: it always falls
out so. So do I know, and so may they know, that a thousand more mischiefs
then I have spoken of, do come of dice-plaie. If they say, that there be not
these mischifes in the game, if gamesters were as they should be: so can I
say, that a talebearer cannot cause contention, if the party to whom the
tale is told, were as he should be: and yet we say, a talebearer causes
contention: and we may as truly say, that dice and cards cause such
mischiefs as are spoken of. When a statute was made by Act of Parliament,
against unlawful games, did not the Knights and Burgesses, being advertised by
the communaltie, whose patrones they are? Did not they perceive what horrible
mischiefs broke out into the common wealth.

For want of restraint that ways? Did not the Lords and Nobles of the upper
house, see that their complaint was just, and that they laid the fault where
it was, when they confirmed that, which they devised? And here have all good
consciences just cause to complain. For, what a shameful thing is it, that
such an honorable assembly should be gathered, from every part of the land,
to make so good and so notable a law: and yet, that thorough the loose
negligence of those that have that trust committed unto them, to see these
laws executed, all should be to no purpose? Naie, I speak favorably of
them: for they do not only not punish these unlawful games, but with their
authority they license a company of needelesse Alehouses, which are places of
refuge for naughty packes to lurk in. And though for very shame, they be
compelled to take away their license from some dronken Alehouse, that for
maintaining of wickedness is more notable then the rest: yet, if some wicked
rich man speak a good word for them, they shall have leave to be masters of as
much evil rule as ever they were. And what man cannot make some friend or other
to speak for him? If they can say that they are poor men, all is well. But
why should not they work for their living as well as other poor men? Why have
they more respect to the poverty of one, then to the beggering of all the poor
men in ye town? They say men may choose whether they will spend their moneie
at the Alehouse or no: but poor women, and their children, can not choose
whether their husbands shall spend that at the alehouse, that should be for
their maintenance, or no. Beside this, if me^ could govern themselves, to what
purpose should they be appointed governors of a town? For they are set in
authority above their brethren, to the end they might ouerrule and govern
such, as cannot govern themselves. Those that bear office, are sworn to put
down dice and card-plaie: and yet, if they keep an alehouse themselves, they
will allure poor men to these unlawful games, and rather then they should not
play, they will play with them themselves. This has been told to him that may
remedy the matter, and yet there is nothing done. A notable judgment of God
has been showed upon perjured persons at Thaxted, not far hence: and yet are
we not afraid to forswear our selves. Seeing therefore these things are thus,
I beseech the Preacher in the name of the living God, that he would not sooth up
the officers: as if all things were well, when indeed there is only a vain
flourish of discipline used, which is as much as nothing. For, who knows not
that these games are used? and yet who has been reproved for it? There be
(indeed) governors appointed, but there is not that diligent inquiring after
these things, as should be: and yet when things are complained of, other men are
not discouraged from sin by ye punishment of the offender. The Magistrate
thinks that he does discharge his duty highly, if he punishes when a falt
is brought before him: otherwise, though they hear men swearing at cards, as
they walk in ye streets, it makes no matter. Good Lord, where is yt merciful
severity that was: in yt good man Job, ^^b. 29. 8. and 6.
which made ye unruly young me^ hide themselves for fear, when they saw him?
He did not wait til a complaint was brought to him but when he knew not ye
cause, he sought it out dilige^tlie. This thing, as all other things were, was
written for our lerning: we must therefore do ye like. We should put down all
vitling houses, but such as must needs be had to intertaine strangers, those
vitling houses that remain, we must search them diligently, and if there be
any cards or tables found, we must bring them to the market place, and there
burn them before all the people. And if the Law will give us leave, we should
take all the cards and tables out of ye haberdashers shops, and burn them. I
know not what the Law says in this point, but truly I can see no reason, how
it can be lawful to buie or sell cards or tables, when as ye use of the^ is
forbidden. Idle persons must be hunted after, at such places as are suspected,
their haunt must be broken: then shall ye earth bring forth her increase, and
God (even our own God) shall give us his blessing. If the Preacher be afraid
to preach these things (as we are all ye sort of us cowards and dastards in
Gods matters) if we be afraid, we know of who^ to ask strength, even of yt
mighty and valiant God, yt is fierce in battle, the Lord of hosts is his
name. What art thou (faith ye Prophet Esaias) yt thou should Esaie. 51
fear a mortal man, and the son of man, which shall be made as grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has spread out the heavens? Let us not
therefore fear the reproach of men, for their breath is in their nostrells, and
the moath shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like
wool. If we will not speak, the Lord is a jealous God. Trusse up thy loins
(says the Lord unto Jeremy) arise, and speak unto the people all that I
command thee, be not afraid of their faces, least I destroy thee before them.
If thou have this boldness with thee, though men fight against thee, they shall
not prevail: the Lord (even the Lord shall deliver thee. Thou must not cease
from speaking, when some little abuse is amended. Wicked king Pharao yielded
somewhat to Moses peticion, but Moses would not content himself with a little.
The Lord must have an absolute obedience. We must indeed yield obedience to
all magistrates, good and badde: so that it be in the Lord: but yet we must not
commend them before they walk roundly in their office, as they should. No, no,
if the officers did their duty, we should not have such disorders as we have.
If a subtle fellow, to make those that should look to it secure, give it
out, that play is well ceased: then all is safe.


Demas. But you know the magistrates cannot punish men for plaieng in
Christmas time: as they call it.


Paul. But they may, and ought to punish them to: for even then, when they
have most liberty, they must not play at Alehouses: but in their masters
house, or when their master look on them, when an inch is given they must not
take an ell: but I have before showed the abuse of this time, and therefore I
will not speak of it any more.


Demas. You have done so indeed: but yet you have not answered one reason that
has been used in defense of abusing the time, in this order. The reason is
taken out of the third Chapter of the Preacher, where the wise man says, that
to all things there is an appointed time: and that there is a time to cast away
stones, or to trifle (as they expound it.)


Paul. Yet casting of stones, were a great deal better exercise, then to sit
moping and dreaming at a pair of cards. But the truth is, they shamfullie
abuse the place. For it has been proved before, that whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, we must do it to the glory of God. When we
exercise or recreate our selves, our recreation must tend to edifieng, and to
the building up of our faith: for example. When we play at tennis, we refresh
our wearied spirits and memories, by the which means we are better able to
study, and to get knowledge, whereby our faith is strengthened. For answer
to their place, this I say, that the holy Ghost does not set down what may
be done without breach of yt commandment: but he tells us what is commonly
done among men, as it is plain in the text, and as it is easy to perceive by
the argument of ye whole book. Among other things that are there rehearsed,
it is said, that there is a time to hate, and a time to love: but we know,
there is no time, wherein we ought for to hate. If any allege, that we ought
to hate sin, they say nothing to ye purpose. For our hatred against sin, must
not be restrained to any one time: but we must bid it battle all our life. But
there it is evident that the text speaks of the diversity of time, so that
they are still to seek for the defense of their vanities.


Demas. If the lewd example of the university were not, truly I think, and
partly by report I understand so much, that many Gentlemen would leave this
game: and also cause all their household to leave it.


Paul. I will not defend ye university in this sin of theirs, notwithstanding
so far forth as the truth will give me leave, I will speak somewhat in their
defense. Least therefore any should think worse of Cambridge men, then they
deserve, this I can say: that all the masters of Colleges are ashamed of
this game. For (as far as I could ever learn) they never play publikelie:
if they play at all, it is in hugger mugger. This also I can say, that those
that used this game, were very infamous, and generally thought evil of,
throughout the University: and therefore those that loved this sport, were
driven to seek corners. For they know that it was unworthy the excellency of
a man, especially of such as profess the study of wisdom and learning, to
be seen plaieng at so doltish a game. I have thought ere now, when I have
seen scholars holding three short thick pieces of paper in their hand, with
such great and goutie spots upon them, I have thought (I say) that it has been the most ill favored sight that ever I saw: a book of a smaller print
would become their hands a great deal better, what an unseemly thing is it,
that men of learning should be heard talking of a pair of eights, or a pair
of tennes, of two ases, and.xxj. Every plain man in the country can skill of
this arethmatick. But they must play for the Butlers advantage, and they must
surfeit and be sick for the Physicians advantage. Students commonly sit too
much, and therefore they have no need of this sitting pastime. But cannot the
Butler be maintained, except the poor scholars (for love of this sport) sell
their books, and their sheets from under them? They know, or ought to know,
that we must not do evil that good may come thereof. Is it not a more easy
matter to find their Butler, when they put him to no charges, then when they
cause him to bie cards, counters, and candelles? Will men of wealth (think
you) give any exhibition, when you trifle away your money at post and pair?
Will men have any mind to send their children to you, when you let them run at
rouers, in the most dangerous time of their age, so long together? If young
men could govern themselves, wherefore serve Masters? Wherefore serve Tutors?
is it to be thought yt young youths have more hold of themselves, and may
better be without government, in so slippery a thing as gaming is, then in
other matters. Is not gaming ye thing yt gives a fall to men yt are of a
stayed age? Seeing therefore these things are thus, I humbly beseech all
masters of Colleges, and all those that can reform this abuse, yt they wuld
not suffer themselves to be carried away with a popish and a doting custom: I
beseech them yt they wuld consider, yt therefore do me^ take such pains at
their book, not yt they should take whatsoever a blind custom does offer
the^, (for it is soon seen without any learning, what is done:) but a
diligent inquiry after that which ought to be done will ask a longer study. I
beseech the^ therefore in ye bowels of Jesus Christ, eue^ as they love their own
souls health, and the health of those yt are so dearly bought, even with ye
precious bloudshedding of ye son of God, yt they wuld reform this disorder,
and send this rioting to Rome, from whence it came. I know they are wise men,
and it may be, some men think yt my giving of the^ counsel will be to no
purpose: but yet Apollos was a very eloquent and a wise man, and we read of
him, that he was content to be reformed by a poor crafts man. And ye wisest
man yt ever was, says, that if you reprove a wise man, he will love you, and
increase in wisdom. I have been bold therefore to give admonition to these wise
men, and I am in good hope, that they will follow, not my counsel, but the
counsel of the only wise God. But if they will be a froward people, and a
stifnecked generation, they will constrain ye simple men of ye country to
take up ye saying of Christ against the^, I thank thee (O father) yt thou have
hid these things from ye wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes,
yt by this means others may be stayed from stu^bling at them. But I cannot
thus satifie my self, with putting by the offense yt they give. I desire
therefore all those that aim at examples so much, that they would consider,
that ye Physician does not always square his life by the rules of physic:
neither does the Lawyer always square his doing by the law: nor the Divine
by divinity. If we be sick, we ask ye Physician what counsel he gives, we
do not require after his diet. Neither if we wuld know a truth in any matter
of divinity, are we to look to the life of a divine: for then we may soon
be deceived. If we look upon the examples of a great many now residents, we
shall take reading Curates to be as good men as they are, we shall be made to
believe by their examples, that it made no matter whether there were any
preaching, or no. But when they come among their Curates, they will tell them
that it is a far more excellent matter to preach then to read an Homely: And
when they make a sermon, they will tell the people (as the truth is in deed)
that preaching is the mighty power of God, to draw us from our accursed
estate, that by nature we are in, that there is no other ordinary means,
whereby the Lord works salvation in our hearts. For no man can hear without
a Preacher. They will tell you, that the love of pastors toward Christ and his
flock, must be judged by feeding: because Christ says unto Peter, feed,
feed, feed. So dare I say for Cambridge men, whatsoever their examples are,
that if a Gentleman come to them, that is somewhat doubtful in this point, and
ask them whether the rioting that they use in Christmas time, is allowed off
by the word of God, or no: I dare say for them, that they will give sentence
against their own example. I presume the rather yt their judgments are against
these games, because I cannot think that they dare open their mouths against
such an army of learned men, as have in all ages condemned them.


Demas. Truly sir, I think it were very good, that the judgment of learned
men, that are known to be men of credit, and are generally well thought of,
were gathered together, and put in print, to ye end ye truth might have some
continuance by them. For though (indeed) the bare authorities of men be little
worth in themselves: yet because, when men that are famous for their wisdom
and learning shall be known to write against any thing: men will then
commonly make inquiry after the reasons that cause them to write, as they
do: I say in this respect, it were good to allege the authority of the
learned.


Paul. The authorities and the reasons of the most excellent authors that we
have, are already gathered together by two learned divines, Peter Martyr, and
Danzus, against this vile game, that idle heads make such account of, and are
in print in the hands of a great many.


Demas. I but sir, every body does not understand the language that they
write in.


Paul. I have gathered out and set down in English most of the authors that
they allege: and I have partly amplified them with other men's judgments
that came to my mind. And if you will stay a little, you shall hear what
they say.

First before I begin, we must remember that our laws have appointed
punishment for those that use this game: it has already passed the
condemnation of our country. The civil law that is more general then ours,
does likewise condemn it in sundry places. If F. says Praetor de alcat. If
any shall call forth his fellow to play, let him be punished, and cast in
prison. The Emperor Justinian would not suffer any of his subjects to use
this game, either in public or private houses: neither would he suffer any to
look upon these that did play. If any thing were lost that ways, there was
law to recover it again. Liber. 3. Codicis Iustineanei. Tit. 43. The Romans
provided Lege Roscia, that those which lost their money this ways should be
banished. In Tullie his time, when the Romans flourished in all kind of
abundance, (at which time men commonly use most rioting:) yet even then was it
accounted a shameful matter to be a dice plaier. For Tullie going about, and
bending all the force of his wit to bring Cataline, and afterward Anthony into
the hatred of the senate, and the rest of the people, he tells them yt they
were dicers: which thing he would never have done, if to play at dice had not
been an odious thing with them. The Poets are wont to match whooredome and dice
play together.

Hunc damnosa Venus, tunc preceps alia prodit.

Iuuenal says, that it does corrupt Satyra. 1.
whole families. Master Ascham, that was Schoolmaster to the Queens
majesty, brings in Chauser our English Poet inueieng against ye cursed
bones: and he himself in his book of shooting, would have it made a matter of
fellonie. In the Canons of the Apostles, this game is plainly forbidden: Cano.
41 Even the Canon law that was gathered of the Papists themselves, does very
severely condemn it Decretalium. lib. 3. Tit. 1. c. Now if we will come to ye
godly fathers of the Church, we shall see, that both old and new have
condemned it. The godly man Cyprian says, that ye devil was the first deviser
of this game. Ambrose, in his first book of offices. 23. Chapter. And
Chrysostom, in his. 6. Homely upon Matthew, inuaie vehemently against it.
Austine, in his Epistle. 54. would have whatsoever is gotten this ways taken
from ye winner, and bestowed upon the poor, by this means (says he) ye
greedy gamester shall be deprived of that he looks and gapeth for: and the
foolish fellow that lost his money shall be punished. Nicholas Lyra, that was
accounted the best learned in his time, wrote a book called Preceptorium,
wherein he proves by nine reasons. And because our talk is of authohities,
his reasons were gathered out of sundry authors, whereby he proved yt dice play
was not to be suffered in a Christian common wealth. The godly man Barnard,
writing to the godly soldiers yt were at Jerusalem, cou^selleth them to be
at defiance with dice play. Peter Martyr. upon the.xiiij. Chapter of the
Judges, says, yt our money is given us of ye Lord to nourish our families, and
to provide for such as have need: beside this, we Christians are to represent
the image of God, which does not any thing at a venture, and at hap hazard.
For he waieth the waters by measure, as Job says: and says unto the proud
waves of the sea, thus far shall thou come. We therefore must do the like, and
not set our moneie at six and seven. Danzus, in his book de Ludo, says, that
deceit is so incident to dice, that the Apostle in the fourth to ye Ephesians,
ye fourtenth verse, uses that word that does properly signify dice 2. These.
5. 22
for deceit and guile. He tells us, out of the Apostle, that we must abstain
even from the appearance of evil. If (says he) Paul would abstain from
flesh all his life long, rather then his weak brother should be offended: it
is a shame for us, if we should not abstain from so trifling a thing, yt may
so well be spared, seeing there are honest recreations enough, when such
horrible mischiefs continually come thereby. By these, and many other
reasons ye have been partly spoken of before, he is bold to say, yt the moneie
yt is gotten by play, is unjustly kept: and with no better conscience, the^ a
thief keeps ye which he has stolen. M. Jewel in ye latter end of his
apology, reherseth and allows very well of ye doing of one Gobilo, a
Lacedemonian, which when he was sent ambassador to ye me^ of Corinth, to treat
of a league, and had found yt dice was commonly used amongst them, he returned
home again with his message undone: and being asked of those yt sent him, why he
did so, he made answer, yt it should be a great reproach to his co^monwelth, to
make a legue with dicers. Erasmus, a man of great reading, misliketh yt we should
suffer our children to use this kind of game, when we buie our selves a new
pair of cards, we wuld not have us let our children play with our old. For
it is better a great deal, that our cards should be lost, then that we should
leese our cards and our children too. Of all other men he could not abide that
Priests, as he called them, should use this game. If he had seen a Bible, and
a pair of tables lieng together in a Bishops hall, he would have thought it a
foul fault. For these two cleave together like claie and iron, as Daniel
speaks, they are not matches. God will be no baude to our naughtines, the
scripture must not be pretended where dice play is meant. Even Castil^o the
courtier, yt labors altogether in framing of an outward man, though not
altogether in words, yet in very deed he does utterly condemn dice and
cards. His words be these, I think it no vice in ye courtier to play at dice
and cards, except (mark his excepto^) except a man apply it to much, and by
reason of that, sets aside other things more necessary: or else for none
other intent, then to get moneie, and to beguile his fellow, and in his loss
fume and take on, so that it might be thought a token of covetousness. What
man is he yt uses this play, that plaieth not too much? For the looser will
not give over, and he that wins, must not leave his fellow in the lurch.
Who by plaieng thereat, sets not aside better things? Who plaieth not to get
moneie? Who deceives not? Who chafeth not? For this cause, Ovid in his
Courtier (unless I be deceived) gives a lover warning to take heed of
plaieng before his Lady or Lemman: because it does lay open our beastly
affections, which might otherwise be kept secret. And so, by this means, a man
shall not be so amiable to ye company, as otherwise he should. This game may
very well be compared to water that is powered into a boule, which causes a
wooden spoone or any such light thing to swim aloft, that would otherwise have
been beneath. Paschasius the Physician, of whom I spoke before, writes a whole
treatise against this game: and shows by many philosophical resons the
beastliness of it. It were very long, and indeed infinite, to rehearse those
that have writ against it. And therefore let those yt favor this game give me
but one instance, let them show me, if they can, that any learned man,
Divine, or other, which is otherwise known to be a man of judgment, that if
he speak any thing of it, condemns it not. But because they can not bring
forth any such, let them not think themselves wiser then all other men: let
them be content to follow the counsel of those that be wiser then
themselves. For my part, I am weary with laieng abroad this dunghill of sin,
and therefore I will grow to a conclusion with it. The sum of that which I have
said is this. Seeing by usual words, and continual practice of gamesters
themselves, this game is an Art, and nothing else but a profession to how
deceive cunningly: Seeing, whether you look to the efficient, material,
formal, or final cause, or to the horrible fruits and effects that proceed from
any of them, it is naught: seeing it is no recreation. Seeing, last of all, it
has been condemned in all ages, not only by the judgment of many learned
Divines old and new, and of many other that are otherwise learned, but also
by the common consent of whole countreies, common wealths, and kingdoms, I
conclude: that dice and cards, as common and wrangling barrators, are to be
banished the country.


The remedy against such evils, as have been hitherto spoken of. Chap. 6.
DEmas. Truly sir, I do not think that you have spoken any thing, to gall
any man, but only of mere love: and therefore in my judgment, you should
do well, if you would set down a remedy against such faults as you have
discovered.


Paul. The Lord that shall judge both me and all other at the last day, can
that love toward my countreie, my native town, and especially toward my
kinds folk and brethren, has caused me to speak as I have done. And
therefore I beseech them, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, that they would look
to these faults, that I have laid before them, and amend them. I have showed
them ineed, that their fault is more grievous then perhaps they take it to be.
For how could I else admonish them at all? In the nineteen of Leuiticus we are
commanded, that we should not hate our brother: but rebuke him plainly. If I
had spoken coldlie, and a far of, that had been a way to rock them a sleep
in their sins, they would have thought then, that there is no danger in
continuing still the course which they have begun. For, as one truly says,
he that demands a thing fearefullie, teaches a man to deny him his
demand, and it is as true a principle in Divinity, as it is in Surgerie, that
soft hands make a foul sore. Desiring them therefore to take this my
protestation, as it is meant, I will go on forward to that remedy you speak
of. In entreating of the which thing, I will betake my self to that same
order, which I have already set down. It has been said, that we may offend
in using the creatures of God, either too little, or too much. Concerning the
first kind, those that offend that ways, I would desire them to consider the
inconueuience that comes by their too much straitness. For, when men
absolutely condemn hunting, hawking, or taking delight in any pleasure, men
that use these delights too much, think that it is impossible, but that a man
should take pleasure in the creatures of God, and indeed, they think aright:
so, through too much straitness, they give themselves over to their accustomed
delights, whereas, if the liberty that God has granted, were set down, and
men instructed in the right use thereof, it is to be hoped, that men would come
to a godly moderation in these things. I will therefoe allege such texts of
scripture, as may remedy this too much severity. We are taught in the
scripture, that if there were any, who had not eaten ye fruits of their
labors, they should return home even in the urgent necessity of wars. A
notable testimony to show how well it likes ye Lord, yt men should take comfort
of their own. The honest delight that a man may take in any thing ye the
Lord bestows upon us, is very plainly set down in the parable of Nathan to
David. There was (says he) a poor man, yt had only one little sheep, which he
had bought, and norished up: and it grew up with him, and with his children
also, and did eat of his own mursels, and drank of his own cup, and slept
in his bosom, and was unto him as his daughter. This delight does so well
please ye Lord, that in the Proverbs it is set down as a Chap. 5. 18.
sufferaine remedy against sin. For there ye holy Ghost dissuading of us
from whoredom, wills us in any case to take delight in our wives. His words
be these, Rejoice with the wife of ye youth, let her be as ye loving hind and
pleasant Roe: let her breasts satisfy thee at all times: and delight in her
love continually. For why should thou delight (my son) in a strange
woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger? If these texts do not prove
plainly enough, yt a man may use recreatio^s, let us hear what Zachary
says. The Chap. 8. 5.
Prophet foretelling the return of the Jews from their captivity, sets it
down in these words: The city shall be full of boys and girls, plaieng in the
streets thereof: ye Lord knows yt we cannot always have our mind bent and
fastened upon weighty matters, and therefore he has given us leave to unbend
our wits, and to leave of our hold, to refresh our werisom spirits: to ye end
we might come to the^ again with greater delight: yt which some allege, is
nothing. They say, we must give account for every idle word, and much more for
spe^ding our time in this order: but when I delight my self some honest way,
to the end I might be fitter and better able afterward to do better things,
where as otherwise my memory would be dulled, and unapt to good meditations, I
do not now spend my time in vain, but to good purpose. To use such things as
may move me cheerefullie to give thanks, is no vain pastime. They say we
must rejoice in the Lord only. The stay in deed of our joy must be in ye
Lord, he must be the resting place of our joy: but yet it has been proved,
that we may rejoice in his creatures. When we use the creatures as steps to
clime up to himself: God then and his creatures are sub alterna, as the
Logitians use to speak, one is under the other. They may both stand together,
the one does not take away the other. There is another sort of men that
delight too much in the creature. The name of an Epicure is not liked of this
kind of men: and therefore if it can be proved unto them, that the life of an
Epicure is all one with theirs, there is some hope, that they will forsake this
wicked sect. Marcus Ciecro, writing of this kind De finibus.
of men, says that they liked very well of wisdom: because thereby they
knew how to procure to themselves such things as are pleasant, and to avoid
all kind of grief. They thought if a man did hazard himself, to suffer any
grief, to the end his pleasures might be increased, he was to be commended.
Intemperate surfeiting, because it afterward brought grief of body, and
somewhat disquieted their merry thoughts, they could not like of it. Doing of
Justice and liberality, because it procured them the loving favor of the
people, they meetelie well allowed of. They were not such drunken sottes as we
imagine, that would sit gulling all day long at the Alehouse: No, they were
iollie neat fellows, and could behave themselves very well, what company so
ever they came into, as it may be seen in that notable Epicure Ovid in his
Courtier, otherwise called his book De art amandi. They would delight
themselves, either with such pleasures as are present, or with calling to mind
such pleasant things as are past, or else with a calm and quiet looking after
such things as were to come. The end of one pastime, was always the beginning
of another. Laboring in an honest trade, they did not like of: because it was
not pleasant. Now let gamesters judge themselves, and see whether they be of
this sect or no. A remedy against the continual delighting of our selves in
the things of this world, is set down in infinite places of the scripture. We
are taught that we are pilgrims and strangers in this world, and that we have
not here any abiding city: Our conversation must be in the heavens, from
whence we look for a Savior. The time is Cor. 71.
short, and therefore he that reioiceth, must be as if he reioiced not. All
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field. Vanity of
vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity. The whole book of Eclesiastes is
of this matter. Christ tells us, yt where our treasure is, there will our
hearts be also. We may therefore deceive our selves, and say, we look to be
saved as well as the best: but the scripture will not bear us out in any such
speech: for, if there were any treasure laid up for us in heaven, our
meditations, our talk, our doings, though they consist of earthly matters:
yet they should tend to an heavenly end. For whereas our treasure is, there
will our hearts be also. The delicate fellows of this world, can not abide, yt
a man should be sorrowful for his sins. What need such a business (say
they) do not men know yt God is merciful? The Prophet David should be a fool
by their reckning, for all his psalms are full of sighing and sobbing for
offending so good a God. The Apostle Paul reioiced, and did as it were triumph,
because of ye godly sorrow of ye Corinths. What great care has it wrought?
Yea, what clearing of your self? Yea what indignation? yea, what fear? yea,
how great desire? yea, what a zeal? yea, what punishment? and indeed there was
great cause why the Apostle should thus rejoice: for godly sorrow causes
repentance unto salvation not to be repented of. What a pitiful thing is it,
that a man should imagine such a kind of repentance, as is no where to be
found? For if we look into that most merciful promise of God, wherein his
exceeding goodness is abundantly set out, Come unto me all ye that labor and I
will ease you: yet we shall see, that it only belongs unto them, that are
grieved with the burden of their sins. As long as we make no more account of
the bloody sweates and horrible torments that Christ suffered for us miserable
men, then to say, we are all sinners: he will have nothing to do with us. For
what is this, but blasphemouslie to accuse the Lord God of mere tyranny, for
tormenting his only son with such agonies, reproach, and villainy, and all
(as we seem to think) for a thing of nothing? We must acknowledge our
redemption to be a benefit indeed, before he will do us any good. He came not
to call those that make so light account of sin. He came not to call the
righteous, but siuners to repentance. If they had once felt the unspeakable
joy and comfort that this godly sorrow brings to a wounded conscience, we
should soon agree in this point. For to whom shall I look (says the Lord by
his Prophet) but to him that trembles at my words? A contrite and a broken
heart (says David) O Lord shall not thou despise. The tears that come from
the godly, may very well be likened to April showers, for they moisten the
conscience as it were, with a sweet deaw, and make it (as the prophet speaks)
like a new watered garden The sweet reconcilement then that Jesus Christ has
wrought between God and us, does make us feel more sound joy then the
Epicures do in the midst of Christmas, even in the twelfe night, when their
iolitie is at ye highest. For being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
and if God does justify, who shall condemn? Jesus Christ that saved us, shall
be our Judge, and therefore we are bold to look and long for, without fear,
the judgment day, which the wicked are so afraid of. Those that are gamesters
cannot be persuaded, that we should avoid the occasions of evil: and yet we
all know, that he that will no harm do, must do nothing that belongs
thereto. This is no precise rule. For that loose fellow Ovid in his book De
remedio amoris, does set it down. If we mislike of our former wantonness, he
tells us we must read no wanton books: we must avoid the company of those
with whom we have abused our selves, even ye places where we have a bused our
selves must be avoided: we must in no case be idle, but we must always be busied
about some good matter. The holy Ghost makes such account of ye means, yt
lead us unto sin, yt he terms the means by ye name of sin. We know the
sins of Sodom and Gomor were monstrous and unnatural: we know ye fulness of
bread, and idleness, were but the means that brought on those ugly sins:
and yet the Prophet Ezechiel says, that the Cap. 16. 49.
sins of Sodom and Gomor, were fullness of bread, pride, and idleness: the
place is plain enough, it needs no interpetation, only a godly meditation
will serve ye turn. This kind of men yt I speak of, think that little sins
are not to be made account of: and yet we will laugh at that foolish and
papisticall distinction between mortal and venial sins. For whorebome,
theft and murder, is not that deadly sin that the Apostle speaks of? No
sin is venial, and every sin is deadly. For 1. John. 5. 16
the reward of sin is death, and all unrighteousness is sin, as John
teaches us: and accursed is he that shall not continue in every thing that is
written in the book of the Law, to do it: and we must love the Lord with all
our hearts, and with all our thoughts. When men chafe at cards or at tables, we
use to speak favorably of this sin. It is in their heat: but afterward they
are good fellows again. But the holy Ghost, when he entreats of this
matter, he sets it out after an other sort. He that works wrath Pro. 21. 24.
in his arrogancy, proud, hautie, and scornful is his name. A thief may
lessen his sins, by considering yt unworthiness of the party, from whom he
steals: he is a churl, and does no good with his money, and therefore it
were a good turn to rob him. So likewise may the murderer: if he be a godly
man whom he kills, he may say, he did him a good turn: if he be a wicked
man that he kills, then he did the common wealth a good turn: but where is
the commandment of the great God all this while? It is true, that so long as
we live, the root of sin shall dwell with us, in our mortal body. We are
not pure as yt Familest supposes: but yet we must strive to be pure, as ye
scripture teaches. Lust, after it has conceived, it brings forth sin, as
James teaches. We ought therefore to be vexed and wearied with it, and to desire
after a patient manner, to have this tickle estate changed. The Apostle Paul
cries out, not only in his own person, but in the person of every
regenerate man, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
sin? If so singular a man was not throroughlie cast down, before he had
wrasteled with the justice of God in this commandment, we are to take heed
least in suspecting yt to be in us, which we want, we become careless in
seeking the mercy of Christ, without the which there is no help. We must
judge our selves, least we be judged of the Lord: we must be confounded in
our selves, our delivery must be from the gates of death, we must know, that
our salvation does consist in his free grace, seeing even our thoughts are
poisoned. If this doctrine seems to rough we must remember that it was the
saying of our merciful and loving God, even of that God that loves man
dearly, and sent his only son to suffer a most horrible and a shameful
death for us miserable men: and that also, even when we were his enemies, I
say it was the saying of this God, Whenever thou eatest of the forbidden
tree, thou shall die yt death. Contrariwise, it was ye saying of ye envious
serpent, which was a manslaier from ye beginning, ye father and prince of
tyra^ts, which gapeth continually for blood, and goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may destroy, I say it was ye saying of this our professed
and sworn enemy yt can abide no truce with us, you shall not die at al. But if
we mark to what a sower death, ye sweet words of this flatterer tended, we
shall be forced to confess, yt they were more bitter the^ wormwood: and that ye
wounds of him yt loves are far better the^ ye kisses of him yt hates. We
must therefore resist yt devil, and the^ he will fly from us: I groan for ye
amendme^t of these men, and what should I say unto the^? I will show unto the^
yet a little their own estate, to the end they may repent I would desire the^
therefore in ye fear of God to examine themselves, by such places of scripture
as I will show the^. We read in. ye. 4. verse of the. 28. of ye Proverbs, yt
those that forsake the law praise the wicked: but those that keep ye law do
fight against the^. We read in. ye. xv. psalm that he shall dwell in ye
tabernacle of God, in whose eyes a wicked man is despised, and which does
honor those yt fear God. He yt approves ye wicked, and condemns ye
innocent, both of the^ are an abhominatio^ to ye Lord. Now let them mark
themselves, whether they be more ready to blaze abroad yt infirmity of those,
which are not ashamed openly to profess Christ, and his religion: the^ they
are to utter ye lewd behauior of those, yt for any thing they can perceive, lie
still in their accursed estate: when an insatiable man resident, or a wicked
vain man, is but a little touched, then we must judge yt best: we do not know
their hearts, we cannot indeed see directly into their hearts, no more then I
can see ye heart of him yt has committed actual whoordome, or actual murder:
but by their covetous, vain and proud behavior, and words, we know they have
proud hearts, vain, and covetous hearts, for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. How can I set my self against a wicked man. How can
I despise him, if I cannot tell (without iudgeing) who is wicked? In the
Chapter of the Proverbs that I last alleged, it is said, that he that hides
his sin, shall not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall
have mercy. Happy is he that always stands in awe: but he which hardneth
his heart shall fall into evil. Rejoice O young man (says the Precher) in thy
youth, walk in ye ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but
know, that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. We use to
allege the natural inclination to naughtiness that is in man, to the end
more liberty of sinning might be granted him: we are no Angels, and so
forth: but the consideration thereof ought to make us more wary, and more
afraid of sin, and of the occasions of sin, as the 12. verse of the. 6.
Chapter to the Ephesians teaches us. We think if we may have so much time,
a lit^^^ before we die, as to say, Lord hau^ mercy upon me, they shall do
well enough. But the Scripture says, not every one that says, Lord Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: They shall call upon me (says the
Lord) and I will not hear them. The Pre. 1.
reason is, because they ask not in faith: for every man believes not, faith
is no light opinion. We think we may repent timely enough, when we are old,
or when we are greeuouslie sick: but ye Scripture says, drive not off from
day to day, to turn to the Lord: for sodeinlie shall his wrath come. Christ
says to all such, that their master will come at such a time as they least
look for him. Hieremie in his lamentations gives us better counsel then so:
It is good (says he) for a man to bear the yoke in his youth, contrary to
that devilish saying of some, A young Saint, and an old devil. For teach a
child in the trade of his youth, and when he is old he wll not depart from
it. I remember master Ascham says, that there was a Judge in England, that
had a company of wild Gentlemen brought before him for their misbehauiour:
they desire the Judge yt he would consider their case by his own, because he
himself had been sometimes wild as they were. But the Judge wills the^ in
any case not to presume of his recovery, for when I was young, there was
twelve of us (says he) that rioted then, as you do now, but only two of us
came to good, the rest were hanged. I do not speak this, to the end that any
gamester, that has a misliking of his present estate, should despair of
himself: for though the way be straight yt leads unto life, yet the Lord
can make us crucify our affections, and deny our selves: his yoke shall then
be easy, and his burden light, the keeping of the commandment, (as John says)
shall not then 1. John. 5. 3.
be grievous: for all yt is borne of god, overcomes yt world. Solomon,
speaking of these ways of wisdom, says, yt her ways are ways of pleasure,
and all her paths prosperity. Throw thy self down therefore before the
footstole of Jesus Christ, whatsoever t^ou art, with sighing and sobbing: then
hough gamsters have been thine only joy, and darling, yet he can make thee
forget all, even by that mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself, shall he bring this thing to pass. Though by this means thou
do well perceive, that thou shall forgo the loving counteuance of a great
many: yet the Lord will be unto thee in steed of all. For he will comfort thee
on this manner. If you were of ye world, yt world would love you, for ye world
loves her own, such love as it is wont to use, you should have part of it:
but now you are not of the world, therefore the world hates you. If the world
hates you, it hated me before you: be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world, fear not little flock, for it is your fathers will to give you a
kingdom. Those that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, for John Harison the younger, dwelling in
Pater noster Roe, at the sign of the Anchor, and are there to be sold.


