TWO SERMONS preached, the one at Paul's Cross the eight of January 1580. The
other, at Christ's Church in London the same day in the after noone: By James
Bisse master of Art, and fellow of Magdalen ^^lledge in Oxenford.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Woodcocke. 1581.

To the right worshipful Sir John Horner, and Sir George Rogers knights;
James Bisse wishes grace, mercy, and peace from GOD our father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.
WHen I had preached these two sermons (right worshipful) diverse of my
friends requested a Copy of them: the which they craved earnestly, and at the
last I granted hardly. I had small leisure to pen my Sermons for them, and
thought it less honesty, and as little courtesy to deny them. But when
through importunity they had gotten the upper hand, and received my Sermons
at my hands, they went presently after a view taken of them, unto the Printer
to have them published. They used many reasons to persuade me to yield
thereunto, but but when they could by no reason move me to agree to their
attempt, they protested that my Sermons should be printed, though I were
never so unwilling, they having the copies in their hands: in the end, when I
could nothing prevail with them, but perforce was constrained to yield to the
publishing of these my Sermons. I Purposed, as duty moved me, to commend and
commit them unto your worships, to whom I do acknowledge my self diverse ways
much bounden: and the rather was I moved to hide them under the wings of your
worships protection, because your favor in mainteining the Gospel, your zeal
to Gods word, the regard that you have of Gods Ministers, is known, not to
me only, who have often times perceived it, but to all the^, which although
they know not you, yet both know and do acknowledge your good deeds. The Lord
power down his spirit plentifully upon you, kindle more and more in you the
true zeal that already burns, increase the love and good affection which you
have toward the gospel, that you being pillars in the Church of Christ
militant, may also be pillars in his Church triumphant. And thus, desiring
your worships to accept this my simple and rude work, with my humble
comme^dations to you, and to the virtuous Ladies your wives, I bid you heartily
fare well, from London this xix. of January. 1580.

Your worships to comma^nd^ in the Lord, James Bisse.

John. 6. 27. Labor not for the meat* which perishes, but for the meat that
endures unto everlasting life. Which the Son^^ of man shall give unto you, for
him has God the Father sealed.
David a King and a Prophet: Romans 1*
a man after Gods own heart, the first lively branche of the root of Iesse,
of whose seed Christ was made according to the flesh, and upon whose throne, he
does and shall sit for ever: although he were a worm and no man, the outcast
of the people, a Pellicane in the wilderness, an owl in the desert, a sparowe
without her mate, alone upon the house top: yet as the heart desires the water
brooks, Psalm. 102.
so longed his soul after the meat which endures unto everlasting life,
being more precious unto him than thousands of gold and silver, sweeter than
honey unto his mouth, and the honycombe unto his throat. Psalm. 119.
For though the plowers had so plowed upon his back, and made long furrows:
though the Lord so had trodden down his soul upon the earth, and laid his
honor in the dust: though his God had so exalted the horn of his enemies,
making them to ride over his back, that he, as it were entering into the
kingdom of desperation, did cry: then have I cleansed my heart in vain, in
vain have I washed my hands in innocence: and again will the Lord absent
himself for ever, Psa. 73.
and will he be no more intreted? is his mercy clean gone for ever, Psalm. 77.
and is his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? What, will he now
forget to be gracious, and shut up his loving kindness in displeasure. Yet
notwithstanding, when he had been in the sanctuary of the Lord, and so knew
the end of his enemies, and the causes of those things, he was filled with
marow and fatnes, his head was anointed with fresh oil, his cup was full,
because he had dronken plentifully of the water of life, and eaten abundantly
of the bread of heaven. Revel. 10.
For as John did eat, not a leaf only, Ezech. 3.
but the whole book and as Ezechiel did eat, not a piece, but the whole role,
the which book and role were sweet as honey in their mouths. But the book
made John's belly bitter, and the role brought heaviness to Ezechiels spirit,
that is, the word brought unto the^ both, peace to the conscience from the
Lord, but war to the body from the world. So David's whole delight was in
the law of the Lord his God, to muse and meditate thereon, too exercise, and
practice himself therein, both day and night, all days and nights of his
life. Whose good and godly example we must follow in laboring for meat, if
we will have the crown of life, if we will eat of the tree of life, if we
will eat of manna, that is hid, Revel. 2. and. 3.
if we will have that whitestone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows, but he that receives it, if we will stand in the midst of the
paradise of GOD, if we will be clothed in white array, if we will have our
names in the book of life, if we will be a pillar in the temple of God, and
never go out, if we will have written upon us the name of God, Heb. 12.
and the name of Jerusalem, if we will come to mount Syon, to the city of the
living God, to the celestial Jerusalem, to the company of innumerable
angels, to the assembly and congregation of the first borne, which are
written in heaven, to God the judge of al, to the spirits of just and perfect
men, to Jesus the mediator of the new tastament, and to the blood of
sprinckling that speaks better things then the blood of Abel. For all other
meats perish, they with us, and we with them, O then labor not for them: only
this meat, the food of the soul does endure unto everlasting life, it with
us, and we with it: O then, let us all labor for it. The children of Israel
did eat Manna in the wilderness, Exodus 16.
but they are al dead: Iosu. 5.
Manna was not to be found on the sabbath days, Manna was full of worms,
and stanke: Manna ceased, when they had eaten of the corn in Canaan: Manna was
kept in a pot, for the posterity. 2. Chro. 5.
But is was no where to be found in the days of Solomon. But they that are
fed with this bread, shall never dye: it is to be found at al times, it
never putrifieth, it never cease, for it does endure, not to death, but to
life, and that to everlasting life, He that drinks of the water of Jacobs
well, shall thirst again: John. 4.
but he that drinks of the water, which the son of man shall give unto
him, (whom God the father to this purpose has sealed) shall never thirst
again, but the water in him shall be a well of water, springing up unto
everlasting life: John. 7.
yea, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. Wherefore: 1. Chro.
11.
as Eleasar and his two companions did break through the mighty host of the
Philistines, and brought water out of Bethlehem for David, even through the
host back again, David longing after that water: right so, let us boldly
and courageously, break through the mids of all our enemies, both temporal
and spiritual to get this water, Mat. 11.
and this bread of the soul, of heaven, and of life, that it may be said of
us, as our Savior spoke of the Jews in the beginning of the gospel: the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. So
zealous were they (O I would to God) so zealous were we) too receive Gods mercy
so freely offered, so greedy were they, (O I would to God so greedy were we)
to embrace, to love, to obey, to follow Gods word so purely preached. For as
the pewter pot, which the fire melts is not so soon consumed, being full of
licour: as the glass, which every knock breaks, is not so lightly dashed in
pieces being full of water: so we, (though we consume as the fat of lambs
before the presence of the Lord, and be as dry stubble, the Lord a consuming
fire: though we be more brickle then glass, for glass being safely locked up,
endures long, but we, keep we our selves never so daintily, never so warily,
never so safely, come to an end as a tale that is told. So we I say, being
full fed with this food, shall be able to abide all blows, al knocks, and
shall quench all the fyrie darts of the wicked, and shall stand fast in the
evil day, and so stand, that all the gates of hell, shall not once be able to
prevail against us. What better reason can I give then this? for it endures
unto everlasting life.

But alas, as Eve was content to adventure the loss of Paradise, for an apple:
as Esau was content to loose his birthright, and his fathers blessing for a
mess of pottage: as the children of Israel did loath Manna, (Angels food) and
in their hearts turned back to the flesh pottes of Egypt: as the Jews at this
time did seek Christ, not for his doctrine, not for his miracles, but chiefly
for meat, because he had fed them, and so fed them, that they had more
store left, when they had done, then when they began to eat: So because the
days of Noe are come, because the days of Lot are come, because the days of
the Son of man are at hand, we are weerie of the meat that endures unto
everlasting life, and do labor for the meat which perishes to serve the
belly, Luke. 17.
the flesh, sin, the world, and all is to serve the Devil.

For as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son
of man, they ate, they drank, they married, and gave in marriage, unto the day
that Noah went into the Arc, and the flood came and drowned them all: like as
it was in the days of Lot, they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they builte, they married, but in the day that Lot went out of Sodom,
the lord rayned fire and brimstone from heaven and consumed them all. There was
never more eating and drinking, I mean never more surfeiting and drunkenness:
never more buying and selling. I say, never more deceyt in buying and selling:
never more planting, I might truly say, never more supplanting one of another:
never more marying, I would to God I might not justly say, never more whoring,
to conclude never more building, I mean not building of Colleges, of alms
houses, of schools. there was never less: I pray you mistake me not, I say,
never more building of private houses, which we think shall continue for
eeuer, and call our houses and our lands after our own names. So that we may
justly bewail the madness and misery of this age, as Chrysostom did the
folly and fondness of his time. Homil. 42. in Johan.
Si secularibus abstinere iubemur, quae miseria, quae amentia est, ea a domino
postulare quae habita, abiicienda: desiderare, in quibus nullam omnino curam
adhibendam praecipit? That is: if we are commanded to abstain from worldly
things, what a misery, what a madness is it, to beg those things at the
Lords hands, which when we have, we must cast away: and to desire those
things, wherein the Lord commands us to put no care at all. Tit. 2.
Wherefore seeing it may well be said of us Englishmen, as Paul said of the
Cretians, evil beasts, slow bellyes: and seeing I may now truly speak with
Paul: many walk, of whom I have told you often, Phillip. 3.
and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies to the cross of Christ,
whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, whose glory is to their
shame, which mind earthly things: and seeing upon good occasion, Romans 16.
I may exhort you with Paul: now I beseech you (brethren) mark them
diligently, which make division, and offenses contrary to the doctrine which
you have learned and avoid them: for they that are such, serve not the Lord
Jesus, but their own bellies, and with fair speech, and flattering, deceive
the hearts of the people: this doctrine is as needful and necessary, now as
it was in the time of our Savior Christ, when he thus taught the people,
Labor not etc. Not only to dissuade you from laboring for the meat which
perishes, but to persuade you to labor for that meat which does endure unto
everlasting life, The which words contain in them, The division.
first a disswasion, a dehortation, a proposition negative: Secondly, a
persuasion, an exhortation, or conclusion positive. Whereunto is annexed, first,
a reason taken from the person that gives, and the certainty of the thing
given: which the Son of man shall give unto you: Secondly, a confirmation,
drawn from the office and function of our Messiah and Savior. For him has
the Father sealed, that is, appointed and consecrated him to give life unto all
the^ that labor for this meat.

IT had been sufficient for our Savior: only to have used the exhortation,
labor for etc, had he not perceived them, as we now see the world, to hunt
and labor for belly cheer, as dogs do for carrion, swine for draugh,
horses for prouender: too be wrapped and tied in these earthly things, (as
the men of this age are) like the fish in the hook, the bird in the net, the
conie in the hay: therefore he begins with the dehortation. Labor not, etc.
And because a little before mention was made of meat, he speaks figuratively,
using the Metaphore of meat, whereas he might plainly have said, care not
for the body to fulfill the lusts of it, but care for your souls, to
possess the kingdom of heaven. And if he had only used the affirmative,
exhorting the^ to labor for meat, they might have been as gross in
understanding him, as his Disciples were, who, when he spoke of the leaven of
the Pharesies, Mat. 16.
thought he had spoken of the leaven of bread: as carnal as Nicodemus, who
when Christ told him a man must be borne again, thought a man should go
into his mothers womb again: John. 3.
as rude as the woman of Samaria, who, John. 4.
when Christ spoke of the water of life, thought he had spoken of the water of
Jacobs well. Therefore, as he uses a metaphore being plain, so to make it
more plain, so to show whereunto their nature was bent, so to declare what
they should labor for, he uses both the affirmative and the negative: but
he begins with the negative, labor not, etc. As if he should have said:
Will thou come up into my holy hill? put of thy shoes. Will thou come into my
congregation? cut of the foreskin of thy flesh, or rather of thy heart. Will thou have my durable coat made of skins? O son of Adam, cast of thy
breeches made of fig leaves. Will thou be clad with my garment? cast of thy
ragged cloak with blind Bartimeus. Will thou have a salve for thy wound? cut
of thy rotten flesh. Will thou have a medicine for thy diseases, purge thy
body. Will thou build? pluck down thy ruinous walls. Will thou sow? pluck
out the weeds of thine heart. Will thou put on a clean shirte? put of the
foul. I will not put my new Wine into old bottelles: I will not put a piece
of my new cloth, upon the moth eaten garments: my coat is without seame from
the top to the skirtes, I give all, or none. Will thou entertain me Zacheus?
come down from the wild fig tree. Will thou do good? decline from evil.
Will thou put on the armor of light? cast of the works of darkness. You
cannot serve God and Mammon, Christ and riches, you cannot labor for the meat
which perishes, and for the meat that endures unto everlasting life. Were
not a garment of linen and woollen: eat not with sweet bread, and sower
leaven: sow not two sorts of grain in one field: go not too plowe with an ox
and an ass in one yoke: for they that do so, look back from the plough, and
are not fit for the kingdom of God. For what fellowship has righteousness,
and unrighteousness, what communion has light with darkness, 1. Cor. 6.
what concord has Christ with Belial? what part has the believer with the
infidel? what agreement has the temple of God with Diuelles? GOd and Mammon,
meat which perishes, and meat which endures unto everlasting life, cannot
stand together. But let us labor a little I pray you, for this meat, a
little is to be borne with. What, know you not, that leaven, and a little
leaven, does leaue^ the whole lump? that a breach, and a little breach does
mar the sale of a whole cloth? that a scarre and a little scarre, does
disfigure the whole face? that poison, and a little poison, does poison the
whole body? that Coloquintida, and a little Coloquintida, does infect the
whole pot of pottage? that a hole, and a little hole in a vessel, will let out
all the licour? that fire, and a little fire, is able to burn a whole City?
Kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.
(says the Prophet) least he be angry, and so perish from the right way, if
his wrath be kinndled, yea but a little, Blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. Make no pax of the world, and have no pax with the world, but
kiss the son, make a pax of him, and have peace with him* Fear his wrath,
if it be kindled, yea but a little, O blessed are all they that put their trust
in him. But alas, Math. 13.
we are so far from laboring for this meat, that whereas like good husbandmen
we should labor and dig in the field, and sell all that we have, to buy that
field. Whereas like wise Merchant men, we should labor and seek for good
pearls, Math 7.
and sell all that we have, to buy that pearl of great price: We, like dogs
refuse holy things offered, we turn about and tear them that do offer them:
we like swine, tread pearls under our feet, and do accounte this pearl,
this holy thing, the word of life, to be unto us as a ring of gold in a
swines snoute. For does the people delight to hear Gods word? Behold yet they
are like the deaf adder, which stops her ears, at the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely. Or if they with delight do hear it, do
they understand it? behold yet, they are like horse and mule, which have no
understanding, or if they hear it, and understand it, do they obey it? behold
yet, they are untamed colts, and vnweaned heyfers. Or if they do all these
three, hear, understand, obey, can they abide to be rebuked to their faces of
their sins? Behold yet they are like Herod, who performed the 3 first, Mark.
6.
but could not abide the fourth. Do they love the bringers of this word?
behold yet there is in England an Adders brood, a generation of Vipers. Do
they abide and stand fast to their profession? Behold yet they are starting
aside like a broken bow, they are yet like the children of Ephraim, who be yng
harnessed, and carrying bows, did turn themselves back in the day of battle.
Nay do the bishops and ministers so go in, and so go out, before the people
of God, that the people seeing them go before, do follow after them, whereby
our father in heaven is glorified? Behold yet many of them are like the eye,
which sees all things and cannot see it self: like the whetstone which
makes the iron sharp, but dull it self: like the iron and flint, which make
fire in the tynder but are cold themselves. I pray GOD they be not like those
foolish Carpenters in the days of Noah, who builded the Arc for Noah* but
they themselves were drowned. Or if the Ministers and people do seem to live
as they teach and are taught, do they live so sincerely, purely, and truly? I
pray God we be not found to be stage players, to be painted sepulchers, Wels
without water, and clouds without rain. For so ripe is the hypocrisy of men
in these days, that they which bear the fairest show of godliness, do most
deny the power thereof. For even they, these holy men, or rather holow trees (I
would they were holy trees, which are always green,) are like the fair redd
morning, which brings rain at noone: Like the calm water, which is most
deep: like the green grass, where the venomous snake lies, and the filthy
curre makes his urine. For they serve their bellies, their flesh, the world,
and in heart do labor for that meat only, which perishes. We care not for our
lives, our souls, our selves, we are inferior to brute beasts. Hear o
heavens, and harken o earth: (says the Lord) the ox knows his owner, Isay*
1.
and the Ass his Miasters cribbe, Ierom. 8.
but my people does not know me, and again, the stork in the air does know
her appointed times, the tutele, the crane, the swallow, observe the time of
their coming, but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord. But why
does the ox know his owner, and the Ass his masters cribb? why do the
storke, the turtle, the crane, the swallowe, observe the time of their coming?
is it not for meat, for their bodies, and for their lives? should they labor
for their lives, and not we for ours? For well said Tullie to Caesar: Non est
haec tua vita dicenda, Orati. per M. Marc.
quae corpore and spiritu continetur: illa, inquam, illa, est vita tua Caesar,
quae vigebit memoria saeculornm omnium. etc. This is not to be called thy life,
which does consist of body and soul: that, I say that, O Caesar is thy life,
which shall endure through out all ages. etc. And well said Africanus to Scipio:
Nou tu is es, In somnio Scipionis.
quem fama ista declarat: sed men's cuiusque is est quisque, non ea figura quae
digito demonstrari potest. Thou art not he, Scipio, whom this form and
proportion of body does show thee to be: and each man's mind is the man, not
that figure and shape of body, which may be demonstrated, and poynted at with
the finger. We then in laboring for this corruptible meat, do neither labor
to maintain our lives, nor yet too sustain our selves. For this is not our
life: and we are not they, whom these shapes and forms of our do show us to
be. Our souls are our selves, and our selves, are our souls: let us then
labor for our selves, that is, for our souls.

As the Lord did carry the Jews, so does he offer too carry us upon Eagles
wings, Exodus 19.
what whereas the dead carcass is, we like young Eagles may resort, but we
will not be carried. As Christ did clock for the Jews, so he does for us to
come under his wings, Mat. 23.
but we will not come. Psalm. 19.
We are like Esops cock, who esteemed more of one barley corn, the^ of all the
precious stones in the world. The heavens do declare the glory of God, the
firmament shows his handy work, the Elements observe their order, the sun
does rejoice to run his course: only the foundations of man's heart, are out
of course, Ios. 10.
only man does disobey gods will. The sun once abode in the mids of heaven for
the space of a whole day, 2. Reg. 20.
but it was at the prayer of Joshua the sun once went back ten degrees,
but it was at the request of Ezechias: but flesh and blood does still stand in
the way of sinners, still walk in the counsel of the ungodly, sit still in the
chair of pestilence, and still go back from the straight way, and straight
path of the Lord. if this food were clean taken from us, and were not to be
found, as it has been, we might then seem to have some reason to labor for
the other meat. For as Hanum king of Ammon, Chro. 19.
took David's servants, shaued their beards half of, and cut of their garments
by the half: so those shauers and shauelinges, those barbours and Barbarians
of Rome, took away half the Lords Supper from the people, they might have no
drink. And took the word of God from them, they had not their meat. But now
as Mary sat in her own house quietly, and heard Jesus preach: as in the
days of Solomon, every man under his fig tree, and under his vine tree,
heard the law peaceably, even from Dan to Beersheba: so now every man in his
own house may read with quietness, and every one under his fig tree and
vine tree with cheerefulnes and ioyfulnes may hear the glorious gospel of
Jesus Christ, even from the mount to Barwicke, from Dover to S. Dauies, the
Lord be thanked for it, the Lord continue it, the Lord grant we be not
unthankful, and that we may labor for this meat which endures unto
everlasting life. But that my speech may more edify, that it may be mighty in
operation, that it may pearce and enter through, even to the dividing asunder of
the souls and spirits, of your joints and marrow: that you may be pricked at
the heart, in hearing this my sermon, Act. 2.
as the Jews were at Peter's sermon, 2. Chron. 34.
when they cried: Alas men and brethren, what shall we do? as Josiah was
hearing the law read by Shaphan, John. 3.
when ye tare his clothes. As the King of Niniuie was, Iud. 3.
when he heard the word by Jonas, and as Eglon king of Moab, when he heard
the word by Ehud: who rose up from their thrones and cast of their Kingly
robes: that my talk may so be powdered with salt, that it may give savor unto
al: to conclude, that my sermon may be like that precious oyntme^t, which was
on Arons head, ran down on his beard, and to the very lower skirts of his
clothing: That it may touch head and foot, king and subject, hie and low,
rich and poor, young and old, bond, and free, man and woman: Let us first see
what this meat is: secondly, why we should not labor for it: thirdly let us
examine our selves, and this our age, whether we labor for this meat or no.

By meat is meant: not only food for the belly, What meat is here meant.
which the earth brings forth, as green herb for the service of men, wine
to make glad the heart of man, oil to make him a cheerful countenance, and
bread to strengthen man's heart: not only cloth for the back, and furniture for
bedding, which by Gods appointment we receive of dumb creatures, as wool of
sheep, lether of oxen, feathers of fowls, silk of worms: but also honor,
promotion, favor, dignity, woorship, countenance, iolity, pride, ambition,
avarice, riches, surfeiting, drunkenness, and whatsoever else is carnal,
whatsoever is fleshly, whatsoever is worldly, whatsoever is temporal,
whatsoever is not eternal, is called meat which perishes. The which Epithetan
is added both as a reason to with draw us from laboring for this meat,
because it does perish, and also to declare a difference between the body
and the soul, and the meats of them both. Lyra makes this difference: Lyra
in Ioh.
Cibus corporalis perit, non spiritualis: Si enim cibus corporalis maneat in
propria forma, non nutrit, sed nocet cerpori: sedsi nutriat, oportet quod a
propria natura pereat, and conuertatur in membra: econuerso cibus spiritualis
manet and Conuertit in seipsum sumentem. That is: the meat of the body does
perish, but not the meat of the soul: for if the meat of the body should
abide in it proper form, it could not nourish, but hurt the body: but if it
nourishes, it must loose it proper nature, and be turned into the parts and
members of him that takes it: whereas contrariwise the meat of the soul
does abide in it own nature, and turns him that takes it into it self
according to that saying of Augustine speaking as it were, August.
in the person of this meat: Non me mutabis in te, sed tu mutaheris in me.
Thou shalt not change me into thee, but thou shalt be changed intoo me,
and another difference the same Lyra makes in this sort: Panis vitae non solum
vitam conseruat, Lira in Johan.
sed etiam dat ipsam de no* uo panis corporalis, vitam corporalem preexistentem
tantummodo conseruat. The bread of life, does not only preserve life, but
gives life anew: but the meat of the body only preserves the life, which
is in the body: and let these serve for two reasons, to prove my second part.
That we ought not to labor for meat which does perish, whereunto, now I
come. In the beginning the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden
of Eden, that he might keep it and dress it: We ought not to labor for this
meat.
whereupon as Peter Lombard notes, that man was made out of Paradise, and
afterward put into it, both to signify that he should not long continue
there, Genesis 2.
and also that Paradise was assigned unto him by grace, and not by nature: so
have we to learn, that God does so detest and abhor idleness, that though
then there was no need of labor, Lib. 2. did. 17.
yet he would have Adam there, not only a keeper, but a dresser of the
garden.

For although at the first God made every plant of the field, Genesis 2.
before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field, it grew: (for the
Lord had not caused it to rain upon the earth, neither was there a man found
to till the ground) yet afterward God would have the man to keep, labor,
dress and trim the garden, not in the sweat of his face, not in pain, not
in sorrow, but in mirth, joy, pleasure, and peace. Where idle livers, loytring
vacabundes, wild rogues, begging Friars, loose libertines, carnal
Anabaptists, snatchers from other men's trenchers, they that live in no
vocation, no art, no trade, no science, cannot make this a shroude for their
sin, or a cloak for their knauerie: saying, we are hear forbidden to
labor: for this sentence of God pronounced against man, Genesis 3.
in the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, was not only a curse,
but a commandment. That every man should labor in some vocation: that, as
Paul says: he that would not work might not eat. 2. Thessa. 3.
For we hear, says he, that there are some which walk among you
inordinately, and work not at all, but are busy bodies: therefore them that
are such, we warn and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with
quietness, and eat their own bread. For this commandment, given to the Jews
from God by Moses: there shall be no beggar among you, was a commandment, not
only to move the^ to pity, to mercy to liberality: but also to take away, and
root out al loyterers, al shifters, al vagabunds, all busy bodies, all that
live in no vocation, from the common wealth of Israel. The slothful will not
plow, Pro. 20.
because of winter, Luke 16.
(says Solomon) therefore shall he beg in summer, but have nothing. But you
will say, I will neither plow nor beg, I will shift with the unjust steward
(whom Christ commended) and say: dig I cannot, Pro. 20*
and to beg I am ashamed: The bread of deceit (says Solomon) is sweet to
a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Wherefore we are not
here simply forbidden to labor, but this is forbidden both to labor too
carefully as the heathen do, or to labor for the meat of the body, and care
not for the meat of the soul as the Athistes do, which say in their
hearts, there is no God. The Lord God knowing the nature of man, above al
other vices, would be prone to gluttony and belly cheer, did first before al
other commandment, consecrate and proclaim an iniunctio^ of te^perancy, and
fasting thou shall not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The
breach of the which commandment did justly and differently not only thrust
Adam and Euah out of Paradise, Genesis 3.
but caused the Cherubins to be heat, and the blade of a sword shaken, Revel. 3.
to keep the way of the tree of life, Revel. 20.
for ever to keep us from it, had not he which has the keys of the botto^les
who opens, and no man shuts, shuts and no man opens: he who divided
the red sea, that we might escape from the Egyptia^s: he who divided the rock
that might have water in the wilderness, he who duided Iorda^, that we might
pas in to the land of promise:: he who divided the earth that we might rise
again, he who divided the clouds and the heavens with his body that we
might might follow after him: he who only gives to eat of the tree of life:
had not he I say, taken away the Cherubins, and removed the blade of a
swoorde, too make us a plain, direct, open, and safe way to enter again into
Paradise, and to taste of the fruit of the tree of life. But what caused Euah
to eat of it? that which does cause us all too labor for that meat which
perishes. Nitimur in vetitum. We must desire that, which we are forbidden to
do: it was a fruit too get knowledge, a proud mind: a fruit pleasant to
look on, a wanton eye: a fruit good for meat, a lickerishe tooth of the
woman. But that we may the better understand, how God is grieved, when men
labor for this belley meat, let us call to remenbrance the times of old, and
think upon the days of late, how the Lord has executed his terrible
judgments and horrible vengeence, how he has abundantly poured out of the
violl of his wrath, when men have bin in the midst of their mirth, of their
feasting and banqueting. The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up
again to play: Exodus 32
let me alone says the Lord to Moses, that my wrath may wax hot against
them, Number. 11.
for I will consume them. And although God heard the prayer of Moses, yet
Moses slew of those belly Gods. 3000. men: again the people lusted for meat,
saying: who shall give us flesh to eat, we remember the fish that we had in
Egypt for naught, the cucumbers, the pepons, the leekes, the onyons and
garlike. But now our soul is dried away, we can see nothing but this Manna:
as now says the Papists where is our plenty of victual? our feasting, our
singing, our ringing, our pyping, our dancing? we see nothing, but the bare
Testament, nothing but this manna said the Jews, nothing but this Gospel
say the Papists, behold while the flesh was between their teeth, before it
was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled, there was an exceeding plague
among them, that the place was called Kibroth Hattanah, the graves of lust.
When fell down the house upon the Lords of the Philistines? at a banquette.
When fell down the house upon Jobs children? at a feast. Yea at the time of
our and banqueting, the devil is more busy with us, and has eftsoon more
power over us: at a diner did the devil move Herod to behed John Baptist* and
at a supper did Satan persuade Judas to betray his master, But what says Paul
to us of these things? 1. Cor. 10.
these things are our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil
things, as they lusted: and al these things came unto the^ for examples, and ar
written to admonish us, upon who^ the ends of the world are fallen. But have we
had no examples of late? who^ did the Lord smite down in that terrible plague
in Oxford, not mockers of Gods servants, as were the Philistines, not
Idolaters, and murmurers, as were the Jews, but the most religious, zealous,
the godliest, the strongest, the best learned, amongst us, judges, sherif,
knight, esquier, justice, ge^tleman, scholar, and for zeal, for godliness and
learning, I may truly say, for the most of them, as David said of Israel, the
Lord smot down the chosen men that were in Oxford. But when was this done? even
when the meat was in our mouths at our act and proceeding a time of mirth, of
feasting and ba^quetting. I mean not that scholars made the feasts but their
friends then assembled, I come a little nearer to your remembrance, was there not
a great feast and a great assembly in this City, not of Herod and his
courtiours, but of many right noble personages, when the Lord of late shook
not London, not England only, but the most part of Europe with a terrible
earthquake? the earth at that time did shake, and we for a time did quake, the
Lord shake the hearts of al englishmen: What shall I say of these: they are
(no doubt) examples for us, that in the midst of our feasting, we set not our
minds on our bellies, but remember our God and think on that meat, which
endures unto everlasting life. If we so do the^ shall we come to the marriage
of the great kings son: the Lord grant we may leave our farms, forsake
our oxen, and not suffer our wives to make us say I can not come. Then shall we
be partakers of that feast with the prodigal son: the Lord turn us home
from feeding of swine and in heart to cry for our sins father I have sinned
against heaven, and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy
son. Then shall we enter with the.5. wise virgins into the bridegromes
chamber, the Lord grant that we have la^ps, that our la^ps may have oil, and
that our oil may burn. Man before his fall, De ieiunio.
might only eat of the fruit of trees, (as Tertullian notes) afterward the
use of corn was lawefull for him, conditionem consciencie, ipso situ corporis
approbante, the body allowing the state and condition of the consience. For
man's concience being right and upright he looked up toward heaven, and pluck
the fruit of trees: but when the conscience of man was by sin cast down,
man turned his eyes toward, the ground and made the grain of corn to be his
meat, and so after the floode, not only fruit, not only corn, but flesh
was also lawful. The Lord did always provide according to the times and
seasons and ages of mankind, sufficient and convenient food, Nay behold the
Lord feeds the young ravens that call on him: the fowls of the heaven sow
not, reap not, nor gather into there barnes, yet they are fed, Psalm. 147.
and by our heavenly father they are fed. Math. 6.
The Lillies of the field labor not, spinne not, yet Solomon in all his
royalty was not clothed like one of them. Thus then will I reason: has God
care for beasts too feed them, and for flowers too cloth them, and will he
not much more feed and cloth us? are they fedd and clothed without sowing,
without reaping, without carrying, without spinning and laboring, and shall not
we be clothed and fed, if we sow, reap, carry, spinne, and labor? Will God
care for my raiment? then much more for my body, will he care for my body?
then much more for my life. For the life is more worth then meat, and the
body more worth then raiment. I will then care neither for cloth, nor food,
nor body, nor life, but I will first seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and then I am fully assured, that all these things
shall be ministered unto me, thou shall not (says the law) mussel the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn. And again: if thou will find a birds nest
and the dam sitting thereon, thou shall not take the dam with the young. Deuteronomy. 22.
Does God take care for oxen? is God so merciful to birds? and will he not
take more care for us? will he not be more merciful unto us. In the Cedars of
Libanus (says the Prophet) the birds make their nestes, and the Fir trees are
a dwelling for the Storcke: the hie hills are a refuge for the wild Goats, 1.
Cor. 10.
and so are the stony rocks for the conies: Psalm. 104.
the Lions roaring after their pray, do seek their meat at God. In the Sea are
things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts, there go the
ships, and there is that Leuiathan, whom thou have made to take his pastime
therein. These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them meat in due
season. Let not us therefore labor for this meat, let us with prayer seek
our meat at God, Psa. 104.
let us wait upon him, and he will give us meat in due season. For our God,
which lays the beams of his chamber in the waters, which makes the clouds
his chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind, is so merciful, that he
suffers his rain to fall upon bad and good, his sun to shine upon just and
unjust. For it is he, that appoynteth the Moon for certain seasons, and by
him the sun knows his going down. He covers the heaven with clouds, he
prepares rain for the earth, he makes the grass to grow upon the mountains,
and green herb for the service of men. He does command the clouds above, and
open the doors of heaven. He does send the first and latter rain, his
clouds drop fatnes, he only makes the valleys so full of corn, that they
laugh and sing. If we ask bread of our earthly father, will he give us a
stone? if we ask fish, will he give us a serpent? if we ask an egg, will he
give us a Scorpion? Luke 11.
Much more will our heavenly father give good things unto us, if we labor for
the meat that endures unto everlasting life. Homil. 42. in Johan.
Chrisostom woondreth, that men will presume so much, to beg corruptible
meat at Gods hands, seeing that among seven petitions in the Lords prayer,
six are for the spirit and soul, and but one (and not that altogether) for
the body. For the first three: hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come, thy
will be done: are for the spirit and soul, the three last, forgive us our
trespasses, lead us not into temptation, deliver us from evil: are also for
the spirit and soul. Only this give us this day our daily bread, is for the
body, and not for food of body only, but for meat of the soul. Ceres the
goddess of corn and bread: is placed in the lowest room of the heathen Gods
and Goddesses, and her daughter Proserpina, was married to Pluto king of hell.
Let Ceres, bread, belly, and belly cheer be last and least accounted of us.
As for her daughters, they are not virgins to be married to the great kings
son, but harlots to be married to Beelzebub king of hell. Tertullian says,
that although God after the flood did permit the use of flesh, yet to his
people he inhibited the use of certain meats: Li. 20. aduersus Marcinne^.
consilium exercendae continentiae, a counsel and practice to exercise their
continency. vii. sons with their mother, were by that horselech and
bludsucker Antiochus most cruelly put to death, 2. Match. 7.
because they would not eat swines flesh against the commandment of the
Lord. Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaos daughter, Heb. 11.
and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the rebuke of Christ, Daniel. 10.
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. Daniel would not defile him self
with the portion of the kings meat, nor with the wine that he drank: he
would have nothing but pulse to eat, and water too drink. O ye adulterers
and adulteresses (says James) know ye not that the friendship of this world
is enmity with God, Iam. 4.
and John says: if any man love this world, 1. John. 2.
the love of the father is not in him. Lay not up your treasures therefore on
earth, where the moth fretteth, the rust kankereth, the thief breaks through
and steal: but lay up your treasures in heaven. where there is no moth to
fret, no rust to kanker, no thief too break through and steal. For is it not
a great folly to lay thy tresure in an Inn doubtfully, when thou may lay it
in thine own house safely? folly to lay it in an house, which together with thy
treasure thou shall leave behind thee certainly, and not in that house whither
thou shall go, find thy treasure assuredly, and abide therein perpetually? the
fashion of this world passes away, the heavens and the earth wax old, as
does a garment: O let us then get that which endures unto everlasting life.
The heavens shall pass away with a noise, 2. Pet. 3.
the elements shall melt with heat, the earth and (...) works therein shall be
burnt up, o let us then labor for that which the fire cannot consume, and
which will save oursoules from everlasting fire, If we would think upon our
name that we are christians, we would, unless we should prove our selves to be
reprobates, not so much labor for this belly meat. First let us remember,
that in our baptism, we forsake the world, the flesh, and the ^iuel, for
baptism signifies not only the death and resurrection of Christ, Romans 6.
b^^ that we must dye to sin, and live in newnes of life. How shall we (says
Paul) that are dead to sin, live yet therein, Knowye not that al we which have
bin baptized into Jesus Christ, have bin baptized into his death? we are buried
then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised from
the dead, to the glory of the father, so we should walk in newnes of life.
Secondly, as thou art a christian, remember the estate of thy lord and master
here on earth. Do thou brag of thy blood, thy progenitors, thy house and
stock? thy master came as of a pure, so of a poor virgin espoused to a poor
carpenter, who for lack of money could have no room in the Inn, who did offer
to the Lord a pair of Pigeons, because he was not able to buy a lamb. Jerome
notes, that only poor and sinful women are named by S. Math. in the
genelogie of Christ, as Ruth a poor Moabitis, Ierom.
and pore Mary the carpenters wife, to signify how Christ did vouchsafe to
come of poor women, and came into the world to redee^e pore sinful persons,
do thou brag of the country Adam was made out of Paradise, and Euah in
Paradise, yet the Devil had more power over her then over him: they had both
one name Adam, Genesis 5.
reed earth: for this name, Adam was not given by God only to the man, but also
to the woman. Thy master was not borne in Jerusalem, whither the wise men
came, but in little Bethlehem, as it was prophesied. Do thou glory in thy
houses, buildings, courts, palaces? Thy master was borne in a manger, the
foxes have holes, and the birds have nestes, but the son of man thy Lord
had no where to rest his head on. Do thou boast of thy bags, thy coffers,
thy wealth? When thy master would have paid tribute, Judas bag was empty,
Peter must run and fetch a piece of money in the mouth of a fish. Do thou
desire to be well spoken of, to have the good will of the world? There were
generally iii. diverse opinions of Christ: one, which flesh and blood could not
reveal that he was Christ the son of God, an other of ignorance, that he was
Elias, Jeremy, John Baptist, or one of the prophets: the third was of malice,
that he was a glutton, a drunkard, a bon companion, a friend to Publicans and
sinners a coniurer, a woorker by Devils. But what says he? Woe be unto you
when all men speak well of you, Luk 6.
Why? For so did their fathers to the false Prophets. But rejoice when they
speak evil of you for so did they to the true Prophets, rejoice, and great
shall be your reward in heaven. Finally, if you be a christian remember the
resurrection of thy master Jesus Christ: Colloss. 3.
and what of that? if you be risen with Christ (says Peter) seek those
things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, I would
to God we were as provident and careful to provide food for our souls, as
brute beasts are vigilant and paynefull, to lay up food for their bodies. The
Emmot does lay up in summer, food for winter. Adelp.
Istuc est sapere (says Syrus in Terence) non quod ante pedes modo est,
videre: sed etiam illa quae futura sunt. This is wisdom, not to see those
things only which lie before our feet, but to fore see things that are to
come. Arist. hist. animal. 40.
But as the fish called Vrlica feeds always on a stone, and being taken
from the stone, dies presently: so we do so cleave unto to stones unto
earthly things that we account life lost, if they be taken from us, or we
from them. Nay I would to GOD we did not think these corruptible things, to
be meet meat, Luke 12.
and sufficient food for our souls: and say with the rich man's soul, thou
have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and
take thy pastime. But hearken, O fool this night perhaps thy soul shall be
taken from thee. O fool, thou heapest up riches, and can not tell who shall be
thine heir. O fool, 2. Chro. 12.
Solomon made shields of gold, but Rehoboam his son, Job. 10.
made the^ of brass O fool, in one day the Arabians took away Jobs oxen and
his Asses, the fire of God burnt up his sheep and his servants: the Caldeans
took away his cammelles and slew his men. O fool it is more easy for a
cammell to go through the eye of a needle, then for one that trusts in his
riches to come to heaven: O fool what shall it profit thee to win the whole
world, and loose thine own soul? O fool what recompense can thou make to
redress thy soul? o fool, thou art not assured whether thou shall live one
hour O fool, where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also. James. 5.
Go to now ye rich men (says S. James) weep and houle for the miseries,
that shall come upon, you, your riches are corrupt, your garments are
motheaten, your gold and silver is cancred, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, you have heaped
up treasures for the last days. Take heed O ye rich and mighty, you see
your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, 1. Cor. 1
not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish of
this world to overthrow the wise, the weak too confound the stronger. Why?
that no flesh should rejoice in his presence. What then? that he that
rejoices, should rejoice in the Lord. Whom did the Lord choose for a captain?
No expert soldier. but Gedeon a thresher: who^ made he ruler over Pharaos
house? none of the nobles, but Joseph a bond servant, who^ made he the first
king of Judah? not any of a great house, but Saul of the little tribe of
Gemini, and of the least family in the tribe. Whom made he to rule his people
after Saul? no Prince, but David a shephearde: whom had he to be his Prophet?
None of their Doctors, but Amos an heardman. Who^ had Christ to his disciples?
No scribes, but simple fishers. Many widows were in Israel in the days of
Elias, to none of them was he sent, but to a poor widow in Sarepta. To whom
was the news of Christ his birth first brought? not to Herod, not to Pilate,
not Annas or Caiphas but to shepheardes, yea, and very poor shepherds, for
they kept their sheep in the field all night. God would not have his Altar
made in a kings court, but in poor Oruan his threshing flower: the Lord
would not have his temple in Euphrata, a plentiful soil but in the wood, a
barren wilderness. This was done that God might have all the glory. Of Sara
being barren came Isaac: of Annah, whose womb was dead, came Samuel: of
Elizabeth, with whom it had ceased to be after the manner of women, came John
Baptist. And this was done, that GOD might have all the glory. The Lord gate
victories for his people, with an Ox goade, with pitchers, with Ra^mes horns,
with a iawe bone of an ass, with one sword, with a stone out of a sling, and
this was done that GOD might have all the glory. Diseases were healed by
spittle, by touching the hemme of a garment, by a napkin, by a shadow, and this
was done that GOD might have all the glory.

For there was no virtue in Shamgars ox goade, nor in Ionathans sword, nor in
Sampsons Iawe bone, nor in David's stone, wherewith they overcame the
Philistines: no virtue in Gedeons pitchers, wherewith he overcame Oreb and Zeb:
no power in the Trumpets of Rams horns, wherewith the walls of Jericho fell
down: there was no virtue either in the hem of Christ's garment, or in his
spittle or in Paul's napkin, or in Peter's shadow, wherewith diseases were
cured: no virtue in Aarons rod, wherewith the dust of Egypt was turned into
lice: no power in Moses hand, wherewith the red sea was divided: no virtue in
the Priests feet or Elias his mantle, wherewith Iordane was divided: yet all
these things were done by such bare, base, weak, and simple means, that no
man should trust in the arm of flesh, that no man should seek for any meat,
that perishes, and that God in all things might only have the glory. Let us
now call to mind those excellent names and titles, wherewith the holy Ghost in
the holy bible does name us: the remembrance and consideration whereof will
somewhat withdraw us from laboring for that meat, which perishes. We are
called Angels and Saints, Priests, and a kingely priesthood. Kings, and a
royal nation: servants of GOD, friends of God, sons of God, heirs of
GOD, and fellow heirs with Jesus Christ: are we Angels and Saints? let us
then seek the things that are above. Are we Priests, and a kingly
Priesthood? let us then offer up our bodies, a lively sacrifice, and not
labor for the meat thereof. Are we kings, and a royal nation? let us then
lift up our eyes to heaven, and not cast our faces down to the earth: like
abiectes and bondeslaues. Are we servants of God? we cannot serve God and
riches. Are we friends of God? the friendship of this world, is enmity
with God. Are we sons of God, heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Jesus
Christ? let us then with our brother the prodigal son come home from feeding of
swine, that we may have the best robe on our back, a ring on our finger, shoes
on our feet, the fat calfe killed for us, to eat and drink, to singe,
dance, and be merye with our elder brother Jesus Christ, who sits in that
house, which has many mansions, preparing room for us. We were chaf, but now
we are wheat: we were dross, but now we are gold: we were ravens, but now we
are doves: we were goats, but now we are sheep: we were thorns, now we are
grapes: we were thistels, now we are lillies: we were strangers, now are we
citizens: we were harlots, now are we virgins? hell was our inheritance, now
heaven is our possession: we were the children of wrath, we are the sons of
mercy: Finally we were bondslaues to Satan, but now we are heirs of God, and
coheires with Jesus Christ.

We were once fet home, from going astray, let us not again return to the
wilderness: the candel was once lighted for us, let us not again fall into
dark holes: wine and oil were once powered into our wounds, let us not by
wandering, fall again into hands of thieves. We were once found: let us not
again loose our selves. We were once made alive, let us not again kill our
selves. Christ was once crucified for us, Heb. 13.
that we should only rejoice in the cross of Jesus Christ, whereby the world
is crucified to us, and we to the world, let us not crucify to our selves
again the son of God, and make a mock of him. The bodies of those beasts,
whose blood was brought into the holy place by the hie priest for sin, were
burnt without the camp: therefore even Jesus, that he might sa^ctifie the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. What is this to us? let
us therefore (says the Apostle) go forth to him out of the camp, for here
have we no continuyng city, but we look for one to come. Will thou (O man) go
forth out of the camp? Labor not so much to provide meat for the camp. The
works of the flesh are manifest: Gal. 5.
as gluttony, drunkenness, etc. They that do such things, shall never
inherit the kingdom of God. The fruit of the spirit is temperancie, and such
like, against such there is no law: For they that are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh, with the affections, and the lusts: if we live in the spirit,
let us also walk in the spirit. Woe be to you, (says Esaias) that rise, to
follow after drunkenness, and are strong to drink wine. Esai. 5.
Will thou resist the devil? be sober, 1 Pet. 5.
and watch, says Peter: beware, take heed (says our Savior) least your
hearts be ouerloaden with surfaiting and droukennesse, and that aid come on you
unawares. Let us then remember the time that we are in, and the consideration
hereof shall call us from laboring for this meat. 1. These. 5.
We are not children of the night, nor of the darkness, that that day should
come on us, as a thief: we are children of the day, and of the light:
therefore let us not sleep, as other do: but let us watch, and be sober. For
they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be dronken, are dronken
in the night: but let us, which are of the day be sober, considering the
season, it is now time that we should arise from sleep: for now is our
salvation nearer, the^ when we believed it: the night is past, and the day is
come, Romans 13.
let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and put on us the armor of
light: so that we walk honestly, as in the day, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and enuiing, but
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it. Consider the time, for the devil knows his time to be
short, the years of his lease are now almost expired, therefore now he will
make havoc. Consider the time: for the day of the Lord is at hand, let us
wait for his coming. Consider the time, we have had the Gospel these xxii.
full years: by reason now we should be able to be taken for tutors, to teach and
govern our selves. The sun stood still in the midst of heaven for a whole
day, in the days of Joshua: never such a day of light, as was in the days of
Joshua. The son of God has holden his sunn over this Realm a long time, never
such a time of light, as has been in the days of Elizabeth. Many have
desired to see that we see, and could not see them: and to hear those things
that we hear, but could not hear them. But yet behold, the Ninevites, shall
rise, and shall be able to condemn us: for they repented at three days
preaching. If such preaching had been in Tyrus and Sydon, in Sodoma, and
Gomorrha, in the new found lands, as has been in England, they would have
brought forth more fruit of repentance, then we have done. Let us therefore
(for it is time) with weeping and fasting turn to the Lord our God. The Jews
in token of contrition and true repentance, did sometimes were sackloth,
sometime tumbled in ashes, so^time did lie on the ground, rent their cloths,
shaued their heds, and powered out water before the Lord, signifying that they
were like unto water, which being powered out, is trodden under foot, runs
away, and is dried up.

Let us rent our hearts, 1. Sam. 7.
and not our garments, put on sobriety, and not sackloth, tumble in heaviness,
and not in ashes, lie in mourning, and not on the ground: cut of the foreskin
of our hearts, and not shave the hair of our heads: power tears out of our
eyes, and not water out of buckets: let us weep, as Ezechias wept, who turned
his face to the wall, and wept heavily: as Mary, who fell down behind Jesus,
and wept pitifully: as Peter, who remembering the words of Christ, went out and
wept bitterly. We are not commanded to fast, either forty days, as Moses
before the law, as Elyas under the law, as Christ after the law, or
superstitiously, or hipocritically, as the Papists do: but that every man may
truly say with Paul: 1. Cor. 9
I chastise my body, and bring it under subjection least when I have preached
to others, I my self become a castaway. The Lord will provide for them that
seek him. Marc. 8.
The multitud was with Christ three days, and had nothing to eat, yet they
were not hungry: be strong then, O Sampson, a dry iaw bone shall give thee
water, before thou perish: Faint not O Israel, the Lord shall turn the hard
rock into a standing water, and the flinte into a springing well, before thou
perish: despair not, Elyas, the Angels of heaven, the Ravens of the air
shall feed thee, before thou perish. Die not, O Daniel, if none in Babylon will
pity thee. Abacucke shall be brought out of Iewrie to bring thee meat, before
thou perish: You cannot add one cubit to your stature, after this meat the
Gentles labor* a sparrowe does not fall down to the ground, without Gods
providence, all the hayres of your head are numbered. I have been young, and
now I am old, (says David) yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his
seed to beg their bread. O care not then for to morrow, the morrow shall
care for it self: (...) The day has enough with his own grief Let us now
examine our selves, Whether we labor for this meat, or not.
whether we labor for this meat, or not. And so I come to my third part.

If we consider the great and gracious benefits, wherewith God has blessed
England: as peace, wealth, health, liberty, plenty, victory, the Gospel,
Preachers, Governors, so noble and wise counsaylours, so godly and so zealous
a Princes: England has received much: therefore of England much shall be
required. England is not able to render (I appeal to every man's conscience)
one for a thousand, therefore is England very much indebtted. O London, daughter
of England, thy silver is become dross, thy wheat, chafe, thy gold, iron,
thy wine water, thy grapes, thorns, thy figs, thistels: yet thou art taught the
will of thy father more then other thy sisters of England: therefore, O London,
with many stripes (unless the Lord turn to thee, and thou to him) and that
shortly, thou must needs be punished. For we al do so draw iniquity, with
cords of vanity, and sin, as with cart ropes, we so stain our selves with
our own works and go a whoring with our own inventions: as Job in body, so we
in soul are so sick from the soul of the foot, to the crown of the head,
that (had not the Lord reserved a remnant amongst us, had not oftentimes Aaron
and Moses, Phinehes and Hester stood in the gap) England should have been,
not like a cottage in a vinyard, not like a lodge in a garden of coucumbers,
but should have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrha. The Lord may now
justly say to England, as he sometimes spoke unto Babylon. Isay. 47.
Come down, and sit in the dust, O daughter England, thou shall no more be
called tender, and delicate, take the milstones, and grind meal, loose thy
locks, make bare thy feet, uncover thy legs and thighs, pass through the
floodes, thy filthiness shall be discovered, thy shame shall be seen, I will take
vengeance, and will not meet thee as a man: for God has not dealt so with
any nation, neither has Asia, Africa, America, and the most part of Europa
such knowledge and preaching of his laws. England has not drunken at the hand
of the Lord, the cup of his wrath, the dregs of trembling, as France, Flanders,
and other her sisters have done: Yet behold Engelande does still heap up
vengeance against the day of vengeance* and does not consider, that the long
suffering of the Lord does lead hereunto repentance. If England would repent,
the Lord would continue to bless her, to give her victories over her enemies,
that neither open enemies abroad, nor privy co^spirators at ho^e, shall be able
to do her violence. Sisera by Deborah, a woman, shall have a nail knocked into
his skull. Holofernes by Judith, a woman, shall have his head cut off. Abimelech
by a woman, shall have a piece of a millstone break his brainepan. By
Elizabeth, a woman, the Goats of Italy. The wolves of Spain, the cormorantes
of Rome. The Irish coltes, and the Foxes of England, that are now in Ireland,
and all other her enemies shall so be brought to shame, that as Abimilech
cried: O kill me my page, that it be not said, Judge. 9.
a woman has slain Abimelech: so shall they cry, O kill us, earth devour us,
hills cover us, Sea swallowe us up, that it be not said, a woman has thus
triumphed over us. Let praise and giuinges thanks, as a sweet odorifferous
savor assend into the nostrelles of the Lord of hosts, for the victory that
lately he has given to us in Ireland. Go tell them, (if they have any
friend here) that those Goats, Wolves, cormorantes, Coltes, Foxes, shall be so
hunted and bayted by an English Gray, that not one of them shall be left to
piss against a wall. And we say, that Christ spoke of Herod, go tell that
Fox, that lies hidden, we preach to day, yesterday, to morrow, and will
preach, until the house of the Lord be made perfect. God grant we may so
do. This is our hope, that though the Kings of the earth stand up together
against the Lord, and his anointed servant Elizabeth, though they rore like
Lions, and stamp like fat bulls of Bashan: yet the Lord shall bruise them
with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces, like a potters vessel. They
shall be like water that runs a pace, like a snaile, like the untimely
fruit of a woman, like a tottering wall, like a broken hedge: the lord shall
awake out of sleep, as a giant refreshed with wine, and shall put them to a
perpetual shame. Ieroboa^ shall not be able to pull in his hand: Iezabel shall be
hurled out at a window: Ahab shall be a portion for dogs: The Lord shall so fight
for England, (if we repent) that his sword shall surfeite with flesh, and his
arrows shall be drunken with blood. Wherefore (O England) I would to God all
England heard my voice (and I would my voice might sink into your hearts, as
it does found in your ears) It is time to leave of laboring for worldly
pelf, and to take the bread and water of affliction with Michaiah: 2. Reg. 22.
to mingle thy bread with ashes, and thy drink with weeping, with David: and
to eat the bread of Barley and beans with Ezechiel. Ezech. 4.
As our Savior spoke to the Jews of the Scribes and Pharisees, so say I to
you of the Papists. Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, I mean Papists and Romanistes. You shall never
enter into the kingdom of GOD. But alas for pity, alas for shame, are not
many that bear the name of Protestants, and Gospellers, inferior too them?
We use our liberty as a cloak of looseness, we turn the grace of God into
wantonness, and the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ into lewdness. Are not
we come from the excess, to the defect? from blind zeal, to wilful
ungodliness? from ignorance in darkness, to wickedness in knoweledge? from
many Gods, to noe God? from papisme, to Athisme? from superstition, to
irreligion? they did fast often, we seldom: they came to the Church in the
night, we scarce in the day: they gave alms, we live to our selves. I condemn
not al, I speak of many. Did the Papstes these things for merit, for desert,
for satisfaction, and should not we do them of duty, of pity, of piety and
charity? They did bona, but not been: good things, but to an ill end. We now
know what is been, let us do bona. Did they these things in darkness? should
not we do them in light? they in the night, and not we in the day? they in
blindness, not we in knoweledge? they in superstition, and not we in religion?
they to an ill end, and not we to a good end? they at the commandment of man,
of the Pope: not we at the commandment of God, of Christ? Nay, this is the
saying of the world: Does he frequent the Church? he is an hypocrite: does
he fast? he will be saved by his works. Does he give alms? he is a Papist. O
miserable world, wherein prayer is counted hypocrisy: zeal is counted folly:
fasting and alms deeds are counted popery. But what is the cause of this?
because we all labor for that meat which perishes. Do not the Papists call
us loose libertines, carnal Gospellers, wanton Epicures? do not they in their
motions make this an argument, to prove that they have the true Church? because
they fast, pray, give alms more then we: because by Papists, colleges have
been founded, churches erected, schools builded, and alms houses set up, and
maintained: O happy were we (for great should our reward be in heaven) if for
the name of Christ only we were evil spoken of: but if we contemn prayer,
despise fasting, abhor alms deeds, pull from churches, defraud the
ministers, throw down alms houses, gape after college lands, pluck at their
forms (as it is too true in many Englismen at this day) then I must say, O
miserable wretches. Propter nos male audit nomen Dei inter Gentes, inter
Papistas. By reason of us the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles,
among the Papists. Let our Savior Jesus counsel us: make you bags, which
wax not old, a treasure that can never fail in heaven: let Paul give you
reasons. First, godlynes is great gain, if a man be content with that he
has. Secondly, we brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry
any thing out. Luke 12
Thirdly, they that will be rich, fall into temptation, 1. Tim. 6.
and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in
perdition and destruction. 4. the desire of money is the root of al evil, which
while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
thorough with many sorrows. But I hear you say, we labor for the meat of the
soul: we hear the word, we love the Gospel, we embrace the preachers thereof,
we have forsaken the Popes yoke, and cast of the whores mark. I would to God
many did not so: even for the meat that perishes, to keep their lands,
houses, livings, liberty, countenance? the Gospel has peace, quietness,
fruition of goods* and lands, I will therefore be a Gospeller. Satan was
deceived in Job. I fear, that if I should say, as he said, I should not
altogether err, I would, I might* lord, does this people fear thee for naught?
have not thou made an hedge about them, made their house, made their substance
to increase in the land? but stretch forth thine hand and trouble that they
have, and they will curse thee to thy face. A man, and so God may have many
friends in time of peace and prosperity: but in time of adversity and
persecution, the^ is a friend tried. Wheat and chaff will go together, until
they come to the flayle: gold and dross will go together, until they come
to the fire: rust and iron will go together, until they come to the scourer:
but then farewell wheat, and farewell chafe: farewell gold, and farewell dross:
farewell rust, and farewell iron. Acts. 19.
Are not now many zealous for the Gospel, as Demetrius the silver smith was
hot in mainteining Diana? was he so zealous, because he loved Diana, or her
religion? No, no: but because (as he confessed) he had his living by making of
shrines for the goddess. The young man will follow Christ, until he come to
this, fell thy goods: then farewell Christ: take up your crosses (says
Christ) lay down your purses, and follow me. Why were the Priests of Babylon
(mark whether this be not true in the priests of Rome) so furious against
Daniell, speaking against Bell? was it for love and zeal they bare to Bell?
no, no: there was spent upon Bell every night 108. gallons of fine flower, 40.
sheep, and 60. gallons of wine. The Priests should have lost this, if Bell
had gone down. This was the cause of their fury zeal. They served God Bell in
the day, but God belly in the night: we serve God belly day and night: they
said: great art thou, O Bell, and with thee there is no deceit: We cry, great
art thou O belly, and with thee there is no deceit, thou eatest up all.
Philopenus is now every where, who desired he might have a neck as long as a
Cranes neck. But where is Peter, Andrew, James, John, Matthew, who forsook
all, and followed Christ? Yea, but Zacheus gave but half his goods to the
poor: De Zacheo.
why did he not give al? Because (as Chrysostom notes) the other half he
reserved, to render four fold, if he had defrauded any man, as he himself
promised. Nay Christ shall be welcome among the Gergesens, Math. 8.
but if they loose an hog, I pray you sir depart, your room is better than
your company. Great was the love and zeal of Ornam, who gave bullockes to
David, and made fire with his threshing instruments. ^. Chro. 21.
Great was the love and zeal of Elizeus, who, when Elias called him, ^. Reg.
19.
slew oxen, and did sees them, with the instruments of the oxen. But we must
do more then this, if our right hand, or eye offend us, we must cut them off,
and pull them out.

What shall I say? the end of the world must needs be at hand, because that men
do so love themselves. To hear of wars (says our Savior) to have
pestilence, Math. 24.
famine, earthquakes, these are but the beginnings of sorrow, but when besides
these, iniquity shall have the upper hand, and the love of men shall fail,
then behold he is at the doors. In that the preachers of gods word are so
neglected, and so little provided for, 2. Reg. 18.
does prove that the Lord is at hand, and will shortly take vengeance. I would
all Magistrates, and Patrones of benefices would follow the example of good king
Ezechias, who in the first yeeare, yea, the first month of his reign, did
command the people to give a part to the Priests and Levites, that they might
be encouraged in the law of the Lord. Liuinges are not given, they are sold
as common as oysters at Byllingesgate. This is the cause that Ministers are
not, nor cannot be so liberal, as their predecessors have been: yea, this is
the cause why doltes, ignorant Asses, idle, and idol Shepheardes have the
liuinges. I call the^ Idols: I will prove it. They have eyes and see not, ears
and hear not, hands and minister not, tongues and speak not: I was about to
say, they have mouths and eat not, but then I should have slaundered them:
In this I confess they are not Idols. A good scholar, and an honest godly
minister, will rather beg, then buy your liuinges, O ye rob Churches, whose
portion shall be fire and brimstone too drink: for you are the causes, why many
thousands of souls have perished: of you, O the benefice mongers, shall be
required, not hand, for hand, or eye for eye: but blood for blood, life for
life, and soul for soul. You make the ministers your serving men, you make
them journey men, they have the name, you have the profit, they the straw, but
you have the corn, nay you have some straw also. I could somewhat bear this,
if here by, they for whom Christ died, were not famished: therefore in
bitterness of spirit, in grief of heart, in vexation of conscience, and in
torment of my soul, I speak it: that even now I do see as it were, Pharaoh
king of Egypt rising up to condemn you. Who when he sold all the land of
Egypt, gave straight commandment, that no one foot of the Priests lands
should be sold. Genesis 47.
Read the history. Hadd he such care for Idolatrous Priests, and have you
no more care for the Ministers of Jesus Christ? Are you Protestants, you
Gospellers, you Christians? You are Athistes, Epicures, that say in your hearts
there is no God. But perhaps few are here of whom I speak: let me utter a
few words to you merchant men, whom I see present, and so I will end. Although
Mercury, (who was supposed to be the God of merchants,) had wings on his
feet, and had always a cock by his side, to signify that merchantes should
be swift in their business, should be vigilant as the cock, or rise at the
cock crowing: yet labor not to greedily, to carefully for this meat for as
the good has in one hand a scepter to give kingdo^s, wealth, and riches: so he
is pictured to have in his other hand a rod wrapped in snaks, to give poison,
ruin and death: beware, least while you gape for the scepter, you receive
snakes. And although your GOD is said to have killed Argos, who had a hundred
eyes: least Argos should perceive the unjust dealying of the Merchauntes, yet
the Lord your GOD lives, who searches the corners, sees the bottom,
hears the motions, and understands the thoughts of your hearts. But what
says the Prophet? All men should praise the Lord, but above all other,
merchantes are bound to perform the same. For (says he) they that go down
to the Sea in ships, Psalm. 107.
and occupy their business in great waters, these men see the works of the
Lord, and his woonders in the deep. And when there he has fully described
the woonders and works of the Lord that they see, he thus concludes with a
vehement exhortation: O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare the woonders that he has done for the sons of men.
Two things are required of you (O ye Merchauntes) to praise the Lord, and
too declare his woonders, that you have seen. unto others. Forsake not the
Lord by going too your ships: Remember the ship that Jonas was in. Beware
how you have fellowship with heathen men, with Infidels, Athistes, and
Papists: because Iehosophat king of Judah, 2. Chro. 20.
joined with Ahaziah king of Israel, to send ships too Tarshish for gold, he
was reprehended by Eliezer, and his ships were broken. Take Christ into your
ships: when Christ was not in the ship with his Disciples, the ship was
almost drowned. If Christ be in your ship, let him not sleep there: when he
slept, the shipp had almost perished. Keep him waking with prayer: singing
with melody in your hearts too the Lord. To conclude, labor not for the
meat which perishes: for then you shall perish, but labor for that meat
which does endure unto everlasting life: for then the son of man shall give
you everlasting life: for he is a Lamb, and he is a Lion: he is a friend,
and he is a foe: he is a Jesus, he is a judge, he is a Redeemer, he is a
confounder: he will not bruise a broken reed he will bruise with a rod of
iron: he has water, he has fire: he has heaven, he has hell: he has
Angels, he has devils: he has a scepter, he has a sword: he has Vae woe:
he has Euge, go too: he has Benedicti, Blessed, he has Maledicti, Cursed:
he has Venite, come, he has ite, go: he has a right hand, he has a left
hand: he has joy, he has sorrow: he has mercy, he has vengeance: he does
give everlasting death, and everlasting life, to him therefore with the Father
and the holy Ghost be given all honor glory, etc. Amen.

An end of the first Sermon.
The ii. Sermon.
Labor not for the meat that perishes. etc.
Forasmuch as I have showed you the braod way, where you should not walk, and
the wide gate, where you should not enter: it is reason that I declare the
narrow way, where you should tread, and the straight gate, where we all
desire to pass through. Behold I have opened unto you the works of darkness,
which you must ca^^ of, now I will give you the armor of light, which you
must put on. I have dehorted you, and I hope thoroughly dissuaded you from
laboring for the meat that perishes: Now in the tender mercy of God, in
the bowels, blood and wounds of Jesus Christ, I exhort you, and I trust, I shall
thoroughly persuade you too labor for that meat which endures unto everlasting
life. Wherefore as our Savior reprehended Martha, Luke. 10.
being careful about many things, in preparing the dinner, not simply
reprehending either her labor, as her hospitality, but reprehended her
because she did not consider the time, where in Christ taught Mary, and offered
too teach her, and because she preferred the dressing of the dinner, to the
hearing of Gods word, and afterward exhorted her too follow the example of
her sister Mary, who had chosen the better part, which never should be taken
from her. So after that I have proved that we should not labor for the meat
which perishes, and that we all are too careful for many things, not
considering the t^me, wherein our Savior does so mercifully offer to teach us:
I must exhort you to choose the better part, which never shall be taken from
you, that is, to labor for that meat which endures unto everlasting life. For
although the Lord did rain flesh as thick as dust, Exodus 16.
feathered fowls as the sand of the sea, and Manna as the hoare frost: yet he
would have every man to labor, and gather it, one house might not gather it
for an other, one man might not sell it, or give it to another: even so every
man must labor for this meat, gather it for himself be it never so plenty,
being far better then Manna: for Manna melted when the sun did shine, but
this Manna, though heaven and earth should be on fire, and burn to ashes,
continues ever, endures unto everlasting life. 2. Sam. 6.
Although we need not go seek the ark of GOD, 2. Reg. 22.
as David did, nor the book of the law, as Josias did: nor go up to Jerusalem
to worship, as the Jews did, nor desire that one might come from the dead, and
teach us, as the glutton did: we cannot say the law is in the mount with Moses,
who shall go up, and fet it? we cannot say (as in the days of Queen Mary
we might) it is beyond the seas, who shall go over and bring it unto us? yet
we must not be idle, negligent and careless, we must labor for it, although
the word be very near unto us, even in our mouths and our hearts for to do
it, Deuteronomy. 30.
as Moses spak to the Jews: though the Lord has put his laws in our minds,
and in our hearts has written them, he our God, and we his people: every man
does not (or should not need) teach his neighbor, nor every man his brother,
saying: know the Lord: but all know him, from the least to the greatest, as
Jeremy prophesied: Iere. 31.
yet must we labor for this meat. Though Elyas cannot now say, I am left
alone, 1. Reg. 19.
Achab cannot say, there is but one Michiah besides my 400. Prophets: 1* Reg.
22*
though Elyas have not only Elizeus for his scholar: nor Elizeus only Esaias:
nor Esaias only Jeremy: nor Jeremy only Daniell: nor Daniell only Aggeus, and
Zacharias, nor the Lord only xii. Prophets that have written, nor Christ
only eleven good Disciples, but the Lord has given the word, and great is
the company of the preachers: yet we must labor for this meat. Although the
Ministers are not scattered abroad, as John in Asia, Peter in Samaria, Phillip
in Alexandria, Thomas in Aethiopia, Bartholomewe in India, Andrew in Scythia,
Simon in Persia, Judas in Mesopotamia, Marcus in Colonia, Nathanaell in
France, 1. Theodoret.
Joseph of Aramithia in Scotland, and Paul in England: but the universities,
and other places are full of them: yet must we labor for this meat. Exo. 2.
Although the Midwiues need not fear the king of Egypt to hide Moses three
months, Josh. 2.
and afterward to cast him out. Rahab need not to fear the king of Ierico, to
hyde the spies under stalks of flax, and let them down at her window. 1.
Sam. 19.
Michael need not fear her father Saul, to let her husband David down at a
window, and to lay an Image in his bead. 1. Reg. 18*
Obadiah need not fear Queen Iezabell, to hide a hundred Prophets in a cave.
Act. 9.
The Disciples need not fear the hye Priests to let down Paul through the
wall, by a rope, in a basket. Moses need not fear Pharao, Exodus, 4*
and say, I have a stutting tongue: Iere. 1.
Jeremy need not fear the Jews, and say, I am a child. Io. 1.
Jonas need not fear the King of Niniuie, and so for to run away both from
him, and from the Lord: but all the Ministers of the Lord are maintained, and
preserved: may utter the message of their master, boldly with out fear, and
freely without danger: yet we must labor for this meat, although the Lord
has broken the bow, and knapped the spear in sunder, broken our swords into
mattocks, and our spears into sithes: blessed us with the crown of peace, and
crowned us with mercy and loving kindness: yet must we labor for this meat,
Gene. 42.
if it were a time of derth, of scarcity, of penury, the^ we might have some
pretense to labor for belly meat, as Jacob did send into Egypt for corn: 1.
Sam. 25.
as David did send to Naball for victual: then we might seem to have some
color of cause to doubt. and to be over careful, Number. 11.
as Moses was, when he said: shall the sheep and thebeeues be slain for
them, or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered for them, and suffice them?
as King Iehorams servant, who mocked the Prophet, prophesying the plenty of
corn to be the next day? and said, though the Lord would make windows in
the heaven, 2. Reg. 7.
could this come to pass? As Saint Andrew, who said, there is a little boy
here, which has five barley loaves, and two fishes, but what are they amongst
so many? Io. 6.
If I say, we were brought into such extremity, as they were, flesh and blood
would be ready to doubt. But seeing God has blessed the fruit of our
cattle, the increase of our kine, the flocks of our sheep, our basket, our
dough, seeing al his blessings are come upon us, and overtaken us, Deuteronomy. 28.
as he promised to them that fear him: why should we labor to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, and take no care to provide victual for our souls? I
pray God those things be not the fall of England, which were the utter ruin of
Sodom. They were iiii. sins: Ezech. 16.
pride, pride abounds in England: fullness of bread, gluttony triumphs in
England: idleness: idleness is succored in England: contempt of the poor,
and behold this sin, has, as a Queen gotten the upper hand in England. Above
all other vices. The way to heaven is a narrow way, the gate is a straight
gate: then we must strive and labor to enter in. The kingdom of heaven is a
treasure hid in the ground, it is a pearl of great price in a far country:
then must we take our spade and dig: then must we enter into ship, and pass
over the seas. We are in the Lords Vinyarde, not they that sleep and are idle
shall have their penny at night: but they that work and labor. Thou art
promised to have, but thou must ask, and have: thou shall find, but thou must
seek and find: it shall be opened unto thee, but thou must first knock, and
then it shall be opened. Knock like the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15*
who continued knocking, although she was three times repelled, and the gate
of mercy was shut against her, not that she should not enter in: but that with
more earnestnes, desire, and vehemency she might knock, and even prye
through the chinkes of the gate: so must we labor by prayer for our meat,
and though we have not our petitions at the first, second, and third knocking,
yet we must knock: Act. 12.
as Peter continued knocking at the door, before he could come in. Labor to
see Christ, Luke 19.
as Zacheus, who, being a man of worship, in the mids of a city, did climb
upon a wild Fig tree, like a boy to see Christ, because he was a man of low
statute, and could not see Christ for the prease.

Let us labor by faith, as did the sick of the palsy, to come to Christ, who
seeing he could not go in at the door, for the multitude, was let down through
the roof of the house, which they uncovered. Mar. 2.
Let us labor by faith to touch the very hem of Christ's garment, as did the
woman, who had an issue of blood twelve years, and had spente all her money on
Physicians. Mat. 9.
If we thus labor, salvation will come into Zacheus house, the dropsy shall
be cured, the issue of blood shall be stopped. Remember what a iorny the queen
of Saba took to come to hear the wisdom of Solomon: 1. Reg. 10.
Remember the travel of the Eunuche of Ethiopia, Candaces the Queen of the
Ethiopians chief governor, who had the rule of al her treasure, and came to
Jerusalem to worship: Act. 8.
Remember the long journey of the wiseme^ who came from the farthest part of
the East to see Christ. The Jews went up every year to Jerusalem, Mat. 2.
the Papists travail far and wide on Pilgrimage, to see relics, dead men's
bones, monuments, images, monasteries, and such like trumperie, and they think
their labor well bestowed.

All these shall rise when the trumpet shall sound, and shall be able to condemn
us, if we will take no pains, suffer no labor, move scarce a foot, to hear
the word of God, to receive the everlasting Nectar, and the heavenly Ambrosia,
to refresh, to nourish, to cherish, yea to preserve our souls unto everlasting
life. But what is meat in this place? whatsoever pertains to the renewing and
amendment of this life, or to The chiefest part whereof, is that, which is hid
from the wise and mighty of the world, that which is received of the poor
and simple, that which is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ: and because meat does not
nourish a dead carcass, we must labor for faith, the life of the soul: and
because this meat cannot be digested in our souls, without the effectual
operation of Gods spirit, we must thirdly labor for the holy Ghost: who is
promised to be given to all them that in a right and true prayer shall ask for
him of the Father in the name of the son, although he descend not like a
dove, Mat. 3.
as upon our Savior, nor in the form of cloven and fiery tongues, Act. 2.
as upon the Apostles. He is now to be sent not to be seen of our bodily eyes:
but into our hearts, where he cries, Abba, Father, as the Apostle says:
because we are sons, Gala. 4.
God has sent forth the spirit of his son, into our hearts, which cries,
Abba, father. It is a true saying, Bona magis carendo, Cicero.
quam fruendo sentimus. We better perceive and feel the commodity of a thing,
when we lack it, then when we have it. For who does better consider the
benefit of the warm fire, then he that is frosen with cold? who does better
think on the commodity of liberty, then the prisoner? who does better
remember the use of apparel, then he which is naked? who does more esteem of
meat, then he that is almost famished? for after a long cold winter, a
little sun shining is fair weather: after great sorrow, one days pleasure is
a paradise: after a long bloody war, a little peace is a merye world: and
after long hunger, brown bread is good cheer.

Now if we could either think on their extreme misery, who like the woman
of Canaan, like hungry dogs would gladly pick up the crummes, that fall from
our table, and can have no more of them, then the prodigal son had of the
swines husks: or at least would call to mind our own miserable famine, when
like poor Lazarus, we lay begging at the rich man's gate, dogs having more
mercy then men, and we no more satisfied then Tantalus with his apples. We
would no doubt labor to obtain by Christ, Mat. 8.
not houses, or livings as that Scribe: Mat. 20.
not to be Lords and Dukes, as James and John: not to have belly cheer, as
in this place the Jews did: but for the meat of the soul, which endures
unto everlasting life. But what was our famine, how were we used, or rather
abused? Sower leaven was put to our sweet bread: Coloquintida was cast into
our potage: chaf thrown among our wheat: sand mingled with our dough: amongst
our gold there was dross: we had water for wine: brass for silver: the cup
of the whore, for the cup of the Lord: wormewoode, for honey: gall for Manna:
the legende, for the Gospel: wolves, for shepherds: the inventions of man,
for the commandments of God: man for God: Antichrist, for Christ: the son of
perdition, for the son of GOD.

Again, the word was delivered unto us in a strange tongue: that neither we
could tell how to dance, when they blewe the pipe, nor how to behave our selves
in battle, when they did sound the trumpet: 1. Cor. 14.
neither the understanding was bettered, nor the congregation edified, nor the
unlearned, at the giving of thanks, could say Amen: but they were Barbarians
to us, and we Barbarians to them.

Furthermore, the common people might not read the word, they might not once
taste of that heavenly food, unless the Priests had first chewed it in their
own mouths: whose mouths were full of bitterness, whose throats were open
sepulchers, whose teeth were venomous, whose tongues were full of deceit, under
whose lips was the poison of aspes: who did eat up the Lords people as
bread, whose feet were swift to shed the blood of Saints, but right dear in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

But why might not the people read the word, taste this meat? they (forsooth)
gathered damnable errors, and sucked out thence deadly poison. Because our
Savior said: Mat. 13.
it is given to you to know the secreetes of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given. Mat. 7.
Because he said again: give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye
your pearls before swine.

First, 1. Chron. 13.
I answer, that Vzza for putting forth his hand to hold the arc, when the
oxen did shake it, 2. Chron. 26.
died before the Lord: that Vzziah burned incense, and was therefore stricken
with a leprosy, because they usurped the offices of the Priests and Levites,
contrary to the express commandment of God. But if this was spoken to all,
Io. 5.
and be the duty of all Christians, search the scriptures. I do not only say
woe unto the^, because they shut up the kingdom of heaven before men, they
themselves will not go in, nor suffer them to go, that would enter: but I
exhort them to remember the blind zeal of Christ's Disciples, in forbiddinge
children to come unto him, rebuked: suffer little children to come to me, and
forbid them not: Mat. 19.
the blind zeal of Joshua requesting Moses to forbid Elead and Medad to
prophecy, Mat. 19.
reprehended: Number. 11.
I would to God that all the Lords people were Prophets.

The blind zeal of John, willing Christ to forbid one to cast out devils in
his name, Luke. 9
misliked, suffer him, he that is not against me, is with me. The blind zeal
of Nadab and Abihu, because they offered strange fire, condemned: who because
they offered not that fire, which came from heaven, but strange fire, were
devoured of fire. An everlasting fire is reserved for those, Leuit. 10.
which have troaden under foot the doctrine that came from heaven, and have
brought in straung doctrine, which never was in heaven. As that fire, so this
meat came from heaven: in this they differ, that fire endured only to the
captivity of Babylon: but this meat endures unto everlasting life. Wherefore,
though Peter, or Paul: though Gabriel, Gala. 10.
or Michael, Cherubim, or Seraphim, teach any other thing, the^ that we have
received of the Lord, who came down from heaven, and brought this meat from
heaven, let him be accursed: as I said before, so I say again: if any of these
bring any thing besides that, which we have received of the Lord, let them, and
every one of them, be accursed. Secondly, I answer, that though the spider do
gather poison, where the Be does suck honey, yet there is no poison in the
sweet flower, but the corrupt humor that is in the spyder, does turn the
sweet juice into poison: so there are no errors, nor heresies in the word of
god, but the corrupt and venomous nature of man, does turn the comfortable sap
of Gods word into deadly poison. Now, if the spyder gather poison, let not
therefore the Be be driven from the flowers: though the sons of Satan, do
gather errors, and suck that which unto them is poison: yet let not therefore
the children of GOD, be forbidden to suck milk, which shall save their
souls. Christ is put both for the fall, and also for the rising, again of
many in Israel: Luke. 2.
he is a rock to build on, 2. Cor. 4.
and he is a stone that will grind to powder: Mat. 21.
if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, it is unto some the
savor of death, Romans 9.
unto death, to other some the savor of life unto life. It is not given to
them to know the mysteries: Mat. 13.
who are they, to whom it is not given? it follows, that people, whose heart
is waxed fat, whose ears are dull of hearing, who wink with their eyes, least
with their eyes they should see, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and should return, that I might heal them. The Gospel
(says Paul) is the mystery hid since the world began, and from all ages,
but now is made manifest to the Saints of God, to whom GOD would make known
what is the riches of his glorious mystery among the gentiles. Dogs must not
have that which is holy. There is a dog, which turns about, and teareth
them that do offer holy things. Let not this dog receive that holy thing.
There is a dog, that cries with the woeman of Canaan, truth Lord, I
confess, that I am a dog, yet the whelps may gather up the crumbs that fall from
the childre^s table: Christ will have that holy thing to be given to this dog.
Cast not pearls before swin. Truth, if they be foul, and tread them under
their feet, or if they be washed, and return back too their wallowing in the
mire. But if we which were swine, are by the blood of Christ washed, and by
the water of regeneration sanctified, and of swine are made lambs, let us have
that pearl, we will not tread it under our feet. One Gospel, yet diversely it
works in diverse men's hearts. Water will harden iron, and soften the earth.
The Sun dries clay, and melts wax: the seed in good ground, brings
forth increase: but sowed among stones or thorns, it brings forth no fruit.
The fault is not in the seed, but in the soil: the Sun to us that have
clear sight is comfortable: to the man that is poreblinde, it is hurtful.
Blame not the Sun but the fool that will turn his eyes toward the Sun.
Sugar to us that be in health is sweet: to the sick of an Ague it is bitter:
the Sugar is not bitter, his taste is naught. Dainty meats to some stomachs
are wholesome, to others they are fulsome, the fault is not in the meat, but
in the stomach. Even so Christ crucified, is to the Jew a stumbling block,
1. Cor. 1.
to the Grecian folishnesse: but to them that are called, he is the power of
God, and the wisdom of God: be they Jew or Grecian, bond or free, male or
female. Wherefore, thirdly I answer: though drunkardes and toss pottes abuse
wine, yet wine is profitable: though usurers and covetous men abuse money, yet
money is necessary: though cutters and swinge-bucklers abuse weapons, yet
weapons are needful. Right so, though the word of God by Heretics, and
Athistes be abused, yet it is not to be forbidden. Because it gives wisdom
even unto the simple: Psalm. 119.
because it has milk for babes, and strong meat for men: because it is a
lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths: because it does lighte^ us
that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death and does guide our feet into
the way of peace. Otho Cardinalis.
Let them with Otho reason thus absurdly: the title set over Christ's head by
pilat was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: therefore the word must be
read in one of these tongues, we thus affirm: Genesis 19.
that God, who did confound the tongues of all men at the building of Babell,
they before having all one language: that God I say at the beginning of the
building of his church did give to his Apostles and servants, not only the
knowledge of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, but of all languages in the world:
that all tongues under heaven, all nations under the Sun might, read, hear,
and pray, in their own language, in their own mother tongue. Cyprian.
We therefore say with Cyprian Non videndum est, quid aliqui ante nos
fecerunt, sed quid ille, qui ante omnes est, faciendum mandarit. We must not
care, what they have done which were before us: but what he does command to
be done, which was before all. Let us then remember our miserable estate, how
we sat down and wept, to remember Syon: how we sought the word in strange
Countries, how the Gospel was mingled with vanities: how it was in a strange
language how it was hid from the common people. O let us now then be
thankful unto the Lord, and that the world may know that we are
thankful, let us labor for that meat which indureth unto everlasting life.
Iud. 16.
As the Philistines could not prevail against Sampson, although his heyfer
had betrayed him, and his hair cut of, until they had plucked out his eyes: so
the Papists could by no means so sone get the upper hand, as by pulling out
the eyes of the people, by taking from them their light, sight, knowledge, and
understanding, making them blind, Mark. 8.
not as whelps, which see after ix. days, not as the blind man, who saw
men as trees: not as Paul whose eyes were open, yet saw nothing by reason of
his scales: but as blind as Moles, Genesis 19.
as blind as beetles, as blind as the men of Sodom, who could not find
Lots door: as blind as the king of Arams servants, 2. Reg. 6.
who came to bring Elizeus to their master, but were by him, not seeing
whither they went, brought into Samaria. But as the Lord opened the eyes of
Hagar, that she saw the well of water: as he opened the eyes of Elizeus his
man, that he saw the mountains full of Chariots and horses of fire: as he
opened the eyes of Paul, that the scales fell from his eyes: so has he now
opened our eyes, that we see the wondrous things of his law, the light of
his truth, the brightness of his word, the shining beams of his glorious
Gospel. Noah rejoiced when he saw the Dove come in with a leaf in her
mouth, whereby he knew the waters were abated: Joshua rejoiced when he saw the
Sun stand still for a whole day, whereby he knew his enemies should be
discomfited: Israel rejoiced, when he saw the cloud, or the pillar of fire
whereby he knew that by the Lord he was guided. Elias rejoiced when he saw
the cloud no bigger then an hand, whereby he knew the earth should be
watered: Ezechias rejoiced when he saw the shadow go back x. degrees,
whereby he knew his days were prolonged: the wise men rejoiced when they
saw the star, whereby they knew that to Jesus they should be conducted. The
wise men rejoiced when they saw Christ in the manger: the shepheardes when
they hard the news. Simeon, when he embraced him in his swaddling clowtes:
Thomas, when he felt his wounds: Steven, when he saw the heavens open. Even
so just cause have we to lift up our hearts and rejoice. For many kings,
wise men, prophets, fathers, have desired to hear those things which we
hear, and could not hear them, and to see those days which we see, but
could not see them. The Lord grant, that as we have eyes and see, taste and
feel this meat. So we may have minds to desire it, and wills to labor for
it. Again, remember, 1. Sam. 13.
as the Philistines left never a whetstone, no spear, only two swords, no
smith in all the land of Israel, least said they, the Hebrwes make them
swords and spears, and so prevail against us: so the uncircumcised Romans,
the Popish shauelings, the superstitious, Egyptians, Chirstians without, and
none within, Jews in the flesh, and not in the heart, Israelites in the
letter, and not in the spirit, who sought praise of men, but none of God, left
very few whetstones, few swords, that is, very few Testamentes and Bibles,
left few Smithes, that is few builders in Gods Church among us, least the
Protestants, said they, make them swords and spears, and so prevail against
us. O let us rejoice and be thankful. For as Jonathan with one swoorde overcame
the Philistines: so Gods ministers by one swoorde, the sword of spirit, the
word of GOD, have pulled down the power and kingdom of Antichrist. God
grant he never rise again in England. As wax melts at the Sun, as the fat
of lambs consumes before the fire: as the heat dries up the clouds: as the
Lion goes into his den, when man goes forth to his work, as the Owl
flies to his hole, when the day star appears: as Dagon fell down before
the ark of the Lord: as Bell and the Dragon were destroyed before the face of
Daniell, so the mists of Egypt vanished, the Lions of Babylon were vanquished,
the owls of Rome departed, the fat gre^e of Antichriste melted, the Gods of
that Sun of perdition were with us in England all destroyed, they al come to
nothing, when it pleased the Lord too send his fire, his heat, his son, his
day star, his ark and his Daniell, that is, his word and ministers amongst
us. Let us then remember how cruelly we were handeled, and rejoice in the
Lord that we are so mercifully delivered: but I would to God that many were
not sorry for the departure of this whore out of England: look you to your
selves, chiefly O ye merchants. For you may seem to have most cause to lament
for the fall of that great strumpet, For thus says the Angel: Apoca. 18.
The kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her, which have
committed fornication with her: they shall cry, Alas, alas, the great city
Babylon, that mighty city: but why shall they so lament? because, says he,
they lived in pleasure with her: yea chiefly the merchantes of the earth (says
the Angel) shall weep and wail over her: yea, every ship master, and all the
people that occupy ships, and shipmen, and whosoever traffic on the Sea,
shall stand a far of and cry: Alas, alas, that great city. But why shall
merchants and all shipmen cry so? Because no man buyeth their ware any more:
and by that whore (says he) were made rich all that had ships on the Sea, by
her costlinesse. Be not sorry for her: mark what the Angel says in that
place: O heaven, rejoice of her, and the holy Apostles and Prophets, and pray
unto the Lord that she never return hither again. 1. Sam. 5.
When Dagon fell down before the ark of the Lord: the first time, he was not
broken: he was set up the second time, but then the head of Dagon and his
hands were broken of. That whore of Babylon fell down once in the days of
king Edward, and was set up again in the days of Queen Mary. But now in the
glorious reign of our Sovereign Elizabeth, she is fallen down the second
time, not only her head, and her hands are broken of, but we hope that all
her body is ground to powder: a curse come to him that shall go about to set
her up again. Cursed be that man (says Joshua) before the Lord, that
ryseth up and builds this City Ierico: Josh. 6.
yet Hiell did build Ierico, 1. Reg. 16.
but a curse came to his whole stock and house for it. So cursed be that man
before the Lord, that shall begin to build that tower of Babell, that seat
of Antichriste in England again. But as the Lord commanded Jerusalem to be
distroied, and all the Jews, though Julian the Emperor did with all his power
aid them, were not able to build it: so the Lord has thrown down this
whore: and we trust that all the kings of the earth all Popes, all Priests,
all Monks, all Friars, all Nuns shall not be able to lift her up again.
She was in England a glorious whore, and a gorgeous whore, therefore her
desolation is more shameful: she was in England an high whore, and an heavy
whore. Therefore her fall is the greater, 3. Reg. 9.
as Iezabell was hurld out at a window, eaten up of dogs, only her skull,
the palms of her hands, and her feet remaining, the which the servants of
Iehu buried: so we thank our God, who has thrown down this great Iezabell,
and we pray that if any thing of her be left, it shall be buried. O let us then
love and embrace the Gospel: follow and obey the Gospel, and continue in our
profession to our lives end. I say, 1. Cor. 16.
continue, abide, endure, stand fast, be strong, quiet your selves like men.
You have put your hands to the plough look not back, least you be judged unfit
for the kingdom of God. For not every one that runs, but he that runs to
the goal, has the garland: not every one that enters into a ship, but he
that goes over the Seas, brings home treasures: not every one that works
in the vineyarde, but he that continues working unto night has the penny: not
every one that fights, but he that ouercometh shall have the crown: To
conclude, not every one that begins well, but that endures unto the end,
shall be saved. Now you follow the Gospel: but I fear many are like the
snaile, who pulls in her horns, if any man go against her: Now you
labor for the meat of the soul: but you are in your houses, like the
snaile, rather the^ you will loose your houses, I fear many will fall from
their standing: I love the Gospel says the worldly man, but as long as I am
in my house, that is, as long as I have peace, and quietness: but if
persecution come, as lice forsake the head when the man is dying: as rattes
forsake a house that is ruinous, or has no victual, so will I leave the
Gospel, if it bring a swoorde, or war, or take away my goods. Mark. 14.
All the Apostles forsook Christ in time of danger, 2. Tim. 4.
and Demas did forsake Paul, and embraced this present world. But remember
this O man, He that loves lands, livings, or life, more then the Gospel,
(it is as true as the Gospel, for it is in the Gospel) he shall never come
to heaven, Mark. 8.
bring he never so many keys from Rome in his hand: Matthew. 19.
but he that shall loose life, or living for the Gospel (it is as true as the
Gospel, for it is in the Gospel) shall have for his living a kingdom, for
his life, a blessed, immortal, everlasting life in heaven. Satan goes about
to winowe you as wheat: stand fast in the faith, a law in your members,
rebelleth against the law of your minds, stand fast in the faith: the flesh
fights against the spirit, stand fast in the faith: the world plucketh you
by the sleeue to look back, stand fast in the faith. Athistes and Papists,
and other heretics are tripping at your heels, stand fast in the faith, it
is worth the noting: that our Savior in the second and third of the
Revelation, Reave. 2. and. 3.
does seven times at the least utter these words, he that overcomes etc.
There is life, and all blessings promised only unto him that overcomes.

Now the heavenly Manna is plentiful in England, let us provide for war
though it be a time of peace, let us take our cloak though the sun does
shine: let us provide for a dear year, though the victual be plenty: I say
stand fast, and labor for this meat, it brings therewith well fed thereby,
fat and in good liking, you may stand fast in the evil day. Amos. 8.
For we have deserved that plague, whereof the Prophet speaks. I will turn
your feasts into mourning, and your songs into lamentations, I will bring
sackcloth on your loins, and baldnes on your heads, I will bring a famine in
to your land, not a famine of bread, or thirste for water, but a famine of the
word of God. Act, 13.
For if Paul and Barnabas were here, they might have just cause to speak
against us as they spoke against the Jews: seeing, you put the word of GOD
from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life Lo, we turn to
the Gentiles. Christ may truly denounce these words against us (if he should
deal according to our deserts) the kingdom of God shall be taken from you
and shall be given to a nation, Matthew. 21.
which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Matthew. 21.
Let us amend, least Christ curse us as he cursed the figtree, when he came
unto it, being hungry, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, he does
hunger and thirst after our good works, but behold how we deceive him, Luke.
13.
for fruit we offer him leaves, a man came to the dresser of his vineyarde,
and bid him cut down his fig tree, because he had come three years and
found no fruits thereon: cut it down (says he) why keeps it also the
ground barren? The dresser answered: let it a lone this year also, till I
dig round about it, and doung it. The Lord has come to his fig tree of
England: not three, but almost xxiii. years, and behold, yet he finds little
fruit: and he would no doubt cut it down, had not the dresser of this fig
tree, Jesus Christ entreated him to let it alone, that he by his word and
his laborers, might dig round about it and doung it. Behold that has been
done, and yet this fig tree brings forth small fruit, we are like trees
that have their heads in the ground, and suck all their juice from the
earth: we are like brute beasts, who turn their faces to the ground: we
are not like men, who should turn our countenances toward heaven, thence to
fet our meat, and all good things, which by promise we may have for the
asking. We are like the corn growing on the house top, which withers before
it be plucked up, whereof the mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds
up the sheues, his bosom. Our Savior Jesus, if he were here, should be
moved to weep over England, as he wept over Jerusalem, and say, O England,
Luke. 19.
England, if thou had even known at the least in this thy day those things
which belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes. I speak of
many, I mean not all. O England thou say, the natural branches are broken
of, that I might be graft in through unbelief they were broken of, Romans 11.
and thou stand by faith: be not high minded, but fear. For if God did not
spare the natural branches, take heed least he will not spare thee. O remember
thou man, thou do not bear the root, but the root does bare thee By Satan
thou did fall, and by Christ thou art raised up, and ingraffed into the right
Oliuetree. Lombar. li. 2
Qui incitatorem habuit ad malum, Distinct. 21.
reparatorem habuit ad bonum, sicut hominis peccatum, per alium habuit
inuitium, ita per alium habuit remedium. He that had a tempter unto evil, had
a restorer unto good: as the sin of man had a beginning by an other, so it
had also a remedy by an other. Ambrose in Romans 11.
For very well (says Ambrose) Non sunt Iudei reprobati a Deo, vt gentes
entrarent, sed seipsos reprobos fecerunt, sperne^tes donum dei: vnde occasionem
dederunt gentibus ad salutem: quam extollentiam reperiri vult, vt magis saluti
congaudeatur, non aegretudini insultetur. The Jews were not rejected of GOD,
that the Gentiles might come in, but they made themselves reprobates,
contemning the gift of God: whereby they gave occasion to the Gentiles to
salvation: the which hautines, the apostle will have to be beaten down, that
they mighe the more rejoice at their own salvation, and not insulte over the
Jews destruction. Take heed, why were they cast off: spernentes donum Dei:
because they despised the gift to God. For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward, Heb. 2.
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Propterea tantam
adiecit, Theophil in 2. hab.
quod and mortis destruction, and demonu^ interitus, and caeloru^ imperium,
cuncta haec exprolatis a deo sermonibus nobis sunt parta. Therefore (says
Theophilact, did the Apostle add so great salvation, because the destruction
of death, the death of deuilles, the kingdom of heaven, all these things are
gotten for us, by the word, which came from GOD Brag not, boast not therefore.
Pride made Herod to have a fall from his pulpet, and to be eaten of worms.
Nay, behold a greater fall: pride made Nabuchadnezzar to be a beast: nay yet
a greater fall: pride did thrust Adam and Eve out of paradise. And yet behold,
I will show one greater fall, pride did throw Lucifer, and many Angels more
out of heaven.

What shall I say then? If GOD did not spare his own people the Jews, if he
did not spare Adam and Eve in paradise: if he did not spare his bright Angels
in heaven, will he spare us? if judgment begin at the house of GOD, 1. Pet.
4*
what shall the end of them be, that obey not the Gospel? If the righteous
scarcse be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? did the natural
branches wither, and were cast into fire, what shall be done to the
unnatural? Did the green tree suffer, what shall be done of the dry? Lo, I
begin to plague the City (says the Lord) where my name is called upon,
Ierom. 25.
and should you escape? let us then be humble, and fear. Let us not despise
this great gift of GOD. That fire only was to be used in sacrifice, which came
from heaven: Moses must make all things according to the pattern he saw in
the mount: Exodus 25.
GOD write the laws with his own finger, that we should make nothing of our
selves, our own brains, our own heads, our own pollycies, our own
inventions. Let us then receive this meat, which came from heaven: and put
nothing into it, least while we with the young Prophets, think to gather good
herbs: we gather, and cast Coloquintida into the pot. No water ever so good,
as that which came out of the rock: 2. Reg. 4.
no meat so delicate, as Manna, which came from heaven: no wine so wholesome,
as that which Christ made of water: no oil so precious, as that which the
Samaritan had: no robe so coastly, as that which the father gave to the
prodigal son: no bread, no food, no meat, so profitable, as this meat of
the soul, which does endure, and bring us unto everlasting life. O contemn
not this meat he that despises Moses law, dies without mercy, Heb. 10.
under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall
he be worthy, which treads under foot the son of God, counts the blood
of the new testament an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified? and does
despite the spirit of grace, These men crucify to themselves again the son
of GOD, and make a mock of him.

This meat is water to refreshe us, and wine to cheer us: it is bread to
strengthen us, and Manna to nourish us: it is a treasure to enrich us, and a
pearl to adorn us, it is a leaven to heat us, and salt to powder us it is a
sword to defend us, and fire to purge us: it is a salve to heal us, and a
lantorne to guide us: it is a trumpet to call us, and wisdom to enstruct us: a
way to direct us, and life to revive us. If we have this meat, this leven,
this bread, this Manna, we shall have no need of Elizeus to increase our
oil, to augment our loaves, we shall have no need of his meal, to sweeten
our pottage: we need not to wait at the gluttons gate, or send to churlish
Nabal for food. If we have this treasure, we need not rob the Egyptians: if
we have this pearl, we shall not need the gold of Ophir: if we have this
water, we need not to draw water at Jacobs well. Naaman need not wash
himself seven times in Jorden: the sick need not to go to the poole Bethsida
for help: we need not Elizeus salt, or Moses tree to heal the venomous
water: if we have this sword, Peter may put up his sword into his sheth: if we
have this fire, we need not the fire of purgatory: if we have this lantern, we
need not the Lanterns of Gedeon, to overcome the Midianites: to conclude, if
we have this trumpet, we shall have no need of the Priests trumpets made of
Rams horns, to pull down the walls of Ierico. 2. Reg. 5.
For by this meat we shall do all things, for it does endure, and will bring
us unto everlasting life. O then labor for this meat, and I speak unto you,
as sometime Naamans servant spoke unto him, when he refused to wash himself
seven times in Jorden, as Elizeus willed him. Naaman thus said: are not
Abanah, and Pharapar ryuers of Damascus better then all the waters of Israel?
May not I wash me in them, and be healed? but this man said: if the Prophet
had commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? how much
rather then, when he says to thee, wash and be clean? you are bidden to come
for the water of life, for the bread of heaven. Do not many say, there are
other meats at Rome, other waters at Rome, better then all the meat and
water, that is now in England? O but I say unto you: if the Lord should
command you to do a great thing, ought ye not to do it? How much more then,
when he says, labor for the meat, which endures unto everlasting life,
which I the son of man will give unto you? this is but ask, and have: seek
and find: knock, and it shall be opened. Let us ask, let us seek, let us
knock, let us labor for this meat. Labor for this meat, O you people, and
pray unto the Lord, that his Ministers put their candell on a candelsticke with
cherefulnes, and not under a bushel: labor for this money, and pray unto the
Lord, that his merchantes may occupy with advantage with faythfulnesse, and
not to hyde it in the ground: labor for this seed, and pray unto the Lord,
that his husbandmen may sow it with painfulnesse, and not hoard it in their
barnes: Labor for this meat, and pray unto the Lord, that his Stewards may
distribute it with bountifulnes, and not keep it in their closets. Labor for
this, that is, Mat. 3.
be earnest, hot, zealous, fiery. God the Father did appear in fire, Act. 2.
God the Son does baptize with fire, God the holy Ghost came down in form
of cloven and fiery tongues: Iere. 44.
but alas, are not yet the people as they were in the time of Jeremy? they
said to him, the word thou have spoken to us, in the name of the Lord, we will
not hear it of thee: but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our mouth,
as to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to purge out drink offerings
unto her, as we have don, both we, and our fathers, our kings and our princes,
for then had we plenty of victual, and were well, and felt no evil. Are not
these the sayings of the romanists, and Papists? first to grant, that we have
the word of GOD: secondly, to say, we will not so much as hear it: thirdly, to
follow their own inventions. Again, are not these their arguments? first of
custom we have done so, and our fathers: secondly of a generality: not we
only, but our fathers, our Princes, and al have done so? thirdly of their
belly, then we had plenty of victual, and felt no evil? and to whom would
they offer their sacrifice? not to God, but as the Papists do, to the Queen
of heaven. Ask the Papists, how they prove their religion to be the truth,
and they will draw their arguments from antiquity, from custom, from
universality, and from the belly, as did the Jews in the days of Jeremy.
Nay, has not the devil raised up Iehoiakim from the dead, to burn the
words, that Baruch had out of the mouth of Jeremy, Iere. 36.
and Antiochus, to burn the books of the law, 1. Match. 1.
and delectation, to know the books of the Prophets and Apostles. Eusebius. li.
8. c. ^
But behold, I show you a better way, and whom you should follow. When Moses
made the arc, every man was commanded to bring something, the people brought
to much, and were bidden to bring no more. And that no man should think, he
were exempted from Gods work, Exodus 3^.
he that has no gold to bring, might bring Goats hair, or badgers skins:
if a woman were not able to buy a Lamb, it was accepted of the Lord, if she
brought a pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons. Every man cannot be a
head in this mystical body of Christ, to be a King. Every man cannot be an
eye, to be a bishop, every man cannot be a leg, to be a pillar in gods church:
yet every one may be a hand to give so^what to the building thereof, every one
may be an ear to hear the word, a tongue to praise the Lord, and a mouth to
receive this meat which endures unto everlasting life. when the people came
home from Babila, they builded the temple of the Lord, before they builded
either their own houses, 1. Esdr. 3.
or the walls of the city, they builded with one hand, having weapons in the
other. All the people followed David, to seek the Ark of God, and all went
with Solomon to build a temple unto the Lord. How did the Jews desire and
love this meat, 2. Esdr. 8.
when they heard Esdras read the law from morning to noone, and wept bitterly.
How did the people of Antioch labor, when the rulers of the sinagogue (an
example for officers to follow) came to Paul, Act. 13.
and his companions, and said: Men and brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation to the people, say on? When they besought Paul to preach the same
sermon the next sabbath day: the next sabbath day, the whole city came
together to hear the word of God.

How did Cornelius labor? when he waited for Peter's coming, he called his
friends and kindred into his house to hear him? Act. 12.
for we have not done our duty if we our selves only eat of this meat,
unless we cause them also to eat that belong unto us: as Cornelius brought his
friends to hear Peter preach: Io. 1.
as Andrew brought his brother Simon: as Philip brought Nathanael, as John
Baptist brought his Disciples to christ: I was glad, says David, when they
said to me, we will go into the house of the lord. If we thus labor, the lord
God will raise up cunning workmen for his temple, painful laborers in his
vineyard, faithful pastors of his flock, and good teachers of his people, as
when Moses made the Arc, Exodus 31.
he called Bezaleel by name: and when Soloman built the temple, he raised up
Hyram of Tyrus, whom he filled with his spirit, to work in timber, silver,
brass and gold. But it is not unknown to us, how the Popes shauelings, and
that fat Priest of Rome himself, Nehem. 4.
do mock us while we are building, as Sauballat mocked the Jews, saying: what
do these weak Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will
they finish it in a day? will they make the stones whole again out of the heaps
of dust, seeing they are burnt? so^e deride us, as Tobiah the Ammonite, did mock
the^ saying: although they build, yet if a fox go up, he will break down the
stony wall. Some come to us, as the men of Samaria came to Zerubbabel: Ezra. 4.
we will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God, as you do. But he
answered, and so do we, it is not for you, it is for us to build the house
unto our God. Ye hypocrites, you speak good words to the people, but as
Absolon, to steal away the hearts of the people from David his father: you
will proclaim a fast: but, as Iezabell, to kill Nabot: you will worship
Christ, but as Herod to murder him: you will kiss Christ, but like Judas, you
will kill Christ. You are known to the world, O ye Gibeanits, Josh. 9.
which fain your selves Ambassadors to Joshua: bringing old sacks upon your
Asses, old bottelles for wine, old shoes and clouted on your feet, old
raiment, dried and mouled bread. 1. Reg. 14*
Do you not know, that for all their old stuf they were known at three days
end. Ieroboams wife disguised her self, and went to Ahiiah for her son, she
carried ten loaves, and cracknels, and a bottell of honey: though Ahiiah were
blind, yet he said, come in thou wife of Jeroboam. So you disguise your
selves: you bring honey in your mouths, there is none so blind, but he can say,
come in, or rather, come out thou son of Antichrist. Genesis 26.
You used us (and so you hope to do again) as the Philistines used Isaac, when
they stopped, and filled up with earth all the wells, which Abraham his
Fathers servants had dug for him. The water for a time with earth may be
stopped: fire for a time with ashes may be covered: the son for a time with
clouds may be shadowed: but now (the Lord be thanked) the earth is removed, and
the water does run: the ashes are consumed, and the fire does burn: the
clouds are dispersed, and the sun does shine. Now that we may long enjoy these
benefits, the Lord continue, and increase the zeal of our soureigne, that she
never set her mind on that meat, which perishes, not on any erthly thing, as
did good king David, when he numbered the people, as did good king Ezechias,
when he bragged of his treasure to the Ambassadors of the king of Babell: 2.
Sam. 24.
but to continue in maintaining the Lords cause, 2. Reg. 22.
not like Ioash, who did well all the days of Iehoida the Priest, 2. Chron. 23.
and afterward fell from the Lord: 2. Chron. 26.
nor like Vzziah, who sought God as long as Zachariah the Prophet lived, and
afterward forsook God: but that as her days may be as the days of heaven, so
to her lives end, she may labor for to keep among us this meat of our
souls, for this meat has no end, but endures unto everlasting life. That she
may still have before her eyes the example of David, who before all things did
seek the Ark of the Lord, and would have builte an house for his God, and
though he were forbidden, because he was a man of blood, yet he provided
timber and stone, and commanded Solomon his son to build it. That Solomon
may be in her remembrance, who builte the house of God, before he built his
own court. 1. Reg. 6
The house of God was 7. years in buylding, but his own was thirteen years:
not that he bestowed more charges on his own house, 2. Reg. 18.
but with more have and speed he did build a temple unto the Lord. That she
never cease to follow Ezechias, who first of all brake the Images, cut down
the groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent, that Moses had set up: that
she think always on Josiah, who being a child, began to seek after the
God of David his father, 2. Chron. 34.
and did purge Jerusalem and Judah: that she may always think on the
commandment of the Lord: when the king shall sit in the throne of his
kingdom, Deuteronomy. 17.
then he shall write him this law in a book repeated by the priests: it
shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord, his god, and keep all the words of this law, and
these ordinances for to do them. Now, for as much as meat does not nourish,
unless it be received, and by faith we receive it: Faith.
it cannot cherish us, unless it be digested, and by the heat of faith it is
concocted: it cannot profit us, unless it be kept in our hearts, and by faith
we retain it: it does no good, unless we have life, and the just shall live
by faith. It is very necessary, that we labor for faith, whereby we may
perfectly be nourished, and well fed with this meat: there is nothing that
the devil desires more, then to have faith out of our hearts: therefore he
planted unbelief in the hearts of Adam and Eve: for unbelief they were
thruste out of paradise: unbelief in the hearts of Moses and Aaron, for
unbelief they never came into the land of promise: unbelief in the heart of
Zachary, for unbelief he was dumb, until the thing came to pass whereof
he doubted. Faith is the evidence of things, Heb. 11.
which are not seen: unto faith did Christ call Mary: when he said to her,
touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father, Barnard sup.
Cum iam ascenderit (says Barnard) tum tangi ab ea velit, Cant. ser. 28.
aut possit? and vtique poterit, sed affectu, non manu: voto, non ocu lo: fide,
non sensibus: would he, or could he be touched of her, when he was ascended?
truly he could: but with the heart, not with the hand: with prayer, not
with the eye: with faith, and not with se^ses. By faith we see him as the wise
men: Ephe. 6.
we embrace him as Simeon: we hear him as Mary, we touch him as Thomas. Faith
is the shield whereby we quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: John. 15.
by faith our hearts are purified: 1. Peter. 5.
by faith we resist the devil: Romans 9.
by faith we are the children of Abraham: Io. 5.
by faith we shall not come to condemnation, but shall pass from death to life.
no virtue by Christ so much commended as faith: be it unto thee according to
thy faith: thy faith has made thee whole, I have not found so great faith, no
not in Israel: O woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee eue^ as thou will:
to faith nothing is impossible. Whatsoever is without faith is sin, and
without faith it is impossible to please GOD, on the contrary part, nothing
does more grieve the Majesty of Almighty Iehoua) then incredulity and
unbelief, all the day long I have stretched out my hand, Esaias. 65.
to an unbelieving people: Mat. 14.
O thou of little faith why do thou doubt: Luke 24.
to them that went to Emaus, Mar. 9.
he said: O fools and slow of heart to believe. Mat. 15.
Again, Heb. 2.
O generation incredulous, how long shall I be with you, how long shall I
suffer you? in his own country, he could not do many miracles for their
unbelief: the Jews entered not into his rest: Why? for unbelief let us
therefore cry with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith: Luke 17.
and as the father of the sick child cried with tears: Mark. 9.
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, Now because faith is not revealed unto us
by flesh and blood, The holy Ghost.
but by the holy ghost: let us labor for him also, that this meat by faith may
work effectually in us: let us utter unto the Lord strong cryings, and deep
sighings for his spirit, that our prayer may be in his sight as the incence,
John. 14.
and the lifting up of our hands, Luke 12.
an evening sacrifice. Ioh. 16.
For he is the spirit of truth: John. 15.
the Master and Teacher of the faithful: 1. Col 17.
the shewer of things to come: Romans 8.
the witness of Christ the distributer of all gifts: the spirit of adoption:
2. Cor. 1.
the pleadge of our inheritance: 1. Cor. 12.
he bears us witness that we are the children of God: he helps our
infirmities, and makes petition for us. No man says, that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the holy Ghost: did not the Diuelles (says Chrysostom) name Christ.
Chrisost. in eodem loco.
Sometime they named Christ, says he, for fear, not for love: and sometime,
that the people might give ear to them, take them for professors of the
gospel, and so they might bring the people through a color of christianity
into manifold heresies, but of sincerity, and hearty good will they never
named him. So then no man can name Christ lovingly, and sincerely, but by the
holy Ghost, we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but
the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry abba, Romans 8.
father. Wherefore, this is the end of my exhortation, that you labor for all
these three, meat, faith, the spirit, by hearty and earnest prayer. I mean
not to cry all day long as Baals Priests did. O Baall hear us: O Baal hear
us. Nor as the Ephesians cried for the space of two hours, great is Diana of
the Ephesians. But in heart fervently and strongly, as Moses, Phinehes,
Manasses, Jonas, our Savior Jesus. Though our prayers be short, as was the
prayer of the poor publicane: God be merciful to me a sinner: of the
prodigal son: father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy son. Of Steeuen, Lord Jesus receive my
soul. Of our Savior Christ, Father, into thy hands, I commit my spirit,
nay though we utter never a word, the Lord will hear us: Moses spoke never a
word, when GOD said unto him, why do thou cry unto me Moses: Anna spoke
never a word when God heard her prayer, she only moved her lips, 1. Sam. 1.
and Ely the Priest said, she was dumb. If we thus labor for the spirit.
we shall obtain him and then our faith shall be fruitful, the^ the meat in
us shall be effectual. The word norisheth, faith reuiueth, the holy ghost
quickens, the word saves, faith justifies, the holy Ghost sanctifies: the
word brings us to heaven, faith opens the door, the holy Ghost places us
among the holy Angels, to have everlasting life, which the son of man shall
give unto us. The reason.
And this is the reason added to the exhortation, being drawn from the person
that gives, and the certainty of the thing given. 1. John. 1.
He which is called the word of God: Col. 10.
the image of God, 1. Cor. 1.
the power and wisdom of God: the Creator of all things: John. 1.
the searcher of the heart: Mat. 9.
the prince of life: the Lord of glory: Act. 3.
the prince of salvation: the prince of faith: 1. Cor. 2.
the brightness of the glory and the ingraued form of gods person: Heb. 2.
the son of God, Heb. 12.
does here call himself the son of man, Heb. 1.
he whom Peter confessed to be the son of God: Mat 3.
he whom the Angel named Jesus: he of whom God the father witnessed: this is
my beloved son, in whom I delight, hear him: he when the very Diuelles could
not choose but confess him to be the son of God: does here call himself
the son of man. He calls John. 1.
Verbum caro factum est. the word was made flesh: here some would prove
that he was not perfect man, because the word was made flesh, that signifies
only the body: but these men know not that flesh in the scripture sometime
signifies the one part of man, as when Christ said: Luke 24.
A spirit has not flesh and bone as you see me have. Sometime carnal lusts
and affections: John. 3.
as whatsoever is borne of flesh, is flesh, sometime it does signify the
whole man body and soul: as all flesh shall see the salvation of GOD, that
is, mankind: and again, Esaias. 40.
I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh, that is, men. And so in this
place, Joel. 2
the word was made flesh, that is, man. Damnable therefore is the heresy of
the Maniches, Manichai.
who held that Christ's body was brought from heaven, and put into the
virgins womb: damnable also is the heresy of the Arrians, Arriani.
who said that his body was made of nothing, and that he had not his flesh of
the virgin: Athanasius wills Epictetus Bishop of Corinth to join these
words of the Angel in Matthewes gospel, Matthew. 1.
that which is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost, Athanasius.
with these words of the Angel in Lukes Gospel, that holy thing that shall be
born of thee, Luke 1.
shall be called the son of God: Christ was conceived in her, therefore his
body came not from heaven: Christ was borne of her, therefore his body was not
made of nothing. Secondly, he does call hungry, he was thirsty: he was werie,
he sorowed, he wept, he did sweat water and

Now if the son of man does give everlasting life, how is it that he made
this answer to James and John, Matthew: 20.
to sit at my right hand, and at my left hand is not mine to give, but it
shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of my father. Again he shall
say, Come ye blessed of my father, Matthew. 25.
enjoy you the kindome of my father, He says not my blessed, nor my kingdom,
but blessed of my father, and the kingdom of my father, and in the fifth of
John, Io. 5.
he said: I can do nothing of my self. Wherefore if he cannot give to sit at
his right, or left hand, if the kingdom be not his, if he can do nothing of
himself, how does he hear promise everlasting life? he says blessed of my
father, the kingdom of my Father, I can do nothing of my self, because he
would, as man give to the father all the glory. My father has appointed these
things to give before the beginning of the world, I am not now to bestow the^,
they shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of my father. Io. 1.
But yet this is true: as many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to
be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. We are sons by
nature, so we are the sons of Adam: we are sons by discipline, so we are
the sons of Christ, we are sons by adoption, and so we are brothers to
Christ, and sons of God. Hear do the Papists gather, that everlasting life
is due unto us by desert, because by laboring or working for the meat of the
soul, we get everlasting life. I purpose not to entreat of the controversy:
Christ does take away all doubt in these words following: when he says,
Ephe. 2.
that he will give this life: for whatsoever we have of gift, that is not of
merit. They are opposite, as Paul says. By grace you are saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: yea, by evil works
we deserve death, and by good works we deserve life: according to the Maxima
of the Logicians. But if I follow Paul, I must deny the argument: for the
wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
but the gift of God is everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Moses
did show unto the Jews the land of promise, but he could not bring them
into it, that was left for Joshua: even so the law is a scholemaister to bring
us to christ, it cannot purchase everlasting life, that is left for Jesus,
whose office it is to give everlasting life: and therefore he was sealed of the
Father: and this is the confirmation, taken from the office and function of
Jesus christ: Confirmation
he says of himself. I came not into the world, to judge the world, but to
save the world. He came not, Io. 12.
as Herod thought, to put him out of his kingdom: not to give Dukedomes and
Lordshippes, as James and John thought, not to restore the earthly kingdom to
Israel, as his Disciples thought: not to be a King, as the Jews would have
made him: not to call the righteous, as the phariseies thought, but sinners to
repentance, as we all believe. For to this purpose has his father given to
him his seal, he has sealed him.

Hereby we are able to answer all objections that the devil and all the
kingdom of hell is able to lay against us: and say, if God be on our side, who
can be against us: it is christ that justifies, who shall condemn us. He
has the broad seal of his father to this purpose, who can disanull it? by
this seal we are sealed also, as the Apostle says: grieve not the holy
spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption, by outward
exercises we may doubt of others: Ephe. 4.
but by this seal, the prynte whereof is in our hearts, we may assure our
selves of everlasting life. Do thou sacrifice, thou do well: so did Abel,
and so did Cain: do thou prophecy? so did Samuel, and so did Saul: art
thou baptized? so was christ: and so was Simon Magus: do thou communicate? so
did Simon, and so did Judas: do thou pray in the temple? so did the Publican,
and so did the Pharisie* therefore the holy Ghost is a seal authentical in our
own hearts, whereby we may examine, try, and prove our selves, whether we be the
sonns of God, or reprobates. Caine had a mark to be known: Esau being rough,
was known from Jacob being smoth: the Lord has a mark for his enemies, and the
Lord knows who are his. The Gileadite by Shibboleth, was known from the
Ephraimite by Shibboleth: the 500. valiant men by lapping water like dogs,
were known from the cowardes, who kneeled and lapped: as Rahab was know by
binding a red cord about her window: as they were saved that had the letter
tau on them, as the Angel passed from them, that had the blood sprinkled on
their posts: Ezech. 9.
as they were not hurt that had the seal of God in their foreheades, Revel. 7.
so we are known, so we are saved* so the Angel does pass from us, so we are
not hurt, which have the seal of the holy Ghost in our hearts, whereby we can
boldly call Christ our brother, and God our Father. The foundation of God
remains sure, and has this seal: the Lord knows who are his, and let
every one that calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.
The Lord seal us unto the day of redemption: the Lord grant we may always
labor for that meat, which endures unto everlasting life: that we may labor
for the word, for faith, and for the holy Ghost, that we may be fully assured
of everlasting life, because the son of man, and the son of God to that
purpose is sealed, appointed, anointed, and consecrated of his father: to whom
with the holy ghost, 3. persons, and one immortal God, be all honor, glory,
praise, power, dominion, authority, worship and Majesty, both now and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

