PALLAS ARMATA. THE GENTLEMAN'S ARMORIE; Wherein the right and genuine use of
the Rapier and of the Sword, as well against the right handed as against the
left handed man is displayed: And now set forth and first published for the
commmon good by the Author.

Hor. Vis consilij expers mole ruit sua. Ea demum tuta est potentia quae
viribus suis modum imponit. Val. Max. Printed at London by I. D. for John
Williams, at the sign of the Crane in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

SENECA. Qui ante nos ista moverunt, non domini nostri sed duces sunt: Patet
omnibus veritas, nondum est occupate, multum ex illa futuris est relictum.
BOETIVS. M^serrimi est ingenij semper uti inventis, and numquam inven^endis.
Generosis Iuvenibus, and ad summa quaeque natis, R GRENVILE IACO* CLAVERING
IOH: WOLSTENHOLME THO: NEWCE GVIL: WATS IO: SIMAND

Verae amicitiae nulla finis,

Amicis ac fautoribus aetatem suspiciendis, colendis, adamandis.
VEstra in me merita, Generosi Iuvenes, suavissimi amici, and quae mihi
vobiscum consuetudo, hoc tandem effecit, virtute plusquam magnetica, ut hunc
vobis libellum, haec mea mitterem interludia; Etenim volventi mihi met mecum,
cui, quibusve hosce meos juveniles lusus inscriptos sacrarem, ad unum vos
infudistis. Quod ut mihi Panico terrore correpto contigit, non dubitavi, quod
occultus mihi Genius insusurrabet, toti mundo expositum detegere.

Tot enim, tantaque amoris erga me vestri extitere indicia, ut, si mihi
sigillatim enarranda forent, aeras and charta prosequendis singulis non
suppeterent, and si, tamen tanta sunt omnia, ut tenuis facundiae encomiis
obfuscata prius jacerent in tenebris, quam illustrata fulgerent, effecistis
denique ut dum vivam, moriar proh dolor ingratus.

Erunt fortean, quorum pectoribus stuporem creabit haud levem, quod tam exiguae
molis opus cumulatorum beneficiorum catervae Cyclopica audacia reponere ausim,
atque sex praeclare de me meritis chartulas hasce obtrusas dicare voluerim,
quarum tanta vix dignitas, si molem inspicias, ut unius subeant aspectum;
verum, quantumvis exile sit, quod offero, and angustum, animus ejus a quo
proficiscitur laxior est and capacior, nec vos candidum amici pectus Schedarum
congerie mensuros confido: nae malui me aliis imperitum vestrisque meritis
imparem ostendere, quam vobis ingratum.

In ingrati culpam profecto incidissem, si in grati animi obsequio declarando,
public illos calamo seiunxissem, quos secreto pectori inclusos conjunctosque
affectu sincero veneror.

Interim vos, quicquid crudi, stoico stomacho, and nobilitate Spartana
concoquite, si quid obscuri and abjecti inest libro, fulgido nominus vestri
spendore circumfusi facite ut corruscet, and qui prodire in lucem immaturum
hunc foetum voluistes, prodeuntis suscipite patrocinium, obstetricum munus
subiistis, nutricum vicem, and Tutorum tandem suscipere ne aversemini. Haec
prece sollicita emulgere conatur vobis

aeternum mancipatus. G. A.
Londini 18. Apr. Anno 1639.
Ad Lecturos Philathletas.
CAndide and ingeniose Lector-Philathleta, non me fallacis gloriae insatiata
cupiditas, non arida sitis famae garrulae, quae superborum titulorum avidos
titillat, ad scribendum allexit, sed fervens tui juvendi desiderium. Etenim,
reputans egometmecum quam frigide, quam obscure, quam inconcinne alij hujus
artis praecepta tradituri egerunt, quam fraudulentur deniquedum lectores suos
per sinuosos anfractus deducentes, artis esse putarunt, si celarent artem,
plurimorum me desiderijs responsurum duxi, sin elatibris protractam Athleticam,
enodatam publici juris fecissem.

Nae, omnium quae, suo fulgore Sol roseus tangit, illuminat, illustrat, post
verbum divinitus traditum and secundu^ arts liberales, pulcherrima est, and
utilissima gladiatoria facultas, ut ad propulsandas a corpore injurias
excogitata, and sirem justa aestimatione prosequi velimus, unicam hanc artem ae
que facere ad tuendam sanitatem ac reliqua omnia quotquot sunt, corporis
exercitia, and plus ad vitam protegendam quam ex iis ullum, fatebimur: Eorum
enim plurima molle otium, nersque luxus genita produxit, fru^alitas and
temperantia ne somniarunt ^uidem, hanc artem dedita magnis ^^clytisque
facinoribus tempora in^exere. Quid enim liberum homi^^m minus dedecet, quam
arma ^actare? Quodnam corpus huma^^m magis roborat exercitiam, feren^sque
laboribus, ac adeundis pro ^a Patria periculis aptiorem reddit? ^llum. Invecta
quidem antiquitus (...) sui cujusque defensionem, verum, nefanda libido
lacescendi erubescendum mortis genus infelic itemporis successu enormitatem
detestandam introduxit, nam, ubi nosmet defendere didicerimus, statim alios
offendere nitimur.

Heu gravem sortem, quoties iniquus Additur saevo gladius veneno!

Sed quid gloriamur de infirmita^tibus nostris, cum brutis ex part^ inferiores
simus? Reliqua enim ani^mantia natura indulgens armis i^^struxit, cornibus
Taurum, dentib^^ Aprum, unguibus Leonem, solu^ hominem imbellem, inermen, imb^
cillum esse, and e terrae visceribus a^ ma morte venalia petere voluit.

Neque in una aliqua provincia q^ se forsan enormi hac provocandi li^ dine
exonerari pateretur, cohib^ poterit effraenis illa, and extra rectu^ (...)
dinem evagans licentia, nisi in^ fimul, ubi nunc dierum hos mo^ peregrinantes
contrahimus, ad n^ liorem ordinem ista licentia revo^tur, revocataque
evanescat: Ceterum ut malum hocce adultum declinetur (quod haud levioribus
remediis restinguendum, quam libidinibus ardescit) vix consultum fuerit, cum,
si ista prohiberemur consuetudine, in deteriora scelera prolabentes, nobis
invicem, clam nexis insidijs, violentas manus essemus illaturi. Utendum hac
art, haud fecus ac artis Aesculapiae periti venenis, venena emorbosis
corporibus expulsuri.

Certe mei muneris non est Athletica tractare, aut exinde quaestu^ capere, mihi
nec seritur nec metitur, atamen, cum jam diu addidicerem hanc artem ab
exercitatissimo quodam armorum Magistro, cui jam defuncto non parem habet
Europa, non possum non, quinquae olim in privatum usum stylo commendaveram,
tibi non denegata mittam in publicum, quo minus publicae utilitati defuisse,
vel saltem deesse voluisse videar. Modo melioris notae hominibus placuero, de
caeteris haud multum ero sollicitus, calumnientur, virus evomant,
patrocinabitur mihi mea innocentia, proteget me tuorum conatuum pro movendorum
studium indefessum.

En itaque tibi mi Lector, artis Athleticae Systema compendiaria Methodo
conscriptum, tuum ego favorem, and in judicando aequitatem ambio, Omnibus
placere, and si fas esset, haud facile, nulli, probrosu^. Imperitis haec non
peritis scribo, amplecte^^ itaque imperite, connive perite, si me in ipsa herba
oppresseris^ nil ausurus sum adultus, si non elogij^ digna, vituperiis ne
onerato, cogitans^ magni and excelsi animi signum esse laudibus indigna and
proculcata, laudi^bus ornare, and erigere studuisse. Vale^

To the Gentle Reader.
MOst Courteous and Ingenious Reader, it was not the insatiable desire of a
shade like fame which soon vanishes, nor the unquenchable thirst of an empty
glory, that did allure me to write this treatise, but the good will I bore thee
and thine endeavors. We ought to do well, not because we would be frequently
talked and spoken of by every man, but that we may edify and give content to
our own minds; for as men are inconstant, so their actions and humors
likewise are variable, and he that heaps up praises upon thee to day may blame
thee to morrow. And although our name does not die presently with us, if we,
having done well in our life time be praise worthy, yet it cannot last for
ever, but must once perish with the world, and thus we die twice.

The subject is praise worthy enough, but as for the Penman, I Will leave that to
thy descreet censure: Good language I want, yet if I did not want it, thou
would want the understanding of the book.

The Art of Defense may be justly termed next to the liberal, the chief, the
most necessary, as well in time of peace as in time of war, at home and
abroad, the most part of other exercises of the body being but for pleasure
only, or the health of the body, this for plea^sure, for health of body and
soul too; for if thou be known to be exp^rt herein, and to guide thy weapon
by judgment, thou do scarsely give any occasion of falling out, that thou
may not be accounted a vain man, and because thou know what danger there
is in, only standing upon thine own defense, when the unskilful having only
courage, will quarrel upon any occasion, because the danger he may fall into
is unknown to him: besides no body will easily offend thee, so that skill
makes thee to be respected and feared, and to fear no man, if thou be engaged
in any necessary quarrel.

And again, if it be thy chance to light into a company, where perhaps in thy
presence some may fall out, then the reputation thou art in for thy skill may
be the cause of their agreement, if thou thy self do stir in mediating
between them, and thus thou may deliver their bodies and souls from danger,
in hindering the shedding of blood. I cannot but marvel extremely,
considering the necessity, why this art should be so much neglected* without
the want of good and skillful teachers be the cause. For with what confidence
can we wear our weapons, with what safety if we cannot use them? There is a
great difference between the wearing and the handling of Arms, to wear a
Rapier or Sword is only fashionable, to use it, necessary.

If a man be assaulted and has no skill to trust to, he will be daunted and
loose his courage, and although he does not loose his spirit, but with a
resolute mind will strive to gain the conquest, his fortitude becomes
temeritie, and his own valor will be his rain, because it is not ruled by
reason.

And if thou have never so good skill, do not offend any one, nor contemning
undervalue thine adversaries skill, although he has none at all, for contempt
engenders carelessness, and carelessness destruction, ever that thou shunnest
thou escapest; therefore rather persuade thy self that thine adversary has
more skill then thou, and fight warily, as if thou were to combat with thy
better man, and thou shall be free from many perils, that else would befall
thee. It is not my profession indeed to practice this science, or to get my
liliving the same, but my ambition to unfold that to thee for Grande mercy,
which has cost me both thanks and silver: I was encouraged by many of my
friends to commit this treatise to the Press, and easily induced to put it in
action, seeing the want of such a subject: yet I had scarsely ventured to put
my self into the world, had it not pleased my noble friends to divide
themselves, and surround me with the fiery walls of their tender love. I
present unto thy view a book small in quantity, but great if thou peruse it
thoroughly, grounded upon reason and experience, methodically composed, and
(which I will not blush to speak) in such terms that there cannot be made any
blow or thrust ^t thee, but thou may find remedy for there. There have
indeed been some few and those of great skill and experience, that have
written some discourses of this subject very obscurely, because being that it
wa^ their living and profession, they thought it not expedient to make that
common by which they were maintained. I have fitted my self to thetimes, in
speaking only of single Rapier and single Sword, being that the Dagger,
Gauntlet, Buckler are not in use, and because that the Rapier an^ the Sword are
the grounds of the less noble weapons. The Rapier of the Quarter staff, of
the long Pike, of the Hal^bard: the Sword, of the two hande^ Sword, and of the
Falchion, so that (...) man who can play at single Rapier an^ Back Sword well
and judiciously, man with great ease learn to handle the re^^ of the weapons.
There be some that wi^^hold that a man having a long arm^ and consequently a
long reach, has (...) great advantage of a short man, th^^ has neither so
long a reach nor so lon^ a Rap^er as he, but if I should ma^^ bold to mantaine
the contrary against those, I should perchanse be held to d^^liver a Paradox,
which indeed is (...) Paradox but to the unskilful: In bac^ Sword-play a long
weapon may be a^^vantagious; in Rapier-play it is not, if he that has the
shorter weapon does but always thrust close to his adversaries weapon: But if
two play together that are both unskilful, then he that has the longer
Rapier doubtless has advantage, because they thrust f^rre off from one another
Rapiers.

Entertain therefore, gentle Reader, these first fruits of mine endeavors,
with as good and noble a mind as I wrote it with a desire to benefit thee, and
to advance thy skill, which if thou do thou shall oblige me further, and give
me great encouragement to enlarge it with Emblemes, and the art of Caminering,
a thing very useful, namely how to assault an enemy far off with a Rapier.
Farewell, and peruse this with health and joy.

In laudem operis and Authoris
IS death of late grown feeble, and her Dart
So blunt, that she must learn to kill by Art?
Or are her Ministers, Chance, Sickness, Age,
Too few in number to fulfill her rage?
That man and man in mortal feu'd combine
To date her Trophies in a rubric line
Drawn with a Pen of Steel, by which device
Their slaughtered bodies fall her sacrifice?
It Is so, such is their madness^, that for lone
Of peoples breath they will prostitute their own;
Virtue unarmed suffers by such, whilst might
Incroacheth on the privilege of right.
But Son of Mars to rescue innocence
From injuries, have published this defense
And teach how with skill to countermaund
The deadly outrage of a stronger hand.
Thy Book, although the volume be but small
Is great enough t'undoe Chirurgions Hall;
Charon may yawne and stretch, expecting fares*
(As watermen do at the Temple stairs
In The long vacation ere they earne a groate)
Yet want a naulum to repair his boat.
SAM. BRIGGES. Master of Arts and Fellow of Kings Col. in Cambridge.

To the deserving Author.
THe joyntlesse Fencers glory who rehearse,
Must let his fancy blood and bleed a verse;
In sheets of St^ele must entertain the Nine,
And write with Quills shot from the brisl'd Porcupine.
Spirit of Arts! Lovely! Misterious strife!
Deaths true Commedie acted to the life.
Motions pleasing-horrid! here the same sight
Daunts the valiant which makes the coward fight.
You that let fall your Babell thoughts at least,
When tumults omen what your fears suggest,
Your valor hence unsheath again, draw breath
By Art, and live in the very act of death.
The left hand man that falsefies his Play,
Never yet oppugned, now makes himself away:
Thy Art exact thus kills without offense,
And murder qualifies to innocence.
When judgment umpires 'twixt the hands and eye,
The first stroke types a perfect victory,
(Grand Master of the great Art Masculine)
Laurel thine own Temples, for the Field is thine;
Triumph in the Book of Fate, this wounding Balm
Whilst thee in the Cirque we Coronet with Palm.
Io. G^DOLPHIN. Bach. of the Civil Law, of Glouc. Hall Oxford.

THou who as yet thy Steel do fear
Which at thy back does hang, and never
Did draw thy blade but for to show't,
Or tell the price for which 'twas bought;
See here the Art to use it, such,
That Naples scarce can teach so much:
Behold thy foe in paper bleed,
And cut, that pity it is to read,
(Here thou may learn to laugh at those,
At Callis, who to blind their foes,
The Sand into their faces throw,
And then attempt a desperate blow)
Here Is nobler shifts to foil his hand;
To drink his blood let lie the sand:
Now thou art taught by finer art
To cut life's Gordian thread a part*
Pallas invites thee here to look,
Read, and thy life's saved by thy book.
ANTHONY ASKHAM, Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge.

To his worthy, valourous, and ingenious friend the Author.
NOt for thy love, or kindness shown to me
Do I commend this Book, or yet praise thee;
For though I know thou art a friend of mine,
I praise this for its own sake, not for thine.
Thou herein to the Reader do impart
In a plain way that famous Martial art
Of fencing, which by charge and toylesome pain
Thou have attained, and striv'st to make us gain
By thy great labor, and hereby do prove
That thou art not only full of skill but love
Of the common good, for which thy name shall be
Both loved of us and our posterity.
IO. SOTHEBY Of Grayes-Inne.

To his Friend.
LOng peace (some say) breeds War, a Fate
Contemptible in its self, for us to hate,
Yet when necessity to the Sword gives Law
Twere more then dastardy not to draw:
With braver spirits that them attempt to do,
Here Is honored skill, and skill for honor too:
Lo here is a Mr. not for Boys but Men,
Who terminates all weapons with his Pen;
His postures such that adds to our life Fame,
(Life overpast) a Trophee to our Name.
For if we honor give to Law, alone
That keeps us in our own possession
What dignities sufficient, or what degree
Can recompense that Art which keeps us free
From foreign and demestique foes, from wrongs,
In duels, combats, multitudes and throngs,
And in the Amphitheater to strive
With savage Lions who shall survive?
Had thou been there thy nimble skill and Art
Would soon have won dire Neroes heart
Who would have thought Romes treasury to be
A small reward and recompense for thee.
Besides 'twill add unto thy worth: by Sword
Caesar himself through Flintie mountains board
Much more our stony hearts thy Art and skill,
Pierces and works in us both power and will
Yet men will carpe, envy at virtue aims,
The fairest face may be Sunburnt with stains
And know, Mechanics that do not understand
Some Pety-Marchants grown behind hand
Will secretly contemn, abroad their fear
Will reconcile them l^st thou should hear
And question words with blows, Heroic blood
Terms this the sinews of the public good,
But I do wrong thee much in this low praise.
Nay I should wrong thee if I gave thee Bays
Alone; since thy victorious hand and tongue
Deserves the noble Palm, the Muses song.
Tamberlayne Bowdler, Nuper ex Aed. Christ. Oxon. nunc de Gray Hospitis.

To his Friend the Author.
MArs and Minerva in a Nuptial band.
By a sacred Flamen here conjoined stand,
At this great marriage after the English rite
I offer here mine English worthless mite.
A. SMALLVVOOD, Master of Arts, sometimes of S. Peter's College in Cambridge.

GReat Master of the Sword and Pen ^ poor we
Hang only Trophies t'your humility;
We but increase your train, not gild your Bays,
Nor add to the shout of victory, your praise
Would wear a Caesar's style out; one that writes
With the same Art and Courage, that he fights.
Mankind's your de^ter, Sir: and should each one
You Have saved a Garland bring, our Oaks were gone;
Duells may now be lawful: for to fight
Will be but Exercise, or Play in spite.
Each man's impassable, more safe from harm
Than if he wore a Lapland Witches charm.
And though our Laws forbid it, yet you have took
A course to save the Dueller by's book:
Pallas now scorns her Gorgon, and in the Field
She Will make your Book her Study and her Shield.
WILLIAM CREED. Oxon.

To the Reader.
Hark Reader, would be learned in the W^rres,
A Captain in a Gown?
^trike a league with Books and Scarres?
And wear of both the Crown?
^ouldst be a Wonder? such a one
As could win with a Look?
A Scholar in a Garrison?
And conquer by the Book?
^ake then this Mathematick Shield*
And henceforth by its Rules,
^e able to dispute ith Field,
And combat in the Schools.
^hil'st peaceful Learnin g once again,
And the Soldier do concord,
As that he fights now with her Pen
And she writes with his Sword.
RICH. LOV^LAC^. A. Glouces: Oxen.

HEre troops of Figures muster, here along
March long-shank'd lines, and angles in a throng
The Sword's the Leader, and a sharp one too,
That never brooks to word it, if he do
But turn, they turn straight with him; Figures the
Dissigure, Angles vary, Lines begin
To cringe and crook themselves and trembling fly
To corners: So they are Angl'd instantly.
It Is well the Sword's the Leader, 'twould molest
To rank him rightly more then all the rest.
The Lines claim him for theirs, and thus conclude
That needs must be a Line that is Longitude.
Should I so count Him? the Angles would confute
My forwardness; cry out, are lines acute?
Rank him with us; the body Sphaericall
Would next step in, thus argue, d' ont swords all
Touch planum still in puncto? So do we;
It Is plain, this touchstone proves him kin to me.
Thus would they wrangle for him, though it is know
The Sword for equals would admit of none.
He Would make them soon confess their properties,
By cutting them into infinities.
Mysterious Artist! whose profounder skill
Has made the Sword a Scholar g'ainst its will,
Has made it learned, and, though it self not knows
To make a Geometrick figure in its blows.
WILL. BEVVE, New Coll. Ox. Fel^

Thanks Mathematick Fencer, that do tie
The Sword to the book and fight in Geometry*
That have given ears to weapons and do cause
Arms to be subject to the voice of laws.
Proceed thus in thy Miracles; be read
And wonderd at, the same path few can tread*
D. VIVIAN. Fell. new Coll. in Oxon.

SIR,
THe praises which to Xenophon were due,
May now deservedly be fixed on you:
By this we do you right, not wrong him, when
You weild as well as he the Sword, and Pen.
But this is not enough: thou do out-doe
Not Xenophon alone, but nature too:
That each man should defend himself, we be
By nature taught, but how we should, by thee.
W. W. Oxoniensis.

Errata.
FOlio 6. line 29. for line read time. fol. 32. line 25. for Is read If. fol.
46. line 22. for under his, read under thy, fol. 58. line 5. for left leg,
read right leg.

LIB. I.
PARS PRIOR: The first part of the first Book; Containing how a Right-handed
man is to play against a Right-handed man at single Rapier.
CHAP. I. Treats of things that must be known before we proceed to the
subject it self.
Prime and the Secunde.

The Prime is measured from ^he Hilt to the midst of the Rapier, and being the
strongest part, is consequently t^ be made only use of in putting by thrus^ or
blows.

Secunde is taken from the midst (...) the Rapier to the point, and being the
weakest of the Rapier is therefore only (...) be used in offending or making
of thrusts*







^hen besides, when thou make a thrust at ^hine adversary stepping forwards
with thy right leg toward him thou come ^o stand with a half body, and
then if he did aim at that part of thy breast which thou did show he will
miss it, if thou lost but thrust at the self same instant his ^hrust
approaches, therefore every discreet Teacher and judicious Master ought ^o
leave that free to his Scholars, being that it is a thing of no great moment.





with thy right foot, but do not stir thy left foot; the weight of thy
body must wholly lie upon thy right thigh, as soon as thou have performed thy
thrust, instantly recall thy body again, so that the weight of thy body come
to rest upon thy left thigh again (as it did before thou made thy thrust) not
recalling thy right leg, with which thou did formerly step forwards, but,
in the mean while thou bindest him after thy thrust remove by little and
little thy left leg toward thy right leg, for thus doing thou can thrust
home at thine adversary again as soon as thou have occasion.



Secunde or weakest part of his Rapier, with thy Prime o^ strongest part of thy
Rapier, for if thou can do that, he cannot put thee by.

without, over his right arm, thou must do it with a Secunde. When thou
make a thrust at thine adversary within, ^hou art to do it with a Quarte.

stringere him on the same ^ide thou did thrust, in the recalling of ^hy
body, not removing thy point from his; for else he may wound thee too upon ^hy
coming off.

CHAP. II. The foreign terms of Art, that do occur in this Treatise, are
unfolded.
STringering is the touching of thine adversaries point with thy point, which
thou art to do upon any occasion, that ^hou may secure thy self on either
side from a thrust, which commonly is termed ^inding.

Cavere, is to turn thy point under ^hine adversaries Rapier on the other
side, when thou art bound, or he does thrust at ^hee.

Tempo is, that thou take heed never to make a thrust or blow at thine
adversary, without thou have a fair opportunity to hit, or requisite measure,
that he be within thy reach.

Mensure is the distance betwixt thee and thine adversary, whereof thou art to
judge (if thou can reach him or no) before thou thrustest, that thou may
not offend in vain.

Parere, is to decline, to put by, and to turn off a thrust or blow.

Finda is called in the Italian tongue ^ deceit or cousnage, and metaphorically
brought into fencing, when I do as if ^ would thrust into one part of thy
body^ and seeing that thou do catch after my thrust to put me by, I then
recalling my point do thrust somewhere else, at which place I in the beginning
did not aim, be^fore thou strovest to put me by.

Passere is when thou do thrust ^ thine adversary without or within
to^wards his breast, and he does put by the thrust upwards, and thou in the
mean^ while he lifts up his arm, bowest the body, and letting thy point
sink down^ into a Secunde under his right arm do^ pass behind him.

Contratempo, is to thrust the self same line thine adversary do^ thrust.

Battere, is to beat or knock either with the Rapier or foot.

Voltere is, when thine adversary does thrust at thee, and thou first parering
his thrust, do just upon the approaching of his thrust turn thy body round
about toward thy left side out upon thy right leg, so that thy back comes
toward thine adversary, and thy left leg between thy right, and thine
adversaries right leg, and thrusts him with a Quarte at his right breast:
But this is a trick altogether full of danger, ^unlesse it be used to avoid the
Passade withal.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Guards.
viz. Prime, Secunde, Tertz and Quarte.

Prime is when thou houldest thy Rapier in such a manner that the outside side
of thy hand does look toward thy left side out, and the inside of thy hand
look toward thy right side out. This is subdivided into a straight Prime,
when thy point looks straight forwards, and into a hanging Prime, when thy
point does look toward the ground.

Secunde is, when thou hold thy Rapier in such a sort that the outside of
thy hand looks upwards, and the inside of thy hand toward the ground. This
is likewise subdivided into a straight Secunde whenthy point looks straight
forwards; into a hanging Secunde, when thy point looks downwards toward the
ground, and finally into the middle Secunde, when thou hold thy Rapier with
a Secunde and a bowed arm, so that the point of thy Rapier looks sheere out
toward thy left side.

Tertz is when thou do hold thy Rapier in such fashion that the outside of
thy hand looks toward thy right side out, and the inside of thy hand toward
thy left side out.

This again is subdivided into the High Tertz when thou hold thy point
upwards yet with bended arm, so that thy hilt equallize thy Right breast in
height; into a middle Tertz, when thou hold thy weapon with a bent arm that
the point looks straight out forwards, so that the Hilt in height equalize thy
waste: And lastly into a low Tertz, when thou hold thy weapon with a
straight arm downwards, so that thy Hilt be equal to thy knee in height, or
a little below.

Quarte is when thou hold thy Rapier in such a manner with a bended arm,
that the outside of thy hand look down toward the ground, but the inside
upwards. This is likewise subdivided into a straight Quarte when thy point
looks forwards, and into a hanging Quarte when thou hold thy Rapier with a
Quarte and let the point sink down.

CHP. IV. How to make use of all the four guards, and upon what occasion each
of them may be used, as being different from one another.
Prima is only to be thrusted at the outside of thine adversaries Rapier over
his right arm, and is never to be used within, and is the weakest of all the
guards.

An example how thou shall use the Prime.
stringere him within as soon as he makes a thrust at thee without, and
turns his point under thy Rapier, instantly thrust at him with a Tertz over
his right arm close to the weak of his Rapier, if then he does strive to put
by thy thrust toward his right side, then turning thy Tertz into Prime thrust
at his right breast.

Secunde is used without over the right arm in a long thrust, and in a
Passade, then likewise under the arm in a Passade without, and again within
in a long thrust and in a Passade.

Examples how to use the Secunde without.
stringere him within, as soon as he makes a thrust at thee without, over
the Prime on the strongest part of thy Rapier, then put it by with a Quarte
toward thy rightside out, and at the same instant thou do put by, change the
Quarte into a Secunde and thrust over his right arm at his right breast, or
Passere.

How to Passere with the Secunde without.
parere thy thrust upwards, then while he is parering upwards, bow thy body and
let the point sink down into a Secunde under his right arm, and Passere him,
but passing behind him clap thy left hand upon his Hilt, for fear he should
knock thee passing, with the Hilt.

How to use the Secunde within.
Quarte as soon as he does put by thy trust toward his left side out, yet so
that the point of his Rapier looks toward thy body, then change thy Quarte
into a Secunde close to his Rapier, and make a long thrust at his right breast:
But if he does parere toward his left side, that the point of his Rapier
likewise does look toward his left side out, then change likewise thy Quarte
into a Secunde and Passere him: And if he does parere thy thrust upwards let
thy point sink in under his arm within and do the same.

Tertz is only used without, over the arm, never in the making of a Passada.

An example how to use the Tertz without.
stringere him within, as soon as he makes a thrust at thee without, then
thrust him over the Secunde or weakest part of his Rapier with a Tertz, and
with thy Hilt go low.

Quarte is for the most part used at the inside of the Rapier, yet sometimes
without over the right arm, and then the Quarte is called Riversa, as having
changed her nature and property, because she only ought to be used within.

An example how to use the Quarte within.
Stringere him without, as soon as he does make a thrust at thee within, then
thrust with the Quarte close to the Secunde or the weakest part of his Rapier
between his right arm and his right breast, and when thou have performed thy
thrust, then presently stringere within.

Another manner.
stringere thee without, then make a find at him within, as soon as he does
catch after thy find toward his left side out, then let thy point sink down
under his right arm, and thrust him with a Quarte under his right arm at his
right side.

An example how to use the Quarte without.
Secunde or Tertz over his right arm, close to the Secunde or weakest part of
his Rapier, if he then does put by thy thrust with a Quarte toward his right
side out, then at an instant turn thy Secunde or Tertz into a Quarte, and
thrust home at his right breast, or Voltere if thou please: And if thou will
thou may clappe thy left hand upon his Rapier within, when thou do touch
him with thy Quarte, not catching hold of it, but only turn his blade away
toward the left side, and thou will easily turn his weapon out of his hand.

CHAP. V. Treats how to stringere right, and of other things that are to be
observed here in stringering.
stringering, or with a contra-posture (whereof we will hear in the ninth
Chapter following) besides these two ways there is none other. Yet stringering
is the chiefest, which if thou will use, it behooveth thee to be very wary that
thou may not incur any hazard; mark therefore these following Rules.

stringere him, not lying too hard upon his Rapier, because he may let his
point suddenly sink down, and then thou following his point downwards do
open thy body too much, that he may easily turn over his point, and thrust
thee without over thy right arm, or within, before thou can recover thy
weapon.

stringere him without, if he lie open within, thou must stringere him within.

stringere him, thou must step: And if thou meanest to stringere him without,
then step with thy right leg toward thy right side, and let thy point look
toward thy right side over his Rapier* If thou make account to stringere
thine adversary within, then thou must step with thy left leg toward thy
left side, and let the point of thy Rapier look over his point toward thy
left side out.

stringere him.

If thine adversary will not suffer himself to be stringer'd, what thou art to
do.
stringere him, make a half thrust at him as it were a Finda or falsifying,
thus thou do force him to come to thy Rapier and put by thy thrust; when he
now has parered thy thrust and is come to thy Rapier, then cavere instantly to
the other side of his Rapier where he is open, and stringere him; when thou
have attained to thy purpose, then follow his Rapier close, according to the
13. Chapt^ following.

How to avoid thine adversaries Stringering.
stringere thee either without or within, then before he does touch thy Rapier,
lift the point of thy Rapier over his, and thru^^ him either with a Quarte if
he does prosecute thy Rapier without, or without over his arm with a Secunde,
if he does prosecute thy Rapier within.

As for Example,
stringere thee without, then lift the point of thy Rapier toward thy right
side over his point, and thrust him with a Quarte at the inside of thy Rapier
close to the Secunde or weakest part of his weapon.

stringere thee within, then before he does touch thy point with his weapon,
lift the point of thy Rapier over his point toward thy left side, and thrust
him at the outside of his Rapier with a Secunde at his right breast.

stringering with Cavering; namely, when thine adversary will stringere thee
without* then before he does touch thy point, cavere or turn thy point from
thy left side toward thy right side under his Rapier, and thrust him with a
Quarte within at his right breast close to his Secunde or weakest part of his
Rapier.

stringere thee within, then turn the point of thy Rapier from thy right side
toward thy left side under his Rapier, before he does touch thy point, and
thrust with a Secunde at the outside of his weapon at his right breast.

stringering likewise with making of Finda's, namely, when he will stringere
thee without, then before he does touch thy Rapier, make a Finda at him
within, as if thou did mean to thrust at him within with a Quarte, as soon
as he does catch after thy thrust toward his left side with his Rapier, then
recalling thy point thrust him at the outside of his Rapier over his right arm
with a Secunde, at his right breast.

stringere thee within, then before he does touch thy Rapier within, make a
Finda at him without, as if thou did intend to thrust over his right arm; as
soon as he does catch after that, thrust toward his right side, then turn
thy point under his Rapier, and thrust him at the inside of his weapon with a
Quarte at his right breast.

How thou shall make thy self loose again when thou art stringered.
stringered thee without, then let the point of thy Rapier by degrees sink
downwards, if he then does follow thy point with his point, Cavere instantly
from thy left side toward thy right side under his Rapier, and battiering him
first at the inside of his Rapier, thrust with a Quarte at his right breast at
the inside of his Rapier.

Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right breast.

Secunde Contra-tempo, or at the coming of his thrust at one and the selfsame
time, at the outside of his Rapier at his right breast, or else Quarte
contra-tempo at the inside of his weapon at his right breast.

If thine adversary has stringered thee without, then cavere from thy left
side toward thy right side under his Rapier, but slowly, and cavering turn
thy hand into ^ Secunde, then thou art open within yet ^oose from his Rapier,
if he then makes a thrust at thee within, then battiering him first at the
inside of his Rapier, thrust him with a Quarte within at his right breast.

cavere from thy right side toward thy left side under his Rapier, and thrust
him with a Secunde without over his right arm, at his right breast.

Passere him with a Secunde at the inside of his weapon.

stringered thee without, then retire, stepping only backward with thy left
leg, in so much that the weight of thy body come wholly to ^ie upon thy left
thigh, and when thou steppest back with thy left leg, draw thine arm to
thee in a Secunde bowed, that the point of thy Rapier look quite out toward
thy left side, as soon as he comes to stringere thee again, then cavere
from thy left side toward thy right side under his Rapier, and thrust him with
a Quarte within at his right breast.

Or when thou have thus retired, and he comes to stringere thee again
without, then thrust him over the Secunde or weakest part of his Rapier, with
thy Prime or strongest part of thy weapon at the outside of his weapon, over
his right arm at his right breast.

CHAP. VI. Treats how and upon what occasion thou art to Cavere.
CAvere took its beginning from a Cock fight; for Camillo Agrippo a reverend
Mr. of defense at Rome 50. years ago (who was the inventer of the Dagger)
seeing two Cocks combat together, and observing, how when one of the Cocks
leaped up to strike the other with his claw, the other seeing him come leaping
at him went quite under him on the other side, conceived that he might make use
of this in his Art, and coming home made trial of it, and found it a very
useful and remarkable observation.

Cavereing is therefore only to be made use of, when thine adversary does
thrust at thee over the Secunde or weakest part of thy Rapier, because thou
can not parere his thrust, thy point being unable to resist.

Prime near thy Hilt, then thou art to Parere and put by his thrust, for if
thou do Cavere then, thou will surely be wounded, because before thou can
end thy Cavereing, his point will be upon thy breast, by reason of the Circuler
motion of thy Cavereing which is slow, his thrust being both swift and
straight: yet here is a remedy for it, namely if thine adversary makes a
thrust at thee over the Prime or the strongest part of thy Rapier (viz. near
thy Hilt) and thou will cavere, then just when thou do cavere, stepping back
with thy left leg, so that the weight of thy body come wholly to rest upon
thy left thigh, break him the Mensure, that is, come out of his reach.
Examples how to use Cavereing I will specify in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Treats of diverse ways, how thou s^alt put by all sorts of
thrusts that are made at thee, at the outside of thy Rapier.
stringere him within, thus doing thou will compel him to make a thrust at
thee without over thy right arm, as soon as he thrnsteth at thee over thy
right arm, and it be over the Prime or strougest part of thy Rapier near thy
hilt, then parere his thrust toward thy right side with a Quarte not stirring
thine arm but only turning the wrest, so that the point of thy Rapier look
toward thy right side out, having parered and turned off his thrust, speedily
change thy Quarte into a Secunde, and make a long thrust at the outside of his
Rapier at his right breast.

stringere thine adversary with a Tertz at the inside of his Rapier as soon as
his thrust approaches toward thy right breast over thy right Arm, and over
the Prime or strongest part of thy Rapier, then not turning thy Tertz into a
Quarte as before, but only with a stayed arm turn thy point in a Tertz
toward thy right side, so that thy Rapier does slide along his blade toward
his point, at the outside of his Rapier; when thou have parered his thrust with
thy Tertz, then change thy Tertz into a Secunde, and thrust at his right breast
over his right arm.

Tertz, so that the point of thy Rapier stands upwards a little, and let thy
right arm be something bended that thou be open without over thy right arm,
then only stret^h thy bended arm, and his thrust will be deluded; when thou
have pareret his thrust, then turn thy hand into a Secunde and thrust him over
his right Arm at his right breast.

and put by his Rapier with a Qu^^te downwards toward thy right side, coming
so suddenly in upon him, thou do, as it were, disarme him, thrust then at an
instant with a Secunde over his right arm at his breast.

String^re thine adversary at the outside of his Rapier, and he does make a
thrust at thy thigh outwardly, then let the point of thy Rapier sink down
into a hanging Secunde and parere it, this done, instantly Passere under his
Rapier, or when thou have parered, then thrust with a Secunde home, over his
right arm.

Secunde or weakest part of thy Rapier over thy right Arm, being that the
Secunde is too weak to resist, then cavere from thy left hand toward thy
right hand under his Rapier, and first battiering at the inside of his weapon
thrust the Quarte close to his Rapier at his right breast.

Secunde or the weakest part near the point, then let thy point sink down
into a hanging Quarte, lifting up the hilt behind, thus thou do touched his
Secunde or the weakest part with thy Prime or the strongest part of thy Rapier,
thrust then with the Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right thigh.

CHAP. VIII. How to decline those thrusts that are made within.
Prime of thy Rapier, then parere it with a Secunde down toward thy left
side, and at the same instant thou parerest change thy Secunde into a Quarte
close to thy adversaries Rapier, and thrust at his right breast, at the inside
of his weapon.

battiere him within upon his Rapier when his thrust comes, and in the same
moment thrust the Quarte at his right breast.

Secunde or weakest part of thy Rapier, then cavere from thy right hand toward
thy left hand under his Rapier, and thrust with the Secunde over the weakest
part of his Rapier, at the outside of his Rapier at his right breast.

cavere toward thy left side under his Rapier, and Passere under his weapon,
or under his right arm with a Secunde.

Secunde at the outside of his Rapier, and parere it toward thy right side
out, and having parered, passere with a Secunde without at his right thigh; or
when thou thus have parered, then thrust a long thrust with a Secunde over his
right arm, at his right breast.

Secunde of thy Rapier, then stepping back with thy left leg so that the
weight of thy body come wholly to rest upon thy left thigh, draw thy Rapier to
thee, letting it slide along his Rapier within toward his point, thus doing
thou come with the strongest part of thy Rapier close to his weaker part,
and having this advantage make a long thrust at him within close to his Rapier
with a Quarte at his right breast.

Quarte, and thrust him with a Quarte at the inside of his weapon at his right
thigh.

CHAP. IX. How thou art to demean thy self against many sorts of guards.
Against the Secunde.
Secunde with a stretched arm and is open within, then stringere him within;
as soon as he will thrust at thee without over thy right arm, then thrust the
Tertz at the same time his thrust approaches, over the Secunde of his Rapier
without, at his right breast, and with thy hilt go something low, when thy
thrust is now arrived at his breast, that he may not be able to cavere.

Secunde as before, and is open within, then Stringere him within, in the midst
of his Rapier with a bended Arm in a Tertz, so that the point of thy Rapier
stands upwards, and thy hilt low; as soon as he will thrust at thee without,
over thine arm, then changing thy Tertz into a Secunde Passere under his right
arm, not touching his Rapier.

stringere him without, as soon as he does thrust at thee within, then let the
point of thy Rapier sink down into a Secunde, close to the outside of thy
adversaries Rapier, and Passere him with the Secunde at his right thigh.

secunde with a straight arm, but does open himself on both sides of his
Rapier, then go with the Tertz just under his Rapier, that the point of thy
Rapier be directed toward his hilt, whether soever he does thrust at thee,
thrust Secunde contra-tempo at the outside of his Rapier over his right arm,
and at his right breast.

Secunde, and the point of his Rapier does look quite toward his right side
out, then Stringere him at the outside of his Rapier, and stringering go
toward thy right side about like in a Circle, thus thou will force thine
adversary to make a thrust at thee within, when his thrust approaches* then
Voltere with the Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right breast.

Secunde again, then stringere him at the outside of his Rapier, and suddenly
make a finda at his face upwards with a Tertz, if he lifts up his arm to
defend his face, then passere him under his right arm: but if he does put it
by with a Quarte toward his right side, let him not touch thy Rapier, but lift
thy point over his point, and thrust him with a Quarte within, at his right
breast: Or if he will put it by with a Quarte toward his right side, then let
him not touch thy Rapier, but cavere toward thy right side under his Rapier,
and thrust the Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right breast.

Against the Tertz.
Tertz with a bended arm, so that the point of his Rapier does stand upright,
then make a finda at him within; when he does intend to put by thy feigned
thrust toward his left side, let him not touch thy Rapier but cavere toward
thy left side under his Rapier and thrust with the Quarte without over his
right arm, at his right breast: If he will not regard thy finda, then thrust
with the Quarte at his right breast within; when he does parere thy thrust,
then turn thy Quarte into a Secunde and passere him. In the interim observe
(that if thou meanest to stringere him within) if he does toward his left
side lift the point of his Rapier over thine to thrust thee over thy right
arm, thou then ^^verest toward thy right side under his Rapier and thrustest
a Quarte at him within.

Tertz and with a straight arm, then stringere him within, and stringering him
step toward thy left side, and go about as it were in a circle, then he will
be forced to thrust at thee without; as soon as his thrust approaches, bow
thy body, and not touching his Rapier, pass behind him under his right arm.

stringere him within, make a finda at his face with a Quarte upwards as soon
as he lifts up his arm, then let thy point sink down under his right
arm, and pass behind him.

stringere him within, and make thy finda downwards at his belly, when he
does catch after it downwards, then cavere toward thy left side under his
Rapier and thrust with a Secunde over his right arm.

Against the Quarte.
Quarte, so that the point of his Rapier does look toward his right side out,
that he be open within, then hold thy Rapier in a Secunde, and direct the point
of thy Rapier toward his Hilt within, as soon as he does thrust at thee
within, then Voltere with thy Quarte at his right breast within.

Against one that lies with a stretched arm, and the point upwards.
Triangle, then go with a high Secunde and a stretched arm at the inside of
his Rapier, and make him a finda at the outside of his Rapier, as if thou did
mean to thrust him at his right breast, over his arm; as soon as he will
put it by toward his right side out, then recall thy point toward thy right
side under his Rapier, and changing thy Secunde into a Quarte, thrust with a
Quarte at the inside of his Rapier, at his right breast.

Secunde, then make a Finda within at his face, as soon as he does catch after
thy finda toward his left side, then cavere toward thy left side under his
Rapier and thrust him with a Secunde, or with a reverse (a Quarte so called
because thrusted without, view the fourth Chapter, the ninth number) at the
outside of his Rapier over his right arm.

Secunde and a stretched arm at the outside of his Rapier about as in a
circle, and thy point hold toward his right eye, doing thus thou shall compel
him to put by thy point upwards; when thou see him lifting up his arm, then
let thy point sink in under his right arm, and bowing thy body pass behind
him under his right arm.

If thine adversary holds his left hand behind his hilt for to parere thy
thrusts, how thou art to deceive his left hand.
parere thy thrust toward his right side over his right arm with his left
hand, then let him not touch thy Rapier with his hand, but just as he is
coming toward thy weapon with his hand, lift the point of thy Rapier over his
left hand toward thy right side out, and thrust him with a Secunde over his
left hand, and his right arm.

Or when he does catch after thy Rapier toward his right side, over his right
arm with his left hand, then let him miss thy Rapier, letting thy point sink
in under his left arm, and thrusting him with a Secunde at his breast as
before, and over his right arm.

Quarte, as soon as he holding his left hand behind his hilt, does mean to
parere thy thrust with his left hand toward his left side out, then lift the
point of thy Rapier toward thy left side over his left hand, and thrust him
with a Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right breast.

cavere from thy right side toward thy left side under his left hand, and
thrust him with a Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right breast.

cavere toward thy right side under his left hand and thrust him with a Quarte
over his left arm.

left side out, then let thy point sink in under his left arm, and thrust
with the Quarte at his belly.

CHP. X. How thou may escape the Passada.
Passade that thine adversary shall not be able to use the same against thee
without, is to parere all thrusts that are made without with a Quarte
(according to the first rule of the seventh Chapter.) As for the inward Passade
to elude, is to make use of the second rule of the eight Chapter.

Passade upon thee without, lift up thy arm and put his thrust by upwards, and
as soon as he lets his point sink down under thy right arm, then Voltere
with a Quarte at his right breast, thus doing thou will escape his Passade, for
his point does pass in the turning of thy body about.

Or when thou put by his thrust upwards, and he lets his point sink down
into a Secunde under thy Rapier for to Passiere thee, then let thou likewise
sink thy point downwards into a Secunde, and first parering his Rapier
toward thy right side make a Passade upon him without, under his Rapier.

Passere, then step back only with thy left foot, so that thou come out of
his Mensure and reach, and the weight of thy body come wholly to rest upon thy
left thigh, and stepping back with thy left leg, cavere under his thrust
toward thy left side, and Passere him without under his Weapon.

Passere thee without under thy right arm, then step back^, (not with thy left
leg as before) but with thy right leg behind thy left leg, which thou art
not to stir, so that thy left side be only seen, and parering his thrust
toward thy right side out with thy left hand, thrust with a Secunde at his
right breast.

CHAP. XI. Remedies for the Volte.
Volte is, that thou always thrustest with a Secunde over his right arm at
his right side, then he can neither Voltere thee within, nor without with a
reverse over thy right arm, without danger of his life.

Voltiere at thee of his own accord, then let thy point sink down into a
hanging Quarte, and make a long thrust at him at the inside of his Rapier, at
his right thigh.

Voltiere with him contra-tempo, and thrust at his right bre^st.

Volte at thee within, then let the hilt of thy Rapier sink down close to the
weakest part of his Rapier, and holding thy point upright, thrust him with the
point into his back.

CHAP. XII. How thou art to behave thee against thine adversaries Finda's or
falsifying.
parere it according to the rules prescribed in the seveuth and eighth Chapters
precedent; and if he puts by thy point toward what side soever it be, then
cavere instantly under his Rapier* and thrust either with a Secunde without, or
with a Quarte within, according as he puts by thy thrust toward his right or
left side.

Or else hold thy Rapier in allow Tertz with a straight arm downwards near
thy knee, then he can do thee no hurt with his finds, as soon as he does
make a thrust at thee, then thrust Secunde contratempo at the outside of his
Rapier over his right arm.

CHAP. XIII. How thou must prosecute thine adversaries Rapier when thou have
stringered him.
STringere thine adversary within, as soon as he does cavere under thy Rapier
toward his left side and makes a thrust at the outside of thy Rapier over thy
right arm, then stepping in with thy right leg, put by his thrust downwards
toward thy right side, when thou have put by his thrust without, then let thy
Rapier rest at the outside of his Rapier and stringere him without, as soon as
he steps back and will make a thrust at thee within, then step in toward
him with thy left leg before thy right leg and put that thrust by toward
^ensure or reach, and then thrust where thou please, ever looking and
observing his point, neither would I wish thee to regard or listen to those who
speaking against all reason and known experience will make thee believe that
thou art only to observe his eye, which may easily deceive thee (as if he be
squint-eyed) by observing thine adversaries point thou art less endangered;
for the Rapier is guided by the eye, not the eye by the Rapier, and being so
that thou can not for certain know by the eye where he will thrust

CHAP. XIV. Containing observations against the seventh precedent Chapter.
Prime or strongest part of his Rapier near the hilt, as soon as he does
parere it with a Quarte toward his right side out, then let the point of thy
Rapier sink down into a hanging Quarte lifting up the Hilt behind, thus doing
thou do touch the weakest part of his Rapier with the strongest part of
thine, thrust then with the Quarte at his right thigh.

Quarte, let thy point sink down into a hanging Secunde, and thrust at the
inside of his Rapier, at his right thigh.

Quarte toward his right side downwards, then stepping toward thy left side
with thy left foot, lift the Hilt of thy Rapier over the weakest part of his
weapon* though close to it, and let thy Hilt sink down at the outside of his
Rapier and stringere him, or thrust if thou please: This may likewise be used
in the fifth Chap.

Secunde or weakest part of his Rapier, if he then cavere toward his right
side under thy Rapier for to thrust a Quarte at thee within, then let the point
of thy Rapier sink down into a hanging Secunde at the outside of his Rapier,
and break his Cavereing, and then at an instant Passere him at the outside
under his Rapier.

Thrust at thine adversary with the Secunde, over the weakest part of his
Rapier, without, as soon as he does cavere under thine approaching thrust
with the Quarte toward his right side out, for to thrust at thee within, then
seeing him cavere change thy Secunde into a hanging Quarte, and letting thy
point sink down at the inside of his Rapier thrust him with the said Quarte
at his right thigh.

Secunde or the weakest part of his Rapier, and he does caver^ toward his
right side under thy thrust with a Quarte, of an intent to thrust* Quarte
contra-tempo with thee, then stay thy intended thrust, and battiere him at the
inside of his Rapier with thy Rapier, and thrust him at the same instant thou
battierest with a Quarte at the inside of his weapon, at his right breast.

cavereth again toward his right side under thy thrust, then cavere thou at
the self same time toward thy left side under his Rapier when he does
cavere, and thrust him with a Secunde at the outside of his Rapier at his right
breast.

CHAP. XV. Containing observations against the eigthth preceden^ Chapter.
Prime or strongest part of his Rapier near his hilt, as soon as he parereth
thy thrust toward his left side out with a Secunde, then change thy Quarte
into Secunde, and passing behind him thrust at his right thigh.

parereth thy Quarte with a Secunde toward his left side, then step with thy
right foot toward thy right side, and letting the point of thy Rapier sink
downwards, lift the Hilt of thy Rapier close to his weapon toward thy right
side, over the Secunde of his Rapier, and stringere him within, and as soon as
thou have stringered him battiere him at the inside of his weapon, and
presently upon it thrust with the Quarte at the inside of his weapon at his
right breast.

parereth thy thrust with a Secunde toward his left side, then step with thy
left leg toward thy left side, and thrust him with a Quarte under his right
arm at his belly.

Secunde of his Rapier with a Quarte, when thou see him cavere toward his
left side under thy thrust, of an intent to thrust thee without over thy right
arm with a Secunde contra-tempo, then change thy Quarte into a Secunde, and
thrust him over his right arm, at the outside of his Rapier, at his right
breast.

Secunde of his Rapier with a Quarte, as soon as he does cavere toward his
left side under his thrust, for to thrust Secunde contra-tempo over thy right
arm without, then cavere thou likewise, but toward thy right side under his
c^vering with the Quarte, and battiering him first at the inside of his Rapier
thrust instantly upon it with the Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his
right breast.

Here ends the first part of the first Book, treating how to use a single
Rapier against a Right handed man.

LIB. I. PARS POSTERIOR. The second part of the first Book, showing how a
Right handed man must play with a Right handed man at single Sword.
CHAP. I. If thine adversary does strike at the outside of thy Sword at thy
head, how thou shall parere it.
stringere him within as soon as he makes a blow at thy head without, then
stepping in toward him, parere his blow with a Quarte toward thy right side
downwards, and having parered, strike instantly with the Quarte toward thy
left side at the inside of his right arm, and having performed thy blow,
step back again with thy right leg and stringere him at the inside of his
Sword.

Secunde, with the outside of thy weapon, and in one motion, at the same
instant thou receivest his blow brandish thy Sword over his within, toward thy
right side, and strike at the inside of his weapon at his head.

Secunde over his right arm, without, if he parereth thy Secunde upwards,
then let thy point sink in under his right arm and bowing thy body pass
behind him: Or else when he does parere thy Secunde upwards, then at the same
instant strike downwards at the outside of his right leg.

parere his blow with a Quarte toward thy right side* and parering, in one
tempo, or the self same motion of thine arm pass behind him, and passing
make a back blow with a Secunde at the Hamm^ strings of both his legs, and in
striking catch hold at thine adversaries Hilt with thy left hand, that he may
not strike thee, at thy passing behind him with a back blow.

Quarte, and instantly stringere him without, that he may not strike thee at
thy head.

mensure) and in the stepping back strike him with a Qu^rte at the outside of
his right arm downwards, and instantly raise thy weapon again and stringere
him without.

Stringere thine adversary at the inside of his weapon, as soon as he
strikes at thee without, then just at the turning of his wrist, let the
Secunde sink in under his arm, and bowing thy body well, pass behind him,
and with thy Hilt go something high in thrusting.

cavere toward thy right side under his* Sword at the coming of his blow
toward thy head without, and do as if thou meanest to thrust him at his right
eye within, as soon as he lifts up his arm to parere thy thrust from his
face, then let thy point sink under his right arm within, and pass behind
him, or else strike him with a Quarte at the inside of his right arm, or right
leg.

CHAP. II. How thou shall put by and parere those blows which thine adversary
makes at thy head within.
parere his blow toward* thy left side downwards with a Secunde, only
turning thy wrest and* thy point toward thy left side, when thou have parered
his blow, then strike with a ^ack ^low, and a Secunde toward thy right side at
the outside of his right arm, and instantly stringere him within, when thou
have performed thy blow.

it arriveth, cavere toward thy left side under his blow, and cavering step
toward thy right side with thy right foot, and receive his blow with the
Secunde, with the outside of thy Rapier or Sword, and instantly strike with a
Quarte at his left cheek, at the inside of his weapon.

cavere under his Sword toward thy left side, and stepping in upon him, catch
with thy left hand under thy right arm, toward thy left side over thy
adversaries weapon, hold of his Hilt and strike him at his head.

When he does strike at thy head again within, then when thou see his blow
coming, step^e with thy right leg toward thy right side, and strike him
with a Quarte at the inside of his right arm.

Quarte at the inside of his Rapier, and although he steps never so far, yet
he cannot reach thee, thou being out of his mensure and reach.

Or When his blow approaches, cavere under his Sword toward thy left side,
and stepping in upon him catch with thy left hand, over thy right arm toward
thy left side hold of thine adversaries Hilt, and strike him with a Secunde, or
a back blow at the outside of his right leg, as does appear in the precedent
Picture.

Quarte from under up at his wrest, and although thou should miss of his
arm, yet thrusting close to his Rapier on either side thou can stringere him
without or within, according as thou do light on either side of his weapon,
and consequently be safe enough.

Stringere thine adversary within in the midst of his Rapier, as soon as he
lifts up his wrest to strike at thee on either side, then strike him at the
inside of his arm with a Quarte toward thy left side.

Quarte at the inside of his Rapier at his right breast; if then thine
adversary does strive to put by thy Rapier toward his left side, then turning
thy Rapier into a Secunde, and letting thy point sink in under his right arm
pass behind him: or when he does put by thy thrust toward his left side,
then strike downwards with a Quarte at the inside of his left leg.

CHAP. III. If thine adversary does strike at thy right arm without, how to
elude it.
stringere thee within, suddenly make a blow at his head without, as soon as
he will strike thee at the outside of thine arm, then let thy Hilt sink
down at the outside of his Sword, so that thou with the Prime of thy Sword
do touch his Secunde; having this advantage of him strike with a Quarte
toward thy left side, at the inside of his right arm.

Quarte at the inside of his weapon at his head, or else with a Secunde or back
blow at his right cheek.

Secunde or a back blow, at the outside of thine elbow of his own accord, not
invited by any opportunity from thee, then let thy point sink downwards into
a hanging Secunde, and Passere him at the outside of his right thigh.

Secunde, at the outside of his weapon, then turn thy weapon close to his
Rapier into a Quarte and strike him at the inside of his right thigh toward
thy left side out with a Quarte.

Secunde at the outside of his weapon, and put by his blow then lift up thy
point, and strike with a Secunde or a back blow toward thy right side, at the
outside of his right arm over his Hilt.

CHAP. IV. If thine adversary does aim at thine arm within, how thou shall
elude him.
stringere thee at the outside of thy weapon, at a sudden make a blow at him
at the inside of his weapon at his head; if thine adversary then does strike at
the inside of thy arm upon the turning of thy wrest, then not performing thy
blow intended, go quite away toward thy right side with thy weapon and with a
stretched arm, till his blow be passed under thy right arm, and then
instantly strike him with a Quarte from thy right side over his hilt, at the
inside of his right arm.

Quarte at the inside of his weapon, close to the Secunde or weakest part of
his Sword, then having this advantage strike with a Secunde or back blow over
his hilt toward thy right side, at the outside of his right arm.

Quarte at the inside of thy weapon at thy elbow, then let the point of thy
weapon sink down into a hanging Quarte, and thrust him within at his right
thigh.

Quarte have parered his blow, then in the same Tempo or instant, raising thy
point, strike with a Quarte at the inside of his right arm.

CHAP. V. How to parere and put by such blows that are made at thy right leg
without.
Secunde at the outside of his Sword, and having parered it, raise thy point
and strike with a Secunde or back blow at the outside of his right arm, or
else at his right cheek.

Secunde again, and parere it as soon as thou have put by, presently change
thy Secunde into a Quarte close to the outside of his weapon, and strike him
with a Quarte under his weapon at his right thigh within.

Secunde, then presently Passere him under his weapon, or raise thy point and
thrust him with a Secunde over his weapon at his right breast.

Secunde or back blow at the outside of his right arm, or his right cheek.

CHAP. VI. How to Parere those blows that are made within at thy leg.
Quarte, when thou have thus Parered his blow, then raise thy point and strike
with a Quarte, at the inside of his right arm over his Hilt.

Quarte as before, and having eluded his blow, turn thy weapon close to his
into a Secunde, and strike with a back blow under his weapon toward thy right
side, at the outside of his right leg.

Quarte, and thrust at the inside of his right thigh.

Secunde at the coming of his blow, and in one motion let thy Sword go about
thy head, toward thy right side, and strike him at his right cheek.

Quarte toward thy le^t side at the inside of his arm, or strike him at his
left cheek with the Quarte.

CHAP. VII. Treats of five observations against the first Chapter of this
second part.
Quarte toward his right side out, then shall thou just when he does put by
thy blow, lift thy point over his weapon toward thy right side, and strike him
with a Secunde or back blow at the outside of his right arm.

Quarte toward his right side, then touch not his Sword, but strike at his
right leg without, and in one motion strike under his Sword through, toward
thy right side and stringere him within.

Secunde, then in one motion strike downwards with a Secunde at the outside of
his right leg, and presently raise thy point and stringere him without, else
he will strike theeat thy head.

parere thy blow with the Secunde, then let thy weapon rest at the outside of
his weapon, and so soon as he strikes at thee within, then Voltere with the
Quarte at the inside of his weapon at his left breast.

Secunde let the point of thy Rapier sink at the outside in under his left
arm, and pass be^inde him under his right arm.

Secunde, then let the Prime and strongest part of thy weapon slide along he
Secunde and weakest part of his wea^on toward thy right side, to the end of
his weapon, and strike from thy right side upwards at the outside of his left
arm, and ^n one motion strike quite through and Stringere him within for fear
that he should likewise hurt thee.

CHAP. VIII. Contains some lessons against the second Chapter precedent.
parereth thy blow downwards with a Secunde toward his left side, then
letting him not touch thy Rapier, but lif^ thy point toward thy left side over
his weapon, and strike him with a Quarte a^ the inside of his right arm.

parere thy blow again with the Secunde toward his left side downwards, then
let him not touch thy weapon but strike him at the inside of his right leg.

parere it upwards with ^ Quarte, then strike him at the inside o^ his right
arm.

CHAP. IX. An observation against the fourth preceden^ Chapter.
Quarte at his right breas^ within.

CHAP. X. Against the fifth Chapter.
Secunde, for to parere thy blow, then do not touch his weapon, but raise thy
point, and strike him with a Secunde or back blow, at the outside of his right
arm.

Secunde, then presently raise thy point and passere him with a Secunde over
his right arm.

CHAP. XI. Observations against the sixth Chapter precedent.
Quarte to put by thy blow, then let him not touch thy weapon but raise thy
point and strike him at the insid^ of his right arm.

Quarte, then lift thy point over hi^ weapon toward thy left side, and Passer^
him with a Secunde at the outside of hi^ weapon, at his right thigh.

CHAP. XII. How thou art to demean thy self against such guards as do
occur in Back-Sword play.
Secunde and a stretched arm, then make a strong back blow with the Secunde in
the outside of thine adversaries weapon; as soon as he strikes at thee
within, then stepping a little backwards with thy left leg strike him with a
Quarte at the inside of his right arm.

secunde at the outside of his weapon, and let the Prime or strongest part of
thy weapon slide along the Secunde or weakest part of his weapon toward his
point, and then strike with the secunde from thy left side at the inside of his
left ^rme.

Quarte and a stiff arm at the inside of his weapon, and with the Prime or
strongest part of thy weapon slide along thy adversaries Secunde or the weakest
part of his weapon, toward his point, and in one motion of thine arm strike
with a Quarte at thine adversaries elbow without.

CHAP. XIII. Contains some few offensive rules.
stringere thee without, and then draw thy blade at thee in a Secunde from his
weapon, as soon as he does follow thy weapon without, for to stringere thee,
then lift the point of thy Rapier toward thy right side over his weapon, and
strike him with a back blow at the outside of his right arm.

stringere thee within, then let thy weapon sink down into a low Tertz, if
he does follow thy weapon downwards for to stringere thee within, then before
he does touch* thy weapon within, lift thy point toward thy left side over his
weapon, and strike him with a Quarte at the inside of his right arm.

Quarte, as soon as he toward his left side will put it by, then lift thy
point toward thy left side over his weapon, and strike him with a Quarte at
the outside of his right arm.

parere it toward his left side with a Quarte, then turn thy hilt in over his
right arm at the outside of his weapon, and beating his arm downwards with
the pummell of thy weapon, cut him then through his face with a Quarte.

LIB. II.
PARS PRIOR. The first part of the second Book, showing how a Right handed man
is to play with a Left handed man at single Rapier.
CHAP. I. Contains the use of the four general guards against the left
handed.
Prime only at the outside of his Rapier, over his left arm.

Secunde is used by the right handed against the left handed without, over his
left arm in a long thrust, and in a Passade and in a Passade under his left
arm; and is likewise used within, in a long thrust, and in a Passade.

Tertz is only thrusted at the left handed, at the o^tside of his Rapier, over
his left arm.

Quarte is thrusted at the left handed man without, over his left arm,
likewise within in a long thrust and in a Volte, and then it may be called a
reverse, as having changed her property and nature.

CHAP. II. The use of the four guards against the left handed man is
particularized, how thou art to thrust with the Prime or Secunde at the outside
over his left arm.
stringere him at the inside of his Rapier, as soon as he caveres toward his
right side under thy Rapier, for to thrust thee within with a Secunde, then
just at coming of his blow thrust with a Tertz, or a Quarte at the outside of
his Rapier, over his left arm; if he then parereth thy thrust with a Quarte
toward his left side, then turn thy Tertz or Quarte into a Secunde or Prime,
and thrust him without over his left arm at his left breast.

How to passere a left ha^ded man with a Secunde, at the outside of his Rapier
under his left arm
stringere him at the inside of his Rapier, as soon as he will thrust at thee
within with a Secunde, the^ at the approaching of his thrust make at him at the
outside of his Rapier over his left arm, with a Tertz or Quarte, if he then
will put by thy thrust upwards with a Secunde, then let the point of thy Rapier
sink down into a Secunde under his left arm and pass behind him.

How thou art to use the Secunde within at thy left handed adversary.
Stringere thine adversary at the outside of his Rapier, when he cave^eth
toward his right side under thy Rapier, and will thrust thee without over thy
right arm, then thrust just at the coming of his thrust with a Secunde at the
inside of his Rapier close to the Secunde or weakest part of his weapon,
between his left arm and left breast*

How the Tertz or Quarte is to be used without, over the left handed man's arm.
Stringere thine adversary within, as soon as he does thrust at thee within
with a Secunde, then thrust with the Tertz or Quarte close to his Secunde or
weakest part of the Rapier at the outside of his weapon over his left arm at
his left breast, and when thou do thrust then go low with thy Hilt.

How to thrust the Quarte within at thy left handed adversary.
stringere thee at the inside of thy Rapier, and upon a sudden thrust at him
within with a Secunde close to the Secunde or weakest part of his Rapier, near
his point, if he does strive to parere thy Secunde with a Quarte toward his
right side, then change thy Secunde into a Quarte and Voltere him at the inside
of his weapon at his right breast: But if he does parere too far toward his
right side, that thou can not hit his breast, then let thy Quarte sink in
under his left arm and Voltere him with thy Quart at his left side.

CHAP. III. How thou art to put by those thrusts which thy left handed
adversary makes at thee without, over thy right arm.
STringere thine adversary at the outside of his Rapier, if then he does make
a thrust at the outside of thy Rapier over thy right arm, then parere it
toward thy right side with a Quarte, and at an instant make a long thrust with
a secunde close to his Rapier, between his left arm and his left breast.

parere his thrust with a Quarte toward thy right side, and instantly thrust
wsth a secunde at the outside of his left arm at his left side, and when thy
thrust is arrived, then clap thy left hand upon the outside of his Rapier, over
thy right arm, not catching hold of his Rapier, and putting it by with thy
left hand toward thy left side, turn his Rapier out of his hand and disarme
him.

secunde or weakest part of thy Rapier, so that thou art not able to Parere his
thrust, then cavere toward thy right side under his weapon, and battiering him
first at the outside of his weapon, thrust Quarte contratempo at the outside of
his Rapier over his left arm.

Secunde or the weakest part of thy Rapier, being not able to parere his
thrust, cavere toward thy right side, under his thrust, and cavering turn thy
point in a Secunde over his weapon toward thy left side, and let it sink
down at the inside of his Rapier, and Passere him at the inside of his weapon
at his left thigh.

Review the seventh and eighth Chapters of the first part of the first book.

CHAP. IV. How to put by those thrusts which thy le^t handed adversary makes at
thee at the inside of thy weapon.
Prime and strongest part of thy Rapier, then put by his thrust with a Secunde
toward thy left side downwards, and in one tempo or motion of thy wreast,
change thy Secunde into a Quarte, not stirring from his Rapier, and thrust with
a Quarte at the outside of his Rapier over his right arm.

battiering him first at the outside of his Rapier, thrust with a Quarte at the
outside of his weapon over his left arm, at his left breast.

Secunde or weakest part of thy Rapier, then cavere toward thy left side,
under his thrust, and first putting him by toward thy right side with a
Quarte, Passere him at his left breast, within.

Secunde aiming at thy right breast, then let thy point sink down into a
hanging Quarte, at the outside of his weapon, and thrust him at his left thigh.
Review the seventh and eighth Chapters of the first part of the first book.

CHAP. V. How thouart to demean thy self against several guards which thine
adversary might use.
Against the Secunde.
Secunde, with a stretched arm, and is open without, then stringere him
without, as soon as he does thrust at thee within with a secunde, then let
thy point sink down in a Quarte close to his Rapier without, and lifting up
thy hilt behind, thrust him with a Quarte under his Rapier, at his left side.

secunde with a stretched arm and is open without, then stringere him likewise
without, if he then does thrust at thee without, over thy right arm with a
secunde, then at the coming of his thrust, cavere toward thy right side under
his Rapier, and thrust Quarte contra-tempo at the outside of his weapon over
his left arm.

secunde be open within* stringere him within as soon as he does make a thrust
at thee within, then let thy point sink down into a secunde at the inside of
his Rapier, and passere him at his left thigh.

stringerest him within, and he does make at thee with a secunde, at the inside
of thy Rapier, at thy ^ight breast, step then with thy right leg toward thy
right side, and thrust him with a Quarte at the outside under his Rapier at his
navell, and thy hilt lift up something behind.

Against the middle Secunde.
secunde with a bended arm, so that the point of his Rapier looks quite
toward his right side out, then string^re him at the outside of his Rapier,
and stringering go about toward thy left side; thus thou do constrain him
to thrust at thee; as soon as his thrust approaches at the outside over thy
right arm, then put by his thrust toward thy right side with a Quarte, and
instantly changing thy Quarte into a secunde, thrust him at the inside of his
Rapier at his left breast.

secunde, as before, then stringere him likewise at the outside of his Rapier,
upon a sudden make a Finda at his face upwards with a Tertz, not stirring thy
whole arm, but only thy wrist; as soon as he lifts up his arm for to
defend his face with his Rapier, then let thy point sink down into a secunde
under his left arm, and pass behind him: But if he parereth thy finda with a
Quarte toward thy left side, then cavere in one motion toward thy left side
under his Rapier, and thrust him with a secunde at the inside of his Rapier, at
his right breast.

Against the Tertz.
Tertz with a bended arm, so that the point of his Rapier stands upright,
and he be open within, then make a finda at him within, as soon as he does
catch after thy finda with his Rapier toward his right side out, then lift the
point of thy Rapier toward thy right side over his Rapier, and thrust with a
Quarte at the outside of his Rapier over his left arm, at his left breast.

finda toward his right side, then let thy point sink in under his left arm,
and thrust him with a Quarte at his left side.

finda, then thrust home at the inside at his weapon with a secunde at his left
breast.

stringere him within thou must observe well that (if he lifts the point of
his Rapier toward his right side, at the inside over thy Rapier) thou
thrustest Quarte, the self same time his thrust approaches, at the outside of
his Rapier at his left breast.

Tertz with a stretched arm, so that the point of his Rapier be lineally
answerable to his left shoulder, then stringere him without, and when thou do
stringere him go about toward thy left side as it were in a circle, not
stirring* from his Rapier the mean while thou go about, then he will be
forced to thrust at thee, at the outside of thy Rapier over thy right arm,
then just when he is turning his point under thy Rapier for to thrust thee
without over thy right arm at thy right breast, bow thy body, and thrusting
him with a Secunde under his left arm pass behind him.

Stringerest him without, will perforce put by thy point with his Quarte
toward his left side, then yield to him by degrees, and letting thy point
sink down suddenly in a Secunde, passere him at the outside of his Rapier at
his left thigh.

stringere him without, upon a sudden battiere him at the outside of his
weapon, and thrust him with a Quarte at the outside of his Rapier, at his left
breast.

Tertz, with a stretched arm downwards, so that the hilt of his Rapier does
equallize his knee in height, then stringere him at the inside of his Rapier
with a hanging secunde, as soon as he does thrust at the outside of thy
Rapier, over thy right arm nigh thy hilt, then put his thrust by with a Quarte
toward thy right side, and thrust him with a Secunde at the inside of his
weapon, at his left shoulder.

Secunde into a Quarte thrust contra-tempo at the outside of his Rapier, over
his left arm at his left breast.

Tertz as before, then let the point of thy Rapier sink down into a hanging
Secunde, and direct thy point toward his hilt, as soon as he does thrust at
thee on either side, then thrust Quarte at the outside of his Rapier over his
left arm and at his left breast.

If thine adversary does hold his right hand behind his hilt for to put by thy
thrusts, what thou art then to do.
Secunde, as soon as he does catch with his righthand toward his right side
after thy Rapier, then lifting the point of thy Rapier toward thy right side
over his right hand, thrust him with a Secunde at the inside of his Rapier at
his left shoulder.

cavering toward thy right side under his right hand, thrust him with a
Secunde at the inside of his Rapier at his left shoulder.

Quarte at the outside of his Rapier, over his left arm, as soon as he with
his right hand toward his right side over his left arm does catch after thy
Rapier, then let the point of thy Rapier sink in under his right hand and
thrust him with a Quarte at the outside of his Rapier, over his left arm, ^t
his left breast.

Or if thou do thrust something low, and he does endeavor to put by thy
thrust with his right hand under his left arm, toward his left side out, then
lift thy point toward thy left side over his right hand, and thrust him with a
secunde at the inside of his Rapier at his left shoulder.

CHAP. VI. How thou shall elude thy left handed adversary his Passada.
stringere him without, as soon as he cavering toward his left side under thy
Rapier does thrust at the outside of thy Rapier over thy right arm, then lift
up thine arm of purpose that he may attempt a Passade, when he lets his point
sink down in a Secunde under thy right arm, for to Passere thee then let thy
point sink down into a Quarte at the outside of his Rapier, and thrust him
with a Quarte at his left thigh.

Passere thee by lifting up thy right arm, as soon as he lets his point sink
in, at the outside under thy right arm, then stepping back with thy right
leg behind thy left leg, let the hilt of thy Rapier sink down close to
the outside of his Rapier and stringere him, and at the same instant clap thy
left hand upon the outside of his Rapier (not catching hold of it) and thrust
with the Quarte over his left arm, at his left breast.

passere thee by the lifting up of thine arm, as soon as he lets his point
sink down in a Secunde under thy right arm, then turning thy body about upon
thy right leg Voltere him with a Quarte over his left arm.

CHAP. VII. How to escape the left handed man's Volte.
Secunde at the inside of his Rapier as soon as he will Voltere a Quarte over
thy right arm contra-tempo, hanging thy Secunde into a Quarte thrust him at
his left side.

Stringere thy left handed adversary without, if he then of his own accord not
invited by thee, does Voltere with a Quarte over thy right arm, then stepping
a little back with thy right leg behind thy left leg, let thy hilt sink
down at the inside of his Rapier, and instantly stepping forwards again with
thy right leg thrust him in at his back with a Tertz upwards, but hold thy hilt
low behind.

Stringere thy left handed adversary within, if he then will make a Volte at
thee with a Quarte at the inside of thy Rapier of his own accord, then let the
point of thy Rapier sink down into a Secunde at the inside of his Rapier, and
Passere him with a Secunde at the inside of his weapon at his left thigh.

Having thus done with thrusts I proceed to blows.

Here ends the first part of the second book, treating how a Right handed man
is to play at single Rapier against a Left handed.

LIB. II. PARS POSTERIOR The second part of the second Book showing how a
righthanded man is to play at single Sword with the left handed.
CHAP. I. If thy left handed adversary does strike at thy head without.
STringere thy left handed adverversary at the outside of his weapon, as soon
as he strikes at the outside of thy Rapier at thy head, then parere his blow
with a Quarte toward thy right side downwards, when thou have parered, at an
instant strike with a Quarte toward thy left side at the outside of his left
arm, or at his left cheek.

Prime of thy Rapier slide along thine adversaries without, toward his point,
and in one motion of thine arm strike with the Quarte under his weapon at the
outside of his left arm.

Secunde at the inside of his weapon at his left shoulder, which thrust if he
does parere toward his right side with a Quarte, then strike downwards with a
Secunde or back blow at his left leg within.

Quarte.

Secunde.

CHAP. II. If thy left handed adversary does strike at thy head within.
STingere thy left handed adversary within, as soon as he does strike at thee
within, then parere his blow with a Secunde downwards toward thy left side,
and in a moment strike with a Secunde or a back blow at the inside of his left
arm.

Quarte at the outside of his weapon, over his left arm, if he parereth that
thrust then strike downwards with a Quarte at his left leg without.

Quarte at the outside of his left arm.

Secunde or Quarte at the outside of his left arm.

CHAP. III. If thine adversary does strike at the outside of thy right arm.
Quart at the outside of his arm toward thy left side out.

Quarte at the outside of thy weapon at thy elbow, then let thy point sink
down into a Secunde, and Passere him at his left thigh, or when thou by
letting sink thy point downwards into a Secunde at the inside of his weapon
have parered his under blow, then immediately raising thy point, strike him
with a Secunde or back blow at the inside of his left arm.

CHAP. IV. If thine adversary would strike at the inside of thy right arm.
Quarte, if he then does strike with a Secunde at the inside of thy right
arm, seeing that, turn thy blow in the air, and go with a stretched arm
toward thy right side out, then he does miss thine arm, as soon as his
blow is passed under thy right arm, at an instant strike with a Quarte toward
thy left side at the outside over his weapon, at his left arm.

Secunde at the inside of thy right arm, then letting thy point sink down
into a Quarte, when his blow approaches, at the outside of his weapon, and
thrust him with a Quarte at his left thigh.

Or let thy point sink down into a Quarte at the coming of his blow toward
the inside of thy right arm from under up, and parere his under blow, upon a
sudden raise thy point and strike him with a Quarte at the outside of his
left arm, or at his left cheek.

CHAP. V. If thine adversary does strike at thy right leg without.
Quarte then at the approaching of his blow, let thy point sink down into a
secunde at the the inside of his weapon and parere his blow, as soon as thou
have parered, strike with a secunde or a back blow (first raising thy point) at
the inside of his left arm, or right cheek.

secunde or back blow at the inside of his left arm, or else at his face.

CHAP. VI. How to Parere those blows that thy left handed adversary makes at
thy right leg within.
Secunde at the inside of thy right leg, then let the point of thy weapon
sink down into a Quarte and parere it, presently raise thy point again and
strike him with a Quarte at the outside of his left arm.

parered his blow with a Quarte then changing thy Quarte instantly into a
Secunde, close to the outside of his weapon, strike him with a Secunde or a
back blow at the inside of his left leg.

contra-tempo or at one time with him with a Quarte at the outside of his left
arm, or else at his left cheek.

An advertisement to the Reader concerning the left handed.
There is no very great difficulty for a right handed man to play against a
left handed at Rapier or at back Sword, when thou caust play against a right
handed, and do but observe those rules which I have set down at large in the
first book of this treatise, only note these following axioms.

Quarte at the inside of his Rapier, this Quarte thou must use against the left
handed without over his left arm.

Secunde or a Tertz, even so thou must thrust the left handed man at the inside
of his Rapier with a Secunde only, not with a Tertz, because the Tertz cannot
keep off a blow in this case but you will both be wounded.

parere, like those thy right handed adversary makes at thee without.

parere like those thy right handed adversary makes at thee within.

And thus I have finished the whole treatise concerning the true and genuine
way of Fencing, which in these our deplorable days is most highly necessary.
It were to be wished for that a Saturn^ne and golden age might again return,
when arms should cease and the use of them be slackned, and we might not have
reason to bewail and lament our cloudy times with the saying of that learned
and praise worthy Heathen:

Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem Vitiosiorem.
That this Page might not be empty, I thought it not amiss to set down these
following verses of that divine Boethius.

Libri IV. Metrum 15. Quid tautos juvat motus exitare?
Et propria fatum sollicitare manum
Si mortem petitis propinquat ipsa
Sponte sua, volucres nec remoratur equos
Quos Serpens, Leo, Tigris, Vrsus, Aper
Dente petunt ijdemse tamen e^se petunt,
An distant quia, dissidentque mores,
Iujustas acies and fera bella m^v^nt,
Alteriusque volunt perire telis?
Non est justa satis saevitie ratio*
Vis aptam meritis vicem refer?
Dilige jure bonos, and miseresae malis.
FINIS

