BEAVTIFVLL Blossoms, gathered by John Bishop, from the best trees of all
kinds, Divine, Philosophical, Astronomicall, Cosmographical, historical, and
Humane, that are growing in Greece, Latium, and Arabia, and some also in vulgar
orchards, as well from those that in ancient time were grafted, as also from
them which have with skilful head and hand been of late years, yea, and in
our days planted: to the unspeakable, both pleasure and profit of all such as
will vouchsafe to use them.

The first Tome.

Jmprinted at London for Henry Cockyn, dwelling in Fletestreate at the sign
of the Elephant, a little above the Conduit.

ANNO. 1577.

The Author unto his Book: borrowed and translated out of Martial his
Epigrammes.
O Blisselesse Book in Powles Church yard
Thou scorned craves to dwell,
When far from frumpe thou may remain,
In empty deske full well.
The coy dame Englands squemishnesse
(Ah fool) thou know not, thou:
Believe me, Brutus brauing brood
Are too too fine nosde now:
More scornful quippes, and Momish mockes
In no place may one dout,
The old, the young, yea, children too,
Can finely gibe and flout.
When thou shall look for to be praisd,
And to be made much of,
Disdainefull hand will toss thee high,
And cast away with scoff.
But that thy masters dashing blots
Thou may not bide so often,
Nor that the painful pen thy faults
May note, when need is thought:
Thou wanton do unwisely wish
Abroad in world to fly:
GOD speed thee well: but safer thou
At home with me might lie.
The Author unto the Reader.
I Being infected with the common contagion of our time, which makes us
small smatterers in good letters, like unto Aesopes Ape, ambitiously to bring
abroad, and show unto all men the deformed brood of our witless brains:
have been pricked forth to publishe unto the world, my unskillful conceits:
and being obscure to seek fame by shame, or to use Horace his words,
Stultitia caelum petere. This ill shaped chaungling of mine have I, following
the manner of these dainty days, who do delight to dalley with the letter,
named Bishops Blossoms: because it does wholly consist of many and diverse
matters collected out of many and sundry sorts of authors: as if a man
should in the spring time gather together beautiful blossoms from all kinds
of trees. To declare the fruit of these flowers it shall not be needful in
this place: seeing that the page following does show the particular contents
of every Chapter: but this only I will say: that besides a great number of
other things, worthy both the reading, and also the remembering: thou shall
find briefly, and truly reported all the notable acts, ends and variable
chances of almost all the famous Princes that have reigned thoroughout the
world until this day.

But if perhaps the first Chapter (wherein I have leaped above my latchet)
may seem unto some delicate ears for the subtilitie of the matter, and
specially it being so stammered out by me, to be somewhat obscure, and not for
their pleasant humor: let them pass it over, and read the rest: which are
all pleasant, and as plain as Dunstable way: unless peradventure in some
place where that through the Printers oversight, yea, or mine own negligence,
a word is either omitted, superfluously added, misplaced, false named, or ill
pointed: the which J am most humbly to desire thee of humane courtesy,
either by thine own wisdom to correct: or else vouchsafe to take the pains
to resort unto the Table of errata or escapes: where I hope thou shall find
thy self fully satisfied. Thus eftsoons craving thy patience in bearing with
mine, and also the Printers imperfections: I remit thee unto the reading of the
work: the which I do heartily pray may work in thee the wished effect, so
that it may redound both unto thine unspeakable pleasure and profit: and also
the surpassing praise of the peerless creator: and then shall J be encouraged
to proceed: and fully to match in matter the ample and glorious title.

Bishops Blossoms.
The first Chapter. Of the essence, vnchaungeablenesse, singleness, and
almightinesse of God.
AS Valerius Maximus, following the old order of the ancient Orators, who
always beegan their orations with the invocation of God, first entreats of
Almighty Jove in his worthy work of manifold matter: so likewise I (that am
borne now the day star is risen, whereby we do more perfectly see that al
good gifts come from above, and do more surely acknowledge that apt likening
of God by the divine Platonistes unto the center, and all creatures unto the
circle: signifying thereby, that as from the center or middle prick, all lines
do proceed into the circle and from it return unto the center again, so also
from God all good things come unto his creatures, and from them redound back
unto his honor and glory) will begin my fruitelesse fancies with a
fruitful discourse of God, not to define his essence the which is
incomprehensible, but only to utter such things of his being, greatness,
singleness, vnchaungeablenesse, and almightinesse, as it has pleased his
unspeakable goodness to reveal unto us, unskillful men by his sacred
scriptures, and holy saints. When that Symonides, who was not only a divine
Poet, Symonides his wise answer.
but also a learned and wise philosopher was demanded of king Hiero to tell him
what, and what manner of thing god was, he wisely requested of the courteous
King a days respite to meditate on that weighty matter: but the next day
being eftsoons asked, desired of the king two days more to consider upon it:
yea and being often after urged to speak his opinion, still requested to have
the number of his days doubled: whereat Hiero wondering, demanded of him the
cause of his so doing, who wisely and truly answered him: because (said he)
the longer. I do muse thereof, ever the more obscure the thing seemed to be.
Plato his opinion of God.
Wherefore most truly said divine Plato, that God is unspeakable, and
vnnameable, (if I may use that term:) and woorthily did the Persians break
down all the images of God in Greece, The Persians brake down all Images of
God.
because ye nothing does resemble his substance, and is like unto it, neither
do we know any thing, or can we by imagination, devise, or by understanding
conceive. Wherefore although that we do know by his works that there is a
God: yet do we not better understand his essence or being by them, What words
do best declare Gods essence.
then by those terms by the which we do flatly deny we do understand it.
We call him the creator, the King, the governor, the Father, the beginning,
the end, eternal, blessed, almighty, the chiefest, all in all, and by a
thousand other names, invented by the Ethnicke and christian divines: yet by
none of these words shall we understand that he is so fully showed, and
declared, as by those terms that do bewray our ignorance: as when we do call
him incomprehensible, immeasurable, infinite, for by these words we do not
only acknowledge him to be, but also to be over, and above more then we can
conceive: and that he who is all, above all, and beside all, is only known of
him self. God is no essence. de Diui. No.
Wherefore does Dionysius justly deny that he is an essence or being: but above
al essences and beeings that our mind can see, our reason comprehend, In one
sense God is most properly an essence. Hier. ad Marcel. Aug. super Joan.
tract. 99.
or our speech express: and therefore to be called superessentiall.

And moreover he affirms that these words of privation, and negation, as
uncreated, unutterable, incomprehensible, and such like, are the most proper
speches to be used of God. But Hierome, Augustine, and other holy Fathers,
otherwise considering of this word essence, or being: do think that only
God is properly an essence or being, because he is everlastingly, neither can
it be properly said of him, as touching his own nature, that he was, or shall be,
but always is, although that the weakness of our understanding has wrested
forth such manners of speech: as also that he does predestinate, foreknowe,
and foresee: whereas in very deed he does absolutely decree, know, and see, as
he unto who^ all things past and to come are present, although that our gross
wits must measure them by distinctions of times. Why bodily limbs and
affectes are attributed unto God.
As also for the better apprehension of our dull understanding, that can
conceive nothing, but by the senses: are there attributed unto God in the
sacred scriptures, hand, arm, foot, and other bodily limbs (of all whom he
being a spirit has none) as also affects of the mind, anger, hatred,
jealousy, love, repentance, sorrow, and such like, from whom he is far:
who is (as he says himself) God, and is not changed, but always remains
one in all points: God only unchangeable.
the which does happen unto no other: or certes if the angels do now inioye
this excellency in heaven, they have it not of nature, but of the
superaboundant grace and gift of God. Singular also is the singlenes of his
essence, The singleness of Gods essence. August. de tri. lib. 6.
the which says Augustine may easily be spoken and believed, but not seen
but by a pure heart. For when we do say that God is, that God is good, that he
is great, he is wise, he is merciful, he is almighty, and whatsoever else is
spoken of that single manifoldenesse, or manifold singleness of God: the
words are not to be taken in such sense, No quality in God.
as when they are spoken of any Creatures, yea and the singlest creature: the
soul. For in the soul it is one thing to be, an other thing to be good, an
other to be wise, an other to be learned, and so of other qualities: and, to
be, does signify the essence of the soul, but the other words, qualities
happening unto the essence, and such as may be away, and yet the soul still a
soul. But so must we not understand these words and things in God: for in
him his being is the self same thing that his goodness, or his greatness is,
or whatsoever else is truly spoken of him. And again his greatness, and his
goodness are the very same thing that his essence is, and in him no quality:
for there is nothing in him, which is not himself, and his very essence and
substance: neither was any one thing that is in him, there before an other:
but all there at once everlastingly: neither can any one be away, or be
sundered one from another, without the corruption of his essence. We do speak
improperly of God by adjectives. Scal. de subti. ex^r. 365.
And here again has our imperfect speech made us to speak improperly of God
by adjectives denominatiuely: as when we say God is merciful, is holy, is
immortal, is good: for if that any thing could be spoken of him
denominatiuely, then were the abstracte, or substantive, from whence it is
derived, an other thing from the adjective, and before it: as for example:
mercy is another thing from merciful, and before it, as the founteine from
whence merciful does proceed: wherefore in very deed God is not merciful,
but mercy: not holy, but holiness: not immortal, but immortality: not good,
God is comprehended in none of the predicamentes. August. de Trinit. lib. 5.
but goodness it self: the which things do dwell fully in him. But so
single is Gods essence, yt Augustine does truly think that he can not be put
aptly into any of the predicamentes of the Logicians. For he cannot be a
substance, because he does not subsist unto any thing: neither is there any
thing abiding in him as in a subject. For as I said before there is nothing in
him, that is not himself: so also we must believe, that God is great with out
quantity, good without quality, president without site, containing all things
without habit, every where wholly without being enclosed in any place, eternal
with out time, making and doing all things without labor, or changing of
himself or his state, and suffering nothing at all. All things also can he do
in heaven, earth, and hell. The omnipotency of God and wherein it does consist.
Neither does it any thing abridge his almightinesse, that he cannot go,
speak, or do any other such things as are done by bodily instruments. For
although he being a spirit can not do them himself, yet are they within his
power: for he can do them in his creatures, and does make man to go and
speak: and also works al those actions in all living things, which do them by
his power. August lib 15. de Trinitate.
Neither because he cannot sin nor do ill, is he the less Almighty,
because they be no points and parts of power, but of infirmity and weakness.
For if he could do them, he were not omnipotent: therefore that he cannot do
ill, August. lib. 1. de symbolo.
it is not to be imputed unto impotencie, but unto power. The like also may be
said of that he cannot die, he cannot be wretched, he cannot be deceived, he
cannot be overcome: for if he were subject unto these defects: he were not
Almighty. And also hereby is he proved to be Almighty: because that
although those imperfections and wantes cannot approach unto him, yet can he
work them in other. For he can make man to die, be wretched, be deceived and
overcome. Wherefore herein does appear the omnipotency of God, that he does
all things that he will have don, neither does he suffer any thing at all. For
nothing is there which is able to infer any corruption unto him, or to make
him suffer ought, neither is any thing able to bring any impediment or let
unto his doings: but all things can he do without any impeachment, unless it
be those things, by doing of which either his dignity should be diminished,
or some thing derogated from his excellency. Wherefore is he truly
omnipotent, who is able to do all things, the doing of whom is power. Then
seeing that such is the surpassing excellency of God above all his creatures,
that none of them cannot only not approach any thing near unto the
singularity of his essence, no nor by wit and wisdom in any wise conceive
the worthiness thereof: how can we wonder enough at the madness of those
men, yt have made to themselves Gods of creatures, or that which is more
frantic, have made themselves to be adored of other, for Gods?

The second Chapter, Of the wonderful pride of Psapho, Menecrates, Alexander,
Co^modus, Caligula, Domitian, and Cosdras, who would be honored for Gods. Of a
witty decree of the Lacedaemonians touching Alexanders Godhead. How Philippe of
Macedonie dolted Menecrates and gave one in charge daily to put him in mind
that he was a man. Of the free speech of a botcher unto Caligula, and a worthy
saying of Antigonus
Cap. 10.
MOst truly is it written in Ecclesiasticus that pride is the beginning of all
sin, Com in Psalm. 7
and in Augustine the last sin that the soul does master and over come.
Lib. 2. de Still. laud.
This only of all other (that I may use Claudians words) is the ingrate
companion of virtues: this only vice does spring and is bredde of virtues: ye
and of the killing and destroying of all other, this often is ingendered. How
many hunt and seek for glory by obstinate refusing thereof? have not many
been more proud of the making of them selves poor, then they were before of
their great riches? is the number of them trow you small, that be proud of
their lowliness? do not some by conquering of all other sins, be conquered
by this, and perish and be slain by the enemy whom they ouerthrewe and trod
upon? this fault only, or certes most, ought the perfect men to fear and take
heed of, wisely warns Augustine. Did not the devil, who for the subtlety of
his nature, sharp judgment, long experience in deceiving, best knowing what
would soonest deceive, keep this temptation as a trusty Trystram for the last,
when he tempted Christ our Lord and God? And what other train I pray you made
the subtle serpent, when he tempted our first Parent Eve, but this? bearing
the woman in hand, that she and her husband should be made like God? Then if
that our first parents in that most free state of theirs, when as no
sensuality moved them, nor any contagion of their corrupt and mortal bodies
whereunto the soul is surely tied, annoyed and infected them, coueted the type
of the glory of the Godhead, who will not believe but that the like proud and
mad attempt might have been given by some wicked men, whom the devil, the
flesh and the world did vehemently drive forward, but nothing stay and hold
back? what small smatterer in humane letters has not read of Psapho a Lybian,
Of Psapho.
who being ouermuche adorned of bountiful nature, could not keep himself
within his owneskinne, as Martial wittily warns, the greatness or rather
naughtiness of his hautie heart swelled so big: but by as witty, as wicked
devise, got him self to be taken and worshipped for a God: for he catching
birds, which were apt to learn man's speech, diligently but secretly taught
them to speak distinctly and plainly the great God Psapho. And when he saw yt
these prattling birds had perfectly learned their lesson, and would ever be
harping on it, he let them fly abroad into the wooddes.

But they, as he subtily coniectured, flue all abouts, still singing this song,
The great God Psapho, which the inhabitauntes thereaboutes hearing, being
altogether ignorant of that crafty fetch, honored Psapho for a God: thinking
that they could not without great note of impiety, and obstinacy, deny him
to be a God: whom the unreasonable birds did to their instruction by
supernatural and divine speech (as they thought) acknowledge and profess to
be a great God.

Moreover I read it recorded in Athenaeus, a grave Author, and also in Aelianus
and other, that one Menecrates born at Syracuse in Sicyle, a famous Physician,
called himself Jupiter the great Almighitie: proudly and foolishly boasting
that he was unto men the cause of life, by reason of his great skill in
Physic. And his usage was to force them whom he took in hand to heal of the
falling sickness, to promise and swear unto him, that when they were perfectly
cured, they would be his bondmen, and follow him. Of them Nicostratus being
adorned like Hercules, was called Hercules. Nicogoras who was the tyranne of
his country, wearing a soldiers mantell, and wings, and bearing a Caducaeus
in his hand, such a rod as the Poets do feign Mercury to bear, he named
Mercury. Astycreon was Apollo, and an other of his patie^ts apparelled like
unto Aesculapius waited on this mad Menecrates, who being Jupiter himself,
the father of Gods and men, went about with his bands of Gods in his robe of
purple, a crown of gold on his head, and a Scepter in his hand. This madd mate
sending a letter unto Philip king of Macenie wrote unto him thus. Thou art King
of Macedonie, but I of the art of healing: thou whenever thou listest can
kill men, but I can save men that be sick, ye and if they will obey me keep
them in health and lusty until they be old: thou go guarded with Macedons,
but I with all the men in the world, or that shall be hereafter: for I Jupiter do
give them life: Philip answearing his letter, used this superscription, or
after their manner, this salutation.

Philip wishes unto Menecrates, health and his right wits. The very like wrote
also Menecrates unto Archidamus, king of Lacaedemonia, that he had used unto
Philip: and unto whom so ever he wrote, he never absteined from the name of
Jupiter. On a time when Philip had invited him with all his crew of Gods to a
feast, he placed them at a bed, which was built and set on a great height, and
very magnificently decked, and placed beside it a table whereon stood an
altar, and the first fruits of all fruits of the earth, and when meat was
brought, and served unto the other guests, the children sacrificed with
perfumes unto Menecrates, and his Gods waiters, but gave them never a morsel
of meat: (for Gods need no earthly food, to nourishe their heavenly bodies.)
At the last, Jupiter being laughed almost out of his coat, with those which
followed him, ran away out from the feast, being dolted more like a dog, then
worshipped as a God by that wise king, who after the great overthrow that he
gave the Athenians, and their confederates at Cheronea, A worthy order taken by
Philip.
where he quite euerted the liberty of all Greece, perceiving him self to
grow into pride and insolency by that happy success, prepared a
preservative, to keep him from swelling so great, that he should break the
bands of reason and humanity. Wherefore he gave unto one of his servant
this office and charge, that every morning he should come into his chamber, and
call out unto him aloud: Philip, remember thou art a man, and this was ever
after so constantly kept by him, that he would not once go abroad him self, or
suffer any man to be admitted unto his speech, but on that day that the boy had
before thrice thundered out unto him, Philippe anthropos ei, Philip thou art a
man. In the very same place also tells Athenaeus of one Themison, Of horsemen.
darling and minion unto king Antiochus, who was proclaimed at public
assemblies by the crier, Hercules: and also all the inhabitants for fear of
the king, sacrificed unto him by the name of Themison Hercules, who was also
present, if any of the noble men sacrificed, and lay upon a bed of state, Of
Commodas.
clothed in a Lions case. He bare also a Scythian bow, and a clubbe: so that
it is no marvel, if that in many years after, Commodus would be called
Hercules, and son unto Jupiter, and not of good Marcus Commodus, seeing that
he being the Emperor of Rome, did more resemble Hercules both in large Empire,
and strength of body, as he that would strike thorough with a dart an
Eliphant, or the horn of an Orix, and also in killing and destroying of Lions
and monsters. For says Dion, he alone with his own hand slew upon the
Amphitheatre in one day, five Hippotami, or water horses, two Eliphants, one
Rhinocerotes, and a Camelion Pardis, whereunto Capitolinus adds one hundred
bears, and one hundred Lions at so many shootes. He would come to the
Amphitheatre in a robe of purple and gold, and a mantel of the same after the
Greek cut (for Hercules was a Greek) with a crown of gold glystering with
precious stones of India. These kinds of ornaments were strange unto the
Romans at those days, also the Caduceus and a Lions case, and a club were
borne before him, whether soever he went: but on the Theater, whether he were
present or absent, they were placed on a seat of gold. In the habit of
Mercury, did he oftentimes enter the theater, and casting off all his other
apparel, would go unto the murdering of wild beasts, striped into his coat,
and barefooted. He refusing says Capitolinus the habit of the Roman
Princes, would come abroad into the city, wrapped in a Lions case, and a club
in his hand, and many times (not without contempt and derision) would he offer
him self to be seen in women's apparel, that he might in all naughty and
indecent points, imitate him whom he would be taken to be. He was publicly
sacrificed unto, and a great number of statuies were in his honor set up in
the habit of Hercules: and a decree was made, that the time wherein he
reigned, should be called the golden world, and that it should be so recorded
and enrolled in all monuments. He was called the golden Hercules. He caused the
head of Colossus to be cut off, and an other of his own visage to be set
upon it, putting a club in his hand, and a Lion of brass at his feet, that
it might be like unto Hercules. Neither was he contented in those ridiculous
toys to follow Hercules, but that he most cruelly against all humanity,
gathered together into one place, all such as in that mighty city (and which
Galene called an abridgement of the whole world) were lame in feet, or
legs: and doubling and folding up their legs unto their knees, as though
they had had the nether parts of serpents (for so the Poets do feign of the
Giants) and giving them sponges, which they should throw at him in stead of
stones, he snatched them, and struck the brains out of their heads with a
clubbe, rather as a butcher does calves, then Hercules did the Giants. But let
us pass Commodus, whom Dion thinks to be but a simple witted man. Could the
diligent trayning, and wise instructions of that famous Philosopher Aristotle
restrain his scholar Alexander the great, Of Alexander.
within the limits of human nature, but that he being publicly pampered by
fortune, like an horse over frankly fed, brake all bands of reason, not
thinking it honor enough, for him to be the chiefest man and monarche of the
earth, but would surmount human nature, and be a God? who would think that
the most skillful man in the nature of things, which ever nature brought
forth, could not teach his scholar to know his own nature? He took foul
scorn to be called the son of Philip, the most renouned king of the world,
but would needs be son unto Jupiter Hammonius, to the great grief of his
mother, who used often to complain that her son would never cease, to make
her envied and hated of Juno, as her husband Jupiter his harlot. Athenaeus
writes by the authority of Ephippus, that he used to wear sacred robes at
supper, sometime of purple, rounded and horned like unto Jupiter Hammonius,
other times like unto Pallas, which he carried in his chariot, an other while
like Mercury, his Petasus on his head, and his Caduceus in his hand: and
oftentimes, in a Lions case, with a clubbe like unto Hercules. He would be
sacrificed unto with myrrh, and other costly odours. He was minded, says
Strabo, if he had not been prevented by death, to have invaded Arabia, by
making a ditche of.xxx. furlongs broad, derived out of Euphrates, because as
he pretended, they only of al nations, had sent no ambassadors unto him: but
the very cause indeed was, for that he had heard that the Arabians only
worshipped only two Gods, yt is, Jupiter and Bacchus, who give the principal
things which do appertain to man's life, then he thought that if he should
subdue them, and afterward suffer them to enjoy their ancient liberties, that
then they would make him their third God. Which report of Strabo to be true,
his ridiculous writing unto all the cities of Greece, to be ordained a God by
public decree, does probably prove: foolishly looking to obtain immortality
of them, which were mortal them selves: and that by the statutes of men, which
was not imparted by nature. But when as concerning this matter, some decreed
one thing, some an other, the Lacedaemonians made this decree: A witty decree
of the Lacedaemonians.
seeing that Alexander will needs be a GOD, let him be a God: in few words
(as their manner was,) wittily reproving and covertly scoffing at his doltishe
pride. How much greater would he have been, if that he had not so hastily
coueted to be so great, and would not rather have given ear and have been
ruled by a pelting Poet of Argos, Hagis, and Clio, a servile Sicylian, and the
drudges and slaves of those countries, whom he had subdued: who to feed his
humor, were not ashamed openly to say, that he was a God far surmounting
Hercules, Bacchus, Castor, and Pollux: whom the vain Greeks accounted their
great Gods, and being set on by him did move the Lords of Macedonie, and
Greece, to acknowledge him for a God: whom they said Clio perfectly already
by his acts to be one. Then his wise, faithful, and loving schoolefelowe
Calisthenes and his Nobles and kinsmenne, and namely Antigonus, A worthy
saying of Antigonus.
who could have told him, as he did afterward his own son, when he used
himself toward his subjects somewhat proudly, and violently, that the state
of a King was nothing else but a glorious bondage, and slavery.

The contempt, hatred, unhappy end, and infamy, which this ambition of godly
honor bred in Alexander, could not happily make other take warning of
attempting the like. For Caius Caligula the Roman Emperor, one borne (says
Seneca) to show what supreme naughtiness is able to do, being placed in the
supreme place, Of Caligula.
did far surmounte, and go beyond all president of Alexander. For he, that I
may use Dions words, would be accounted higher then the top of mankind and
to have carnal copulation with the Moon, whom says Suetonius he used, when
she shined bright and was at the full, foolishly to inuit to come down and
lie with him: and to have been crowned by the Gods victory. He fained that
he was Jupiter, and therefore he professed that he had fleshly dealt whereas
with many other women besides his wives, then also with his own sisters. He
oftentimes became Juno, Diana, and Venus, always changing with his name his
habit and apparel. Whereby it happened, that sometime he was seen in a
woman's apparel holding a cup and a Thyrsus, or Bacchanall Iauelin, at other
times clothed manlike in a Lions case with a clubbe, now he had a bearde anon
after he was beardlesse, otherwhile he bare a threefolde mace like Neptune,
the^ he would vambrish lightning as he had been Jupiter, sometime he resembled
Minerua the virgin warrier in glistering armor, shaking his spear,
incontinently after was he transformed into a nice woman. Finally in the
fashion of his apparel, and the garments that were partly put on him, and
partly cast about him, was he wonderfully changed and altered, coveting to
seem any thing rather then a man.

On a time it happened that one Gallus seeing him sitting in judgment upon an
high throne, disguised like unto Jupiter, The free speech of a Botcher.
began to laugh at him. Then Caligula spying him to laughe called Gallus unto
him, and asked the fellow, what he thought him to be: Gallus answered readily
and truly, a notable great fool: and he escaped scotfree because he was a
botcher, but one letter of that sentence should have cost a Senator his life
and lands.

There flattered him those that were in greatest estimation, among whom was
also L. Vitellius, a man of great wisdom and valiauncie, and very famous,
specially for the government of Syria. For among other noble acts, he forced
Artabanus the king of the Parthians for fear to sacrifice unto the statuies of
Augustus and Caligula, and to desire peace with conditions very honorable for
the Romans: giving his children in hostage for the perfourmance of them. This
Vitellius being sent for by Caligula to be murdered (for his good service and
glorious acts were the cause of his danger, The impudent flattery of
Vitellius.
envy breeding hatred, and fear death) escaped death by a means worse then
ten thousand deaths: for he apparelling him self far more basely then
his honor and glory required, and falling down flat at Caligula his feet
sheading abundant tears, cokesing him with many divine honors, and vowing if
that he did escape in saftie that he would sacrifice unto him, as the only
author of his salvation: did so mollify the man, and so appease his wrath,
that he not only obtained pardon, but was taken into the number of his most
entire friends.

On a time Caligula affirmed that he had carnally dealt with the Moon,
Vitellius his witty answer.
and would know of Vitellius whither that he did not see him doing it with
the Goddess: then Vitellius as one astonished, casting down his head softely
and trembling said: my sovereign it is granted only unto you Gods, to see
one another. But to return unto Caius, he being carried further into folly,
built up a Temple unto him self, and proper unto his own Godhead, wherein was
set up his statuie of gold, which was every day decked with such garments,
as he ware him self. He had made him self a mansion in the Capitol, that he
might, as he would say him self, be conversant with Jupiter, but afterward
thinking it to be against his divine majesty in dwelling with Jupiter to
have the lower place, chafing with Jupiter that he had gotten before him the
Capitol, in great have with all speed set up a Temple to him self in the
Palace: and the Temple of Castor and Pollux which stood in the Roman Forum,
being divided into two parts: he built a way or entry into the Palace
between the two Images of Castor and Pollux, saying, that the two sons of
Jupiter and Leda should be his porters. Of the which matter writes Suetonius.
She would talk as it were in secret with Jupiter, which was set up in the
Capitol, the Romans chief God, sometimes he whispered, and at other times he
listened, as though Jupiter had spoken unto him, and other while would he
speak aloud, not without bitter chidings: for often those words of his were
heard, threatening Jupiter, with a piece of an ancient Greek verse, that he
would send him thence unto the land of the Greeks: until at the length he
being won by entreaty, as he said him self, was invited by Jupiter to dwell
with him, and made a bridge above the Temple of Augustus which joined the
palace unto the Capitol. He chose to be his priests his wife Cesoina, and his
uncle Claudius, and other of the richest and best of the city, every man
making great suite for it, and out bidding one another in money. He took says
Dron of every one of them which were admitted unto the office, Centies
sestertium that is of our money. 75000. l. He also was his own Priest, and
choose to his college or fellow in office his horse, a meet match.

Every day were supplications and vows made unto him and sacrifices of all
kinds of delicate birds, of great price, as Phinocopteri, pecockes,
bustardes, Turkey cocks, and other strange birds. He also had an engine,
wherewithal he would thunder against thunder, and lighten against lightening,
and as often as any lightening fell down he would hurl up a stone, ever
adding that verse in Homer: kill me or I will thee. Neither could Italy
contain his pride, but that it stretched throughout all the provinces of the
Roman Empire, ye and Petronius the governor of Syria was commanded to go to
Jerusalem with a power and to set up his statuies under the name of Iouis
Maximi in the inviolable and holy temple of God almighty: and unless that the
Jews would receive them, that he should put unto the sword those that would
speak against them, and take prisoners all the rest of the multitude. The
constant piety of the Jews.
But when that the Jews did wholly with one consent constantly refuse to admit
the^ against Gods laws, and offered unasked the throtes of themselves, of
their wives, and children to the fatal blade, rather then to suffer such
abomination to be brought in to defile their Temple: Petronius moved with
their constancy, stayed the execution of the Emperors commandment for that
present time, writing unto him immediately with what power he had entered Jury,
and what all the whole nation had suppliantly desired of his majesty, which
if he would deny, he wild him to understand, that with the people the whole
Province must be utterly destroyed, for they did obstinately keep their
country laws, and vehemently refuse his new injunctions.

To these letters Caius all to chafed answered very immoderately, and
threatening him death for the slack executing of his commandment. But before
these letters were delivered unto Petronius, more ioyefull news were brought,
Caligula his great hatred unto mankind
that Caligula was made out of the way, to the incredible joy of all mankind,
whom he hated so deadly, that he had been often heard to bewail his ill hap,
that in all his reign there had chanced no notable pestilence, famine, rauin
of water, earthquake, nor any great bloody battle, whereby many men might
perish: and wished that all the people of Rome had but one head, that he might
have stricken it off at one blow: it had been ill with mankind, if that this
Phaeton of the world, as his uncle Tiberius did use to call him, had been
immortal, who in three years and six months (for so long he reigned) had
near hand utterly destroyed it. Moreover I read in Suetonius, Of Domitian.
that Domitian the Emperor drawing a form of letters, which his agents
should use, began thus: Our Lord and God does command it so to be done.
Whereby it was decreed afterward, that he should not be called otherwise by
any man either in writing or speech.

It is is also left to memory, that about the year of our Lord 620. Cosdras
the mighty King of the Persians, after that he had won al Syria, with
Jerusalem, and all the South part of Asia with Egypt, and all Africa, would
needs be adored for a God, and divine honors with sacrifices done unto him
through out all his large dominions. But perhaps some man will say, what
marvel was it for great monarchs among the heathen to think themselves to be
Gods, if that you do consider their absurdity and fond usage in constituting
of Gods: the original and causes whereof I do think good to touch.

The third Chapter. Whereof the false Gods had their first ground, and the
causes that moved diverse countries to worship many men after death for Gods,
and also some while they lived: as Demetrius, Julius Caesar, Pycta, Lysander,
Simon Magus and Apollonius: and of the extreme madness of the Egyptians in
choosing of their Gods, of the impudent flattery of the ambassadors of Palermo
unto Martine the fourth, and of the people to Herodes Agrippa, and the present
punishment of God for the accepting thereof. Of the wonderful reverence that
the Persians gave unto their Kings: and of the rare love that the Galls,
Arabians, and Aethiopians bare unto their Princes: two worthy sayings of
Antigonus and Canute.
AFter that the ungracious child Chara was abdicated and put away by his father
without any instructions given him touching the worshippinge of the true God,
Lact. de falls. relig. The Original of worshipping of false Gods.
the outcast and his progeny marueilously increased, (as our common proverb
is, an ill weed grows fast) and they deduced many colonies into diverse parts
of the world, and the ignorance of the proving of the true God, which was in
the first parent, daily growing greater and greater in his posterity. You
seeing as Cicero says in his book of the nature of the Gods, it is naturally
ingraffed in man to acknowledge a God, and that no people or nation is so rude
and barbarous, that does not profess a God, they being utterly ignorant of
the true God, thought those things which they saw to excel other, and by
whom they received most commodities to be Gods: whereof arose the worshipping
of the Sun, the Moon, Stars, and such other things, and also the making
of the Gods, when they were dead, The first cause why the Gentiles did make men
Gods.
who in their lives had invented or done any notable things to the use and
profit of mankind. And hereby it came to pass, that some for the great
celebrity of their names, were as it were generally received of all nations, as
Hercules, Bacchus, Castor, and Pollux: Lact. de falls. reli 1. cap. 15.
and other were worshipped but in particular countries, of whom only they had
well deserved, as Isis in Egypt, Iuba in Mauritania, Cabyrus in Macedonia,
Vracius among the Carthaginians, Fanus in Latium, Romulus, or after his
deification Quirinus at Rome: and with a great number such other shall he meet,
that diligently reads the ancient monuments of the Paganes, and those
christian authors which have refused their superstitions. The second cause.
We read also in the book of wisdom that the unhappy man being bereft by
unripe death of his son whom he loved tenderly, to mitigate and assuage his
sorrow, first invented to have his sons image adored, and it to be taken for
a present GOD in earth, and the son him self for a GOD in heaven. The like
affection we read in Lactantius Cicero had toward his Daughter, and
Virgils Aeneas unto his Father: Aeneid. 5.
with this consolation recovering their Spirits daunted and broken with
grief. The third cause.
Wonderful also was the honor and obseruancie that some nations bare unto
their kings: The love of the Arabians unto their Kings.
so that he which reads what Atheneus does write of the Arabians, that the
familiars of the Kings did use to maime them selves voluntarily of that member
which it should happen the king to leese: and that when the King died either
natural or violent death, they thought it but a sport to die all with him: the
like whereof is affirmed by Strabo and Diodorus Siculus of the Aethiopians:
Lib. 4. Lib. 17.
and also of the Soliduni in a country of Gallia: who were six hundredth men
whom the King did choose to be about him as his guard, The love of the Solidunes
unto their Kings.
and lived and died with the king, neither was it ever known that any one man
of them did ever refuse, or seem, unwilling to die, the Prince being deceased.
He (I say) that reads this will not be hard of belief to credit Lactantius,
that the Maures did use to consecrate all their kings for Gods after they were
dead.

The Aethiopians says Strabo libr. 17. think that there is an immortal God
and a mortal God. The immortal is he that is the cause of all things: the
mortal is with them uncertain and lacks a name: but mostly they do take them
by whom they have received benefits, and their Kings for Gods. Moreover they
do think their kings to be conseruers and keepers of all men, but private
men when they be dead (for they do account all dead men for Gods) only of
them, to whom they have done good. In like manner also the Romans used to
deifie their Emperors after their death, as they also did their first king
Romulus. The Persian kings we read in Curtius and other, What man was first
adored.
were adored like unto Gods, which honor says Arrianus was given and done
unto Cyrus first of all mortal men: and the first of the Roman Emperors that
was adored or kneeled unto, was Dioclesian after his glorious voyage and
victory against the Persians. Yea in our time Xoas the king of the Persians is
worshipped of his subjects for God. The water wherewithal he has washed his
feet do they power out of the basen, and keep religiously as holy, being an
hoalsome medicine for all diseases: he is called the Lord that holds up
heaven and earth.

The Gentiles also to encourage the young Gentlemen to follow virtue and
valiauncie, The fourth cause of deifying of men.
used much to Canonize and consecrate for Gods after death, the renouned
Capteines and great conquerours: by these means Hercules, Bacchus, and other,
did clime into heaven. Of this way speaks Horace in his Epistles.

In triumphs brave to countrymen
To show the captive foes,
Does touch the stately throne of Jove,
And up to heaven it goes.
And Lactantius cites Ennius making Scipio Africanus thus to speak.

If any man by sheading blood
May clime the lofty Skies,
Only to me the greatest gate
of Heaven then open lies.
This wasting and burning of other men's lands, and goods razing of towns,
destroying of Cities, killing of infinite number of innocent men, women, and
children, bringing into bondage unjustly many free people, did they call virtue:
which hethen abuse of the world remains yet unto this day among the Italians,
with many other such irreligious relics, calling John Galeazo the court of
virtue, because he wrongfully like a strong thief robbed and spoiled by force
all the Princes about him of their Dominions, and possessions. Lact. de falls.
relig.


Among the Pagans he that had killed one man was adjudged a contaminate and a
wicked person, neither did they think it lawful to let him come into the
earthly house of their Gods: but he that had slain infinite thousands of
men, had overflowed the fields with blood, had dyed the rivers, was admitted
not only into the temples, but also received into heaven. Murdering of one
climed the gallows, of infinite thousands heaven. No otherwise, then the
pyrate answered Alexander the great, when he reviled him as a most wicked
knave, that lived by the spoil of other men: that because he roued but with
one only pinasse, he was called a pyrate: but Alexander, for that his mighty
fleetes filled all the seas, robbing, wasting, pillaging, and burning al
countries, was named a king: as though singularity in wickedness, were
singular virtue, and deserved singular honors. But although it was common
among the Gentiles, to deifie me^ after they were dead, yet godly honors to be
ordained unto any while they lived, To what men godly honors were decreed while
they lived. The fifth cause.
happened but unto few. The first says Plutarche among the Greeks was
Lysander, to whom after he had taken Athens, the Greeks decreed many unwonted
honors, and some of them altars to be erected in his name, and poemes or
sacred hymns to be soung in his honor. The impudent flattery of the
Athenians unto Demetrius.
The Athenians did set a fine of ten talentes on Demades his head, because
he thought that Alexander was a god, and did put to death Euagoras, for that he
adored Alexander when he was sent ambassador unto him from the city. Yet
these severe men afterward received Demetrius Poliorcetes, Ath. lib. 6. ca. 6
when he came to Athens, not only with fine persumes, garlands, and effusions
of wine, Ath. li. 14. ca. 8
the quires and Ithyphalli (which were men disguised like drunken me^, with
garlands on their heads, and gloves made of flowers, or rather of diverse
colors like flowers, cloakes half white, and a Tarentine robe, down to the
shope, which sacred persons only attended on the highest gods) went out to
meet him with sacred singing and dancing. But the multitude daunced and
soung: that only this the true God is present, but the other gods do sleep, or
wander abroad from home, or else certes be not at al, but this is the son of
Neptune, and Venus, excelling all in beauty, and for his facility common to
al men. This God is here as it is meet, for a God surpassing beautiful, both
laughing and also grave: because al his friends enuiron him, in the midst of
whom, who are as it were stars, he is seen like unto the sun. All hail thou
son of Venus, and most mighty Neptune, for the rest of the Gods, either they
have no ears, or they be not at all in very deed: or at the least wise, they
adhibite not their minds to our matters. Therefore thou most merciful and
mild, we do pray thee, that thou will vouchsafe to give us peace, for thou
art the Lord: with a great deal more such stuff, which song, if that they had
soung unto his father Antigonus, he would have answered the^, as he did ye
parasite poet Hermodotus, A worthy saying of Antigonus.
yt called him in his prattling poem, the son of the sun: my man that uses
to empty my close stool, thinks not thus of me. Which sage saying of
Antigonus, puts me in remembrance ye Platina writes in the life of John,
the eight of that name, yt the bishops of Rome do use at their installing, to
sit upon a iakes stool, to put them in mind, yt although they are advanced to
the highest seat of earthly glory (as they them selves think) yet for all yt,
that they are mortal men still, and subject to the necessities of man's nature,
as well as other poor knaves. A suitable song unto this of the Athenians, howled
out ye ambassadors of the citizens of Palermo, unto Martin the fourth bishop
of Rome, The shameless speech of the Panormitanes.
who had accursed the^ for sleying of al ye frenchmen, women and children,
which were in ye Island of Sicyl, and all Sicilyan women which were known to
be with child by any frenchma^. Upon an Easter day at ye first peale to Euensong,
Paul Aemyl. lib. 7.
they lying prostrate at the bishops feet, cried out with lamentable voice: O
lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us:
and again: O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us: and the third time: O lamb of God that take away the sins of the
world, give unto us peace: ungodly and violently pulling off ye royal spoils
from our Savior Christ, and casting them on Martine: for whom they were as
fit as Hercules startvps, according to the old proverb, are for a child, or
his rough Lions case and club, were for the nyce Lady Iole. But to return
unto the Athenians, Plutarche in the life of Demetrius writes, that they
decreed that Demetrius and his father Antigonus, should be called the Gods
saviors, and that there should be ordained a priest unto the Gods saviors,
that they should be interwouen in the sacred people with Jupiter and Pallas,
that the legates which should go at any time unto them, should be accepted
for sacred. Yea, there lacked not some that would have had a shield consecrated
unto him at Delphos, of whom they should publicly receive oracle and answer
in all doubtful matters, as good, and as true as any that was there. But the
Athenians not being content with this shameless flattering of the king, they
decreed the sacrifices of Venus unto his two concubines, Leona and Lamia, and
unto his flatterers and parasites Burichus Adimanthus, and Exythemides, were
altars and statuies erected, and poemes which should be soung in their honor:
in so much, that Demetrius him self being astonished at their servile
flattery, affirmed, that in his time there was not one Athenian of stout
heart, The shamlesse flattery of the Athenians unto Antonius, and how he
required them therefore.
nor ripe judgment. The like impudency used they many years after unto
Antonius the triumpher, and among many extraordinary honors, they espoused
unto him their chief Goddess and patron of their city, Pallas, which
marriage he said he did very well like off, and withal his heart accept, and
they should give with her unto him quadragies sestertiu^. 10000. crowns, a fine
not half great enough for so heinous a fault. The Ephesians also by Plutarches
report received him Godlike, the women being disguised like Bacchus his dame
priests, and ye men and boys transfigured into satyrs, and Panes, bearing in
their hands Bacchanicall iauelins called Thyrsie, and garlandes of iuie on
their heads, saluting and calling him by the name of Bacchus, Charidoles, and
Malichius. Wherein they be the more to be borne with, because, says Dion, lib.
48. he had after the overthrow that he gave unto Brutus and Cassius, named
him self Bacchus, whom in very deed he did very lively counterfeite and
express in drunkenness: and commanded that no man should call him by any
other name. But before this time had the Romans decreed Julius Caesar, The
flattery of the Romans to Julius Caesar.
after that he had with arms oppressed unto the liberty of his country,
honors higher, and greater then could agree with any man, a temple jointly
unto him and Clemency, a statuie of gold set with precious stones, to the
Curia or Senatehouse: and before the judgment seat a sacred drey or little
carte and a Pageaunt setfoorth with the pomp that they used at their plays
Circenses, his statuies to be set up close unto the superstitious beds of
their Gods. A College of priests were instituted unto his Godhead, which were
called Luperci Iulii, and a Bishop or Flamin of the order, which was Marcus
Antonius ye consul: that they should swear by his fortune, that every fifth
year a feast should be celebrated unto him, as a Heroes or half God, that all
the games of sword plaiers that should be kept in Rome or in all Italy should
be consecrated unto him. Finally, says Dion, they openly gave him the syrname
of Jupiter, Lib. 44.
which things do agree unto Eustatius the famous interpreter of Homer upon
the first of his Iliades, that Julius Caesar was called a God by the Romans
while he was living. Diod. lib. 44.
Al these decrees which partly the flattering people, and partly his privy ill
willers to bring him into envy thus heaped on him, were engraued in pillars of
silver with letters of gold, and placed at the feet of Jupiter Capitolinus,
covertly to admonish him of his humanity, and subjection unto God. But it is
not to be wondered at that Caesar was made a God by the oppressed Romans, Lib.
7. cap. 47.
seeing that Pliny affirms, that one Euthymus Picta, an Italian, who had
ever been victor at the games held at Olympus, and never but once overcome,
was by the commandment of the Oracle of Apollo and the astipulation of Jupiter
the highest God, consecrated alive and fealing: and that the very same day his
statuie that had been set up at Olympia was stricken and consumed with
lightening, and that this did also please the Gods, he says that Callimachus
does so marvel at, as he does at nothing else yt ever happened. Neither have
Magicians, Simon Magus adored for a God.
and sorcerers obtained less honor: for in the time of Claudius the Emperor,
one Simon a Samaritane, of his devilish art and science called Magus, Just. in
Apol, Tertul. in Apolo. etc.
came unto Rome and plaide there so many fine slye iuggling knackes, that he
with his minion Helena were accounted for Gods and sacrifices offered unto
them, and his Image set up between the two bridges of Tiber with this title
Simoni Deo Magno, to Simon a great God: but Tertullian has an holy God whom
all the Samaritanes, and many also of other nations did adore and confess to
be the highest God.

The insolency, writes Egesippus, out of this iuggling merchaunt went so
far, The contention between Peter and Magus.
that he provoked Simon Peter, then being at Rome to contend with him in
woorking of miracles. He went about to raise up by magic arts, the body
of a child, whose soul was departed out of it, the Child was of kind unto
Nero: and in deed moved it a little, but incontinently it fell down starcke
dead, as it was before.

But Peter by the name of Jesus made it to rise alone of it self. With the
event of which miracle Simon being netled, and chafed, professed that he
would in the sight of all the people of Rome fly from the Capitol unto the
Auentiue hill, if Peter would follow him: that deed should manifestly
declare whither of them two was best beloved of GOD. And now was Simon carried
aloft in the air, when Peter on his knees suppliantly desired almighty GOD
not to suffer the people who tourneth all things to the wurst to be deceived
by false iuggling, neither lacked his prayers effect, for Simon fell down to
the ground in the mids of his foolish flight, and brake one of his legs,
shortly after dying thereof at Aricia: whither he had been privily conveyed
by his disciples after that foul foil. Lib. 5. cap. 3. Apollonius adored for
a God.
I find also in Lactantius that in the reign of Domitian, Apollonius the
famous Magician was adored of many for a GOD, and an image set up unto him by
the name of Hercules Alexicacos: Hercules the driuer away of all evil. The
madness of the Egyptians in choosing their false Gods.
Thus have ye heard the extreme foolishness of many heathen men in choosing
of their GODS, but the madness of the Egyptians does far exceed them all:
for they, says Herodotus in Euterpe, do take all beasts both wild, and
tame, for Gods.

There are (says Strabo in his seventeenth book) some unreasonable living
creatures, which all the Egyptians do universally woorshippe, as of the land
beasts, the neat, and the dog: of birds, the hawke and the Ibis: of fishes
the Lepidotus, and Oxyrinchus. And there be other which every city adoreth
peculiarly, as ye Saites and Thebans a sheep, the Latopolitanes a fish in the
River of Nilus called Latus, the Lycopolitanes a woulfe, the Hermopolitanes the
Cynocephalus, the Babylonians besides Memphis the Cepus, which is a beast like
unto a Satyr, but in all other parts mean between a dog and a bear: the
Mendesians both the ram, and the ewe goat. The Athribites ye venomous mouse
called Mus Araneus, Hercules his city, with other the ill-favored Ichneumon
which kills the crocodile, and destroys the aspes eggs: the Arsinoites
the cruel crocodile, the Leontines the Lion. Diod. Sic. 2. Ath. 7. cap. 17.
Hero. Enterp.
The Ele also is a general God in Egypt, and all fishes with scales, and the
bird Phoenix, and the Bergander, as affirms Herodotus: who also tells, that
if any man kill any of those baggages willingly, he dies the death for it: if
against his will, he is fined and punished at the discretion and will of the
priests: but whosoever kills an Ibis or an Hawk either with his will, or
against it, must needs die for it. And to be death to kill a catte either by
mishappe or of purpose, does Diodorus Siculus show by an example, which he
himself saw. Lib. 2. cap. 4.
The Roman imbassadours were at Alexandria to enter into society and
friendship with the Egyptians and their king to he called an alie and friend
of the people of Rome, where it chanced one of the Romans against his will to
kill a catte. As soon as it was noised in the city, the angry citizens
assembling together in great troops from all parts of the town, assaulted
the house wherein the imbassaders lay, and requested to have him delivered unto
them, that he might be executed: utterly neglecting the greatness of the
Roman name, and the memory of the friendship lately made: and doubtless
they would have put him to death, if that the king and the officers, had not
rather conveyed then delivered him out of the present peril. Diodorus also
does affirm, that these baggage Gods are kept and nourished about the
Temples by men of good reputation, who feed them with fine manchet, Alica, a
kind of furmament, and deintie dishes made with milk. Moreover they do set
every day before them geese both boiled, and also roasted, and for those that
eat raw flesh they cause birds to be caught, finally they keep them with
great care and charges. Furthermore they do wash them with warm water, and
very good and odoriferous ointments. They also make for them sumptuous beds,
costly garnished, they mourn for their death, as much as they were their
children, and bury them more sumptuously then their ability can clear.

After the death of Alexander the great, when that Ptolomeus Lagi held Egypt,
an Ox being dead at Memphis for age, he that took upon him the charge to
keep him, bestowed upon his burial a great mass of money the which had
been given for the charges of the funeralles, and also fifty talentes that is
9375. lent by Ptolomey. Also in our age which was in the time of Ptolomeus
Dionysius the last king, certain that had the keeping of such beastly
Gods, bestowed upon their funeralles, no less then 100. talentes, that is,
18750. pound. In what house soever says Herodotus cattes do dye by nature, al
they that do dwell in them do shave their eybrowes only, but if that a dog
die, all their whole bodies, and heads are shaven. Dead cattes are carried by
the people howling and beating their breasts, unto the temples to be salted,
and from thence into the city Buleastis to be buried: but they lay dogs in
sacred cophines in those temples where they happen to die, but dead shrewe mise
and hawks they do carry unto the city of Butis: all these baggages do they
by the report of Diodorus wrapp in fine sheets, and embaulme with the
precious liquor of Cedrus, and odoriferous ointments: but dead bears and
wolves do they bury where they find them. Moreover, Iuuenal in his xv.
Satyr, does charge them with farther folly, in that they make leekes and
onyons their Gods: wherefore he frumping them says: O holy nations, that
have Gods growing in their gardens. I have been the longer in declaring the
madness of the Egyptians, to make men understand from whence the Israelites
had their wonderful pronenesse unto idolatry, and worshipping of false
Gods. But as I said before, it is not so greatly to be marvelled at, if that
heathen men, who accounted those to be Gods, who^ they knew to be most
renouned for virtue and valiancie, did when that when fortune fauned on them,
forget them selves, and invaded wrongfully the godhead: yet who would believe
that so absurd a thought could come into their minds, to whom God had
revealed his truth, and the knowledge of him self, if we did not read the
like of Herodes Agrippa, in the most true records of the Acts of the
Apostles. Which history is in these words, related more at large by
Josephus, in the.xix. book of his antiquities. When Herodes Agrippa, The
flattery of the people unto Herodes, and of his doleful end.
did set forth at the city of Caesaria, magnificent spectacles unto the
people in the honor of Caesar, upon a day vowed for the life and safety of
the Emperor: to the which came also the worshipful and honorable of the
whole Province: the second day of the shows, the king putting on a glittering
robe, wrought with wonderful workmanship of clean silver, about Sun rising
came forth unto the theater. Now when that the Sun at the first rising did
shine upon the silver garment, the glistering of the metal did cast forth,
with the reuerberated beams, such a double and divine brightness, that the
tenor of the sight, did dazell the eyes of them that beheld it, striking in
them a veneration with honor. Incontinently was there heard the flattery of
the common people, prattling out words which sounded to honor, but brought
destruction. He was saluted from all parts of the Theater by the name of a
God, and supplyantly prayed unto to be merciful and good unto them, the people
saying: until this time we have ever feared thee as a man, but from
henceforth we do now confess thee to surmount, and be above man's nature.
But the king did not suppress nor blame their lewd exclamations, neither
abhorred the ungodliness of unlawful flattery, until such time as a little
while after he looking up, saw an Owl sitting upon a rope that went cross
the Theater over his head, and immediately withal, he felt him to be the
minister of his destruction, whom he had known before to be his purueyour of
good things, and so was he soudenly tormented with incredible peines about his
heart, belly, and small guts, and looking back upon his friends, said:
behold ye, I that God of yours am presently tumbled down from life: the power
of God presently proving those words to be false, which you even very now
bestowed and hurled on me. And I whom but very now, you called immortal, am
out of hand at this instant, carried headlong to death: but I must abide and
receive the sentence which God has pronounced on me: for I have lived, not in
misery, but in so great felicity, that al men call me a blessed man. When he
had spoken those words, he being more grievously vexed with the violence of the
peine, was incontinently borne into ye palace. But shortly after, when it was
bruted abroad, yt he was upon the point of death, a great multitude of al ages
and sects came unto the palace, who lying on the ground grouely clothed in
hairecloth, after their country guise, made incessant supplications unto God
for the kings recovery, all the kings palace ringing with their dolful cries
and lamentations: when as in the mean time, the king lying in a chamber above,
and looking down, and beholding them lying flat on their faces with
lamentable weeping, could not abstein from tears him self: but being five
days thus tormented, incessantly with griping peines of his belly, at the
length brake in sunder the tedious thread of loathsome life. Thus by this long
narration of those, whose prosperity made them to forget their maker, A golden
sentence of Augustine.
yea, and them selves too, that saying of Augustines is verified: that as all
fruits, all grains, all woods have their worm, and every one a diverse worm
the one from the other: so the worm of riches, power, and prosperity, is
pride, which does corrupt and quite consume them, as all other worms do the
substaunces wherein they are bred: never dying, until that they have changed
the names: turning woods to rottenness, iron to lust and dross, power to
poverty: the unsearchable wisdom of God so ordeyning, that those things
which it might seem, no forreighe forre could be able to hurt, should them
selves engender in them selves, a thing to destroy them selves, and be utterly
consumed by an inward ill. Yet Canute the mighty Monarche of this realm,
Denmark, and Norwey, did so medicine his prosperity with true godliness,
religiousnesse, and humility, that there could no worm of pride be bred in
it. For he having once gotten a leisure time, The humility of king Canute Polyd
from the troublesome affairs of his realms and subjects, walked for to
refreshe his spirits, dulled with the unquiet tediousness of Princes toil,
along the sea side upon the sands, not far from Southhampton: where he was
called by one of his soldiers, that served unto the ear, the king of kings,
and of all kings, far the most mighty, who largely reigned over men, over the
sea, over the earth. Then the king speaking never a word, erected his mind to
contemplate the power of God: and that he might with a manifest argument and
demonstration, reprove the vain and false flattery of his soldier: he did
put off his cloak, and wrapping it round together like a bowl, and setting
down upon it hard by the water, that then flowed, spoke thus: Wave I command
thee, that thou touch not my feet. He had not so soon spoken these words
(those which attended on him woondering to what end he did these things)
when behold the wave in surging all to wette him.

Then he going back said: Syrs call ye me a king who am not able to cohibite
and stay this little wave? certes no mortal man is worthy of so high a
name: there is one only king the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
he does reign: at whose beck al things are governed and ruled, him let us
worship: him let us call king: him of kings, him of all peoples and nations
to be the Lord, him of heaven, of the earth, of the sea to be the ruler, let
us not only confess, but also profess, and besides him none. After this
going to Winchester, he did set with his own hands the crown which he ware
on his head upon the Image of Christ crucified, which stood in the Church,
and never ware crown afterward.

The fourth Chapter. Of the manifold miseries of man.
NOw after I have rehearsed unto you a ragged roll of them whose unmeasurable
pride would not suffer them to be contented with the next place unto God: but
would needs sit with him, and many of them having by their savage and brutishe
usage and acts, justly lost the name of men, did wickedly and wrongfully invade
the Godhead: I think it will not be either amiss, or unpleasant, to
discourse, whither that they or any others such foundlings of fortune, ever
had any such perfect felicity, as might quite take from them all annoyance
and defect, and make them wholly forgette that they were mortal men: and whyther
that any man may in this life be truly accounted happy: But I will plainly
prove that man's nature of it self is so far from that bliss in this world,
that no living creature is in any wise so wretched and fraught with miseries,
as is he, and will also make manifest unto you by the particular examining of
their lives, dooinges, chances, and ends, that no man which either would
be, or was accounted a God, called the great: or any other man which was
notorious and renouned for this worldly felicity, ever had fortune so addicted
unto him, that he lived long without some great mischaunce, which might put
him in remembrance that he was a man, and subject unto manifold miseries and
gracious calamities.

And first to speak in general of man, who knows not, that where as all
other living things be borne with some covering defense, and clothing, as
shell, ryndes, hydes, prickles, bristles, hair, feathers, quilles, scales,
fleeses, or wull, ye and trees are defenced against both cold and heat with a
bark, and some with two, only man has nature thrown away on the bare
ground all naked, for to wraule and cry, and only of al creatures to weep:
yea and to begin his immeasurable labors with lamentations, but to laughe
before he be forty days old is a monster, prognosticating and foretelling
how seldom he shall have cause of mirth and how rife sorrows will be all his
life long. After his doleful beginning of life, inco^tinently is he bound like
a notorious malefacter both hand and foot, ye every limme of him: (which
happens unto no other living thing:) and he that shall reign over al other
creatures, lies crying in his cradle as in a prison fast tied, and begins his
life with punishment, which he suffers for no other fault, but because he is
borne. O the madness of them that of their beginninges do think them selves
borne to pride, and to be Gods. The first hope of strength, and function, and
gift of time, makes him to craule on all four. How long is it er he does go?
how long before he speaks? how long before his mouth he firm for meat?
how long does his moulde pante: a sign and token of a singular weakness
among the things that live? all other living things do feel and know their
own nature, some use swiftness of foot, some wight winge, other their
strength, other swim, only man knows nothing without teaching. He speaks
not, he goes not, he eats not, and to be short he does nothing of natures
own accord and instruct, but weep and cry. Whereby that saying of Menander
in Plutarche his consolation unto Apollonius is proved true: that no living
thing does sooner and more often rise and fall, then does man, and good cause
why, for that he being of all other most weak does administer greatest and
weightiest matters. To how many diseases is he subject? how many medicines are
inverted daily against them, which yet are overcome by new diseases, which do
daily arise? and what disease almost has any thing ye draws breathe,
whereunto man is not obnoctious? and how many maladies has he, wc who^ no
other living thing is troubled? the panting of the heart, Arist. in proble.
blood flowing out from the head by the nose, only he weepeth, only he
goggleth with his eyes, only he sta^mereth with his tongue, he only is borne wc
the stone, only in his scarrs will no hair grow again, he neeseth oftener then
any other thing that bears life: a token of great distemperature of the
brain. Now if we run through all parts of his life, we shall find and see
no time void of pain, loose of greefes, and free from torments of diseases.
In the ages of men, says divine Hippocrates, happen such diseases: in infants
and children newly borne, hot vlceres of the mouth, vomitinges, coughes,
watchinges, swellings, inflammations of the nauill, moistness of the ears:
but when they come to breed teeth, itching of the gummes, agues, conuulsions,
laskes and worse, when they put forth the dog teeth when they are waxen
elder, inflammations of the parts between the mouth and the gullet, falling
inward of the spondill in the nape of the neck, Asthma or hasing, the stones,
worms both round, and astarides, a kind of wortes called acrochordones,
satyarismes or standing of the yard by a small inflammation, strumes or the
Kings evil, and other small tumors: when they be elder and come unto
fourteen years, there happen many of the diseases of the ages which went
before, and longer agues and bleeding at the nose. But unto young men spitting
of blood, consumpsions of the lungs, sharp fevers, the falling sickness, and
other diseases, specially those, which I have spoken of before, but unto them
which have passed this age, befall Asthma, or hasinges, pleurisies,
inflammations of the lungs, lethargies, phrensies, burning agues, long laskes,
skourings upward and downward, bloody fluxes, lienteries, piles. But unto old
men hard fetching of breath, rheumes with coughes, stranguries, difficulties of
making water, pains of the joints, swimming of the head, apoplexies,
cacheries, itches over all the body, moistness of the belly, eyes and ears,
dimnesse of sight, glaucedines or dryness and concretion of the christaline
humor in the eyes, and ill hearing. But although no age of man's life is free
from diseases, yet perhaps some part of the year is so benign that in it
the body having rest from grief may refreshe and repair his strength which
was welneere quite tired and killed with the maladies and pains which it
suffered before. No (says Hippocrates) all diseases happen at all times, but
yet some diseases are more bredde and worse at one time, then at another. In
the springtime reign madness, melancholy, the falling sickness, fluxes of
blood, squinseis, catarrhes, hoarsnes, coughes, leprosies, morphewes,
impetigines, many vlcerous pustules, small tumors, pains of the joints. In
the Summer some of those before rehearsed and agues, continual, and burning,
and very many tertian and quartan agues, vomitings, and lasks, ophthalmies, or
inflammations of the ears, pains of the ears, exulcerations of the mouth,
putrefactions of the general parts and sweatinges. But in Autumn many of the
summer diseases and feauers quartane and wandering agues, great splenes,
dropsies, consumptions of the lungs, stra^guries, lienteries, and bloody
fluxes, pains of the hippe, sqinseyes, Asthma or hasinges, pains in the small
gutts, falling sicknesses, madness, and melancholy. In the Winter pleurisies,
inflammations of the lunges, lethargies, rheumes, catarhes, hoarsnesse, coughes,
pains of the breast, sides and loins, swimming of the head, and apoplexies.
Not only no part of man's age, nor of the year is free from diseases, no nor
yet any kind of weather or state or te^perature of the air. If it rain much
there come long agues, laskes, putrefactions, the falling evil, apoplexies,
and squinseies. In great droughts, Hip. Aph. sect. 3.
consumptions, ophthalmies, pains, of the joints, stranguries, and bloody
fluxes. Hip. Aphor. sect. 5.
Much heat brings effemination of the flesh, weakness of the sinews, and
brain, whereby the wits and mind be as it were benumbed, fluxes of blood,
swounings, after whom follow death. But cold causes conuulsions, tetanes, or
distentions, benumming, the killing of the natural heat, making of the flesh
black and blewe, quiueringes and shakings. Southern winds dull the hearing,
dim the sight, make the head heavy, and men to be slothful and lither: but
a northern constitution brings coughs, horsenesse, binding of the ^^lly, and
stranguries, quiuering pain of the sides and breast. So that Hippocrates truly
says: that all whole man from his nativity is sickness. Ye though they and
infinite other bodily griefs and diseases wherewithal man is oppressed, were
not sufficient to keep this proud creature in his obediente, and to make him
acknowledge his creator: he is no less but far more vexed with bodilesse
perturbations of the mind: unto whom he only at the least in most, and in the
other is most subject. Only says Pliny ye diligent searcher of nature, who
with Hippocrates have said almost all that you have heard of the misery of man,
to him is given mourning, to him riot, and that innumerable ways, and in every
member, to him only ambition, to him only covetousness, to him only
unmeasurable desire of life, to him only superstition, to him only care of
burial, yea, and what shall be when he is not. To none is more brittle life, to
none greater lust of all things, to none more confuse fear, to none sharper
and extreme rage and madness.

The fifth Chapter. The immoderate mourning of man, and examples of them which
have dyed for sorrow, conceived for the decay of Gods glory, countries
calamities, infortunitie of parents, children, brethren, wives, masters, and
friends.
ANd these things not to be rather amplyfied rhetorically, then spoken truly,
may easily be proved, and first of mourning. All other living things, because
they are moved only by the senses, do apply them selves only unto those things
which are present, little or nothing feeling things absent: whereby it comes
to pass, that they be not either so much or so long grieved with the loss of
theirs. But man only by divine reason, which is given unto him by God, as the
principallest and excellentest gift of nature: does perceive and feel things
absent, past, and to come, which multiplyeth his miseries, and sorrows, the
unsearchable wisdom of God so ordeining, that nothing in this world should be
in all parts blessed. And as man by nature is desirous and loving society,
and reposeth the greatest part of his felicity, in the mutual love of
parents, children, husband, wife, kinsfolks, friends, country, yea, and
most principally of God: so doubtless must we needs confess, that it is unto
him ye cause of great and many and sundry sorrows: and assent unto Martialis,
yt he which loves not, feels less joy and less grief, the manifold
mischaunces of death, dishonor, either by corrupt manners, or otherwise, griefs
and diseases, both of body and mind, of our kinsfolks and friends, unto all
which kind of calamities, the world is too too much subject, continually
supplying unto us abundant sorrows. And how great the acerbitie of this
mourning is, besides the common examples, of whom daily experience gives unto
us store: the lamentable habit of those which be in heaviness, does
sufficiently bewray: their faces pale and lean, their eyes hollow, their
bodies nothing else but skin and bone, showing the knitting together of every
joint, their continual watchings, their abhorring of meat, after which
ensues death. And of voluntary death willingly gone unto these cases, will I
rehearse unto you examples. For piety toward God, we have innumerable of
holy martyrs, who suffered al terrible torments to advance God his glory: and
of Helie, as soon as he heard that the Ark of God was taken, fell backward
from his chair, and brake his neck: of duetifull affection to their country
out of Iustine, Codrus the king of Athens, and out of Liuie ye two Roman
Decij, who willingly lost their lives for their countries welfare: and out of
Paulus Iouius, Pomperane in our age, a noble man of France: who being stricke^
with extreme sorrow for ye lamentable loss by sickness of ye flourishing army of
his countrime^ in Naples, under the conduct of the Lantrech, and the
dishonorable yealding of Auersa, as he stood musing on this so great a
calamity, and staring up into heaven, fell down stark dead: of pitiful
piety toward parents out of Campofulgoso, the Toletane, who by importunate
prayers and flowing tears, hardly at the length, obtained of the magistrate to
be hanged in his fathers steed: of fatherly sorrow out of Appian: Blauus, who
hearing a false tale that his son was slain by the soldiers of Triumri, of
his own accord went unto them, and obtained of them to be killed as one
proscribed: and out of Julius Capitolinus, Gordian the Roman Emperor, who
understanding that his son was slain in battle, for intolerable grief
hanged up him self, that night in his chamber: of brotherly love out of
Pliny, Pub. Rutilius, who being certified of his brothers repulse in his suite
for the Consulship, incontinently dyed: being before but grieved a little with
an ague: and of the two Cappadocian brothers, that contended whether of them
was the elder: for that Augustus had decreed, that the elder should be put to
death with his father Adiatorix: and when they had long after this manner
striuen in deadly piety, scarce at the last Dyetentus, by the earnest
entreaty and prayers of his mother, who saw that she might be more easily
found and maintained by him, gave place, and suffered his younger brother to
dye for him the elder. Of sure affied heart unto wife, Marcus Plautinus, Valor.
4.6.
who slew him upon his dead wife: and Sempronius Gracchus, who did suffer him
self to be slain wittingly in his fight, by killing of a male serpent, that
he might deliver his wife from death, by letting the female to escape (for so
the Soothsayers affirmed:) of fervent friendship Pylades and Pithias, who
incessantly sued to dye, to save his faithful friends Orestes and Damon, and
Philotinus out of Pliny, that threw him self in to ye roge, or funeral fire
of his patron, who had made him heir of all his whole goods: of faithful
service two bondmen in Dion, who did change apparel with their proscribed
masters, that they by wished error might be slain for them. Thus much of
mourning the next is riot, whereunto may aptly be annexed too great lust of all
things.

The sixte Chapter. Of the great riot of man in apparel, and the excess
therein, of a Cardinals harlot of Poppea, of the soldiers of Antiochus,
Sedetes, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Charles duke of Burgonie, the Marquis of
Astorga, Lollia Paulina, Agrippina of the Romans, the Greeks, and the
Alexandrines, of the great prices of a pearl, and a precious stone which
made his master to be proscribed: How man does alter the natural constitution
and ornaments of his body, and of Poppea her bath, and of a Patriarche, and a
Cardinal that made themselves to be pale.
ALl other living things are contented with the clothing of nature, and the
ornaments of it: only man covers his carcass with foreign furniture,
which were to be allowed in him, seeing nature has afforded him none, if he
could be pleased with such things, as are able to defend him from cold and
heat, and not to seek the bottomes both of the seas, ye the Arabian and
Indian, and al lands to garnishe their bodies withal: robbing the Seas and
fishes of purple, pearls, stones, and amber grease, and the hidden and secret
tresures of the whole earth for gold, silver, and precious stones, and the
poor vermin of the farthest cold countries of the North, cruelly of their
able garments: for Sables, Lucernes, Georg. Agri. de animal. subter. and Paul.
Io. Rer. Musc. com.
Hermines, and such like costly furs, (paying for a face of Sables 1000.
ducates) and wild beasts of the East for musk and ciuet to make them smell
sweet. They set pearls, says Pliny, on their feet, and that not only upon
the upper parts of their shoes, but also on the soles: ye in the memory also
of our fathers, a Cardinals harlot A Cardinals harlot.
wore all the upper part of her shoes set clean over with pearls, and
precious stones: and long before her, Poppea Poppea.
wife to Nero would shoe such horses as she liked of with gold, as her
husband did all his mules with silver: so that it is not greatly to be marueiled,
that the soldiers of Antiochus Sedetes, king of Syria did peg their shoes
with nails of gold. Antiochus Sedetes his soldiers.
Clemens Alexandrinus seems to make it a common thing in Greece and Asia, or
rather at Alexandria, where he lived, to set their shoes every where full of
studs of gold, and to wear pantafles made with diverse kind of workmanshippe
of gold, Caligula and Heleogabalus Sueto.
and precious stones, so that I do cease to wonder that Caligula used riding
clokes covered over and over with precious stones, and Heliogabalus all his
garments, Lamprid.
ye and his shoes, glistering with gemmes. No, what say you that our
Barbarians will boorde for bravery those riotous Romans, and gorgeous Greeks?
for Charles the hautie, ye last Duke of Burgonie, Charles Duke of Burgonie.
when he received Frederike ye Emperor wore a cloak of cloth of gold set with
diamonds, and carbuncles valued at an hundredth thousand crowns. Annals Fland.
And in our days at the coronation of Charles the fifth at Bologna, a
Spaniard, the Marquis of Astorga, The Marquis of Astorga.
as Iouius reports, wore a rich gown of cloth of gold wrought over and over
with dolphines of pearls, and precious stones. Pliny tells that the stones,
and pearls, that Lollia Paulina Lollia Paulina,
wife unto Caligula wore, and not at any solemn feast, but only at a nuptial
night, upon her head, her hairs, her ears, her neck, her hands, and fingers,
were worth quadringenties sestertium, which after Budeyes account is ten
hundredth thousand french crowns, and above three hundredth thousand pound of
our money: neither were they the gifts of ye prodigal Prince, but her graund
fathers goods, gotten by the spoils of the provinces. This was the end of
rapines and robberies, this was it, for the which Marcus Lollius infamed for
the gyfts given unto him by all the kings of the orient, and therefore falling
into the displeasure of Caius, nephewe, and son adopted unto Augustus, drank
poison, that his niece might be seen by candle light covered over with 10000
crowns. Plinies exclamation against pearls.
Against this excess in pearls does Pliny exclame, in his 9. book, 35.
chap. speaking thus: ye marry, it had been a small thing for the seas to be
buried in our bellies, unless they were worn as well of men, as women, on
their hands, their ears their feet, ye and the whole body. What has the sea
to do with the garments and clothing? what have the waters and waves with the
back? but nature, you will say, does not friendely deal with us in casting us
forth into the world naked? Go to, let there be so great society between the
belly and the sea, but what with the back? let it be a small matter unless
that we that are fedd with dangers, be also clothed with perilles, so through
the whole body things gotten with the danger of man's life do best like.
Therefore pearls of all things have the greatest price and praise. Julius
Caesar bought a pearl for his sweet heart Seruilia, which cost him Sexagies, A
great price of a pearl.
that is six and forty thousand eight hundredth, threescore and seventeen
pounds, and ten shillinges of our money. Moreover it is certain (says
Pliny) that Nonius a senator of Rome did wear in a ring a precious stone
called an Opalus which was valued at vicies sestertium, A great price for a
precious stone.
that is an hundredth thousand crowns, the which ringe only of all his
goods, he carried away with him, when he fled, being proscribed for it by
Marcus Antonius, whose savageness and riot was great, that would proscribe a
senator for a stone: and Nonius his contumacie no less, that loved the cause
of his proscriptio^: seeing that also wild beasts leave behind them those
parts of their body being bitten off, for whom they know they are in danger.
The jewels used by the Romans.
And in his 33. book.3. chap. he tells how the men at Rome did wear ringes,
or hoopes of gold about their arms, and the women that were wives unto the
horsemen of Rome about the small of their legs, but the comoners wives of
silver, and that the women did wear gold on their head, their ears, their
neck, their arms, on all their fingers, ye and on their feet: and chains
hanging bandericke wise on both sides, with tablets of gold, The Jewels worn
by the Greeks.
set full of stones and pearls. Aristophanes also the Athenian in his comedy
called Thesmophoria reckons up all the ornaments, and jewels that women did
use to wear in that prodigal city, which were so many in number, that his
breath failed him in the rehearsing of them: which made him to marvel that
they fainted not in the bearing of them. The Jewels worn by the Asians.
And Clemens Alexandrinus charge his countrymen the Greeks of Asia, with the
decking of themselves with gold, pearls, and precious stones, and reckoning
up the Jewels that the women did wear, besides earinges, bracelettes,
tabletes, ouches, ringes, chains, and a number of such riotous ornaments, the
which being now out of use, I know not what things the names signify, he
recites fetters of gold, which were either chains, or else hoopes of gold,
such as we showed before out of Pliny were worn at Rome: and that they were
worn by the Greeks in Europe he proves out of diverse Poets. Also the
Greeks and Asians were apparelled in purple: The price of purple.
a pound of the which wool being Tyrian double died, (as all good and usual
in Plinies time by his own testymonie were) was woorthe at Rome, and in Asia,
and Greece where it was usually worn of women, and the the noblemen, 1000.
denaries, which is xxxj. l. v. s^. of our money. So yt their people may for
cost, which makes al things to be esteemed of foolish me^, compare with our
cloth of gold, silver, and tissue, which then were rare, or not at all to be
worn at Rome, as Seneca co^plaines, ye silk began to be worn by women in his
days. Yet I read in Pliny, that he saw Agrippina, Agrippina.
wife unto Claudius Caesar, wear a robe of wouen gold, without any other stuff
intermixed with it. The which robe yet I think was not so rich as Clemens
Alexandrinus does report women did wear gowns in his country, being worth a
thousand talents, Women's rich robes at Alexandria.
which is of our money. 187500. at the least, for if he means Egyptian
talents, it amounts to a great deal more: whereat I do so much the more
marvel, because neither at Alexandria, nor yet in those parts in his days,
there were any Queens, which might be able to bear the outrageous charges of
so great riot. Man is not co^te^ted with the natural habit or ornaments of his
body.
But why stand I so long about the rehearsing of man's mad supplying of that
profitable defect of nature, in clothing his body, seeing that he is no less
troubled with correcting, or rather corrupting of the natural composition, and
ornaments thereof. Whereof come coloring of hairs, depilactories, or making of
hairs to fall off, yea, and that which is most shameful, wearing of bought
hairs, painting of faces, whitings of teeth and hands, anointing, plastering,
and slabbering against wrinckles, for the which cause Poppea, wife unto Nero,
used to have driven with her, whether so ever she went, or traueled, five
hundredth mylche Asses, in whose milk she bathed her unchaste body, and yet are
they more to be discommended, that will make them selves ill colored with
drinking of slabber sauce, and in the old time with cumin, the which Horace
touches in his epistles, and in the age of our fathers, Daniel the
Metropolitan of Moscouie, is reported to have used to make his face look pale
with the smoke of brimstone, The patriarch of Moscouie.
that he might seem to have pyned him self away, and dried up his blood with
fasting, study, Elog doct viror. Cardinal Egidius.
watching and praying: and Egidius a Cardinal, who by Iouius his judgment,
deserved the highest honor of a Christian Orator in a holy pulpit, was
supposed for the causes before rehearsed, to drink cumin, and use perfumes of
wet chafe.

The seventh Chapter. O^ the unreasonable riot of men in building, and namely,
of the ancient Romans, of Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Lucullus, Clodius: of
the rare riot in household stuff of the Romans, Greeks, and Asians, and
specially in their counterfeits both painted and in metal, and yuorie, with
the incredible prices of diverse of them, in curiously wrought plate, hangings,
bedsteedes, chaires, stools, tables with the excessive prices of diverse of
the^, and of the great riot in furniture of household of Antonius Bassus, Sopus,
Heliogabalus, the liberts of Clodius a Cardinal, and again, the sparenesse
therein of the ancient Romans of Scipio Africanus and his brother, Aelius
Catus, and what silver was found at the sack of Carthage, and of the costly
piece of Arras of Leo the Pope.
But as this wayward creature man, is not pleased with the proportion and
garnishing of nature in his body, and the clothing thereof, so neither does the
open air, the high hills, the low valeys, the pleasant open fields, nor the
couerts of trees, and caves against al kinds of injuries of the angry
heavens, and air, content him, which do satisfy all other living things,
but that he buildes him sumptuous houses, not to defend him from cold, heat,
and storms, the which is the use of an house, but to fulfill his riotous and
intemperate proud heart, with wasting his wealth. Our houses says sage
Seneca, are so wide and large that they be as it were cities. The Roman houses.
We have twice seen, writes Pliny, the whole city enclosed and compassed
about with the house of two Princes, Caius and Nero, and the latter, that
nothing might be missing, Nero his house.
of gold. It was so great, that these verses were set up against it in Rome.

Roma domus fiet Veios migrate Quirites,
Si non and Veios occupet ista domus.
Rome shall be made an house, Romans
To Veios pack a pace,
If not, both Veios to possess
We will this huge monstrous place.
Alluding unto the history, that the Romans after they had taken Veij, stood
doubtful whether they should forsake Rome, or no, and inhabit Veios. This
house reached by Suetonius his report, from the Palatium, even unto the
Exquiliae, it had three porticus or galleries, three miles long, and a poole in
it like unto a great sea, enclosed round with beautiful buildings like unto a
city. The whole house was al guilted over with gold, and set with precious
stones, and mother of pearl, the dining chambers were seeled with boordes of
yuorie, Pli. 33. cap. 10.
the which Pliny does witness to be of mighty price, and a stuff of all
other most commended, for to make the images of the Gods: these boords might be
turned when it pleased, ye flowers and precious ointments might be powered down
by pipes over all the whole chambers, upon the heads of ye guests. But the
principal and highest dining chamber, was in form round, and ran round
continually day and night like unto the heavens: in the roof whereof were the
stars with the Sun and Moon, expressed by precious stones, ye colors of
them agreeing unto the qualities of ye stars. There were seats of gold, and
yuorie: and the walls were plated over with flowers and birds of silver, ye
which did cast forth continually the fragrancie of al kind of sweet odours. Of
this house thus writes Tacitus: He builded an house, in the which not the
gold and precious stones should be such wonders, seeing that of late years
before, they had grown through riot, to be usual and common at Rome: as the
corn fields, and the great pooles, and like unto great forests on the one
side mighty woods, and on the other open galleries, or walks. By the which
words of Tacitus, is insinuated the sumptuous building and garnishing of houses
vulgarely used in Rome. Lucullus his buildings.
I read also that Lucius Lucullus would in all places ye liked him, build
wonderful su^ptuous palaces, in places near unto the sea, repelling the sea,
and on high mountains and hard stony rocks, as on Paulisippus, a little from
Naples, with excessive charges force the sea to run into his fish pooles: so
that in all his buildings, he seemed to strive against nature: wherefore Pompey
used to call him the gowned Xerxes, because that the Romans always wore
gowns at home. Caligula used to set the floores of his chamber with pearls,
and Heliogabalus strewed them with the dust and filings of gold. Publius
Clodius, Clodius his house.
one that never bare office in the city, but Tribune of the people, an office
for a commoner, dwelt in a house, for the which he paid. 147000. sesterties:
and every sestertian being worth of our money vij.l. xvjs^. iij.d. the whole
amounts to above eleven hundredth and five and forty thousand, seven
hundredth and six and thirty pounds. Whereat says Pliny, I do no less
wonder, then I do at the madness of the kings that built the Pyramides and
Laberynthes, but if the sum in Pliny, be as Budey does read, centies,
quadragies, octies, it is but an hundredth and fiftene thousand, six hundredth,
and five and twenty: or as Hadrianus Iunius will have it, centies, quadragies,
septies, an hundredth and fourtene thousand, eight hundredth and forty two
pounds, with odd money. But as the lest sum is over great to be bestowed
upon an house, so would his wonder induce me to incline unto the greatest, if
that I did not stand in doubt, whither that such kind of phrase in numbering
were used, among the Romans or no: and namely seeing that he does affirm that
Julius Caesar gave for the bare plat to build the great tilt yard in Mill
ducenties sestertium. 937500. pound: and Appian, Paulus his Basilica hall, cost
1500. talentes the which is two hundredth and four score and one thousand two
hundredth and fifty pounds. The stuff and garnishing of the Roman buildings.
He will be easily led to believe such a mass of money to be given for an
house, that reads how all their buildinges were of fine marble, and
alablaster, fet with vnaccomptable charges out of Thasus, Paros, India, Syria,
Damascus, Cyprus, Egypt, Aethiopia, Arabia, Armenia and Africa. The which how
costly it was may appear by that we read in Valerius Maximus, that ten
pillars of marble being fett no farther but out of Greece, and not accounted
afterward of any price, and they but twelve foot long, says, Pliny, and but
six in number, cost 10000. nummos, that is a thousand and five hundredth
french crowns. Add thereunto the huge largeness, the great and sumptuous
gardens, the excessive price of vain trees, serving unto no use, but only for
shadow, ten of them being valued in the before alleged place cut of Valerius,
The great prices of trees.
at tricies that is, 23436. pound, the roofes and walls of private men's
houses guilt, and garnished commonly every where with gold, pearl, precious
stones, mother of pearl, Indian torteises, and iuorie, and their baines of
silver, the floor under foot either of costly marble engraven, or else of
stone very fair and cunningly painted, which they called Asarotica Pauimenta:
they had also their Lithostrata, which were made of small pieces of marble,
and stone, of all kind of colors, white, red, blewe, black, green, yelow.
etc. very finely simened together, representing not only the figures of men,
beasts, and trees, but also their very lively and true colors. But of all the
deckings, and garnishings of their houses, most costly were their painted
tables, The great prices of painted tables.
and counterfetes of metalles, of whom they had great store. Lucius Lucullus
bought a table which cost him two talents, which is of our money three
hundredth and seventy five pou^ds. Apelles gave unto Protogenes a painter for
the tables that he had in his house ready painted at one time, Pli. li. 35.
ca. 11
fifty talentes, which is 4875. pound. and he himself had of Alexander the
great for one table two hundredth talents of gold, Pli. li. 35. ca. 10
the which were worth at the lest two thousand of silver, yet every one of
silver was worth of our money an hundredth fourscore and seven pounds ten
shillinges, unless perhaps Pliny meant the common talent of gold of Athens,
which contained but three Athenien gildens, who weighing eight dramms a piece,
I can value at no less then seven pound ten shilling the talent and the whole
sum of the money received for the table 1500. pound. Aristides painting a
table of a battle between Alexander, and the Persians, couenanted to have for
every man painted in the table which were 100. ten of their pounds, every of
them being worth iii.l. ii.s^. vi. d of our money, and so consequently for
every man xxxi.l. v.s. of our money, and for the whole table 3125.l. King
Attalus bought also a table of the same man's painting, which cost him 100.
tale^ts that is eighteen thousand seven hundredth and fifty pounds. Mnason
gave unto Asclepiodorus for the painting of twelve Gods 300. of their pounds a
piece, and unto Theomnestus for every Heroes he painted 100. pound, every one of
theirs being as I told you before worth iii.l. ii.s^. vi.d. of our money. Pl.
li. 35. ca. 11.
Hortensius gave unto Euphanor for a table of the Argonautes 144. sesterties
the which is eleven hundredth, four and twenty pounds x.s^. His scholar
Antidotus refused to sell a table unto King Attalus for 60. talentes that is
5850.l. Timoniachus had of Julius Caesar for the pictures of Ajax, and Medea,
80. talents, which is 7700.l. So that painters being so well paid for their
pains, might very well go in their purple, and wear crowns of gold on their
heads, and have their staves writhed about with plates of gold, and their
shoes tied with points of gold, as Atheneus reports of Parrhasius the
painter. Pli. li. 35. ca. 12.
But to return unto Images, Lucullus bargained with Archesilaus to make the
Image of Felicity in plaster, and he to have for it 60. talentes, that is
5850.l. Praxiteles made Venus in marble which the Guidians bought, all whose
debtes which were wonderful great, did king Nicomedes offer to pay, if they
would let him have the Image, and they refused it. Of what value then may we
justly conjecture were Images of iuorie, of copper, and specially Corinthian
copper, which was a temperature of gold, silver, and copper, of wonderful
price, yea and Images of gold, and silver, seeing their workmen, Polycletus,
Phidias, Lysippus, Myron, and other were no less famous for their works, then
were the excellent painters, and their stuff did far exceed: and Pliny
reports that many men were so in love with counterfetes of Corinthian copper,
that they had them carried with them whither soever they went. Cicero in his
sixth Oration against Verres says a counterfeite of copper, and no great one
was ordinarily sold for 120000. sesterties. yt is above 900. Pli. 34. ca. 8.
l. Polycletus made Diadumenus a youth in copper, and had for it 100. talentes
that is 18750.l. I read that the Collossus of brass that stood in the
capitol, cost 150. talentes, yt is 28135.l. and one also brought by Lucius
Lucullus to Rome from Appollonia of the same price: but one at Rhodes which
cost 300. talentes, which is six and forty thousand 250.l. and in that
city were there an hundredth Collossi, and of other Images of metal and iuorie
three thousand, and no fewer in Athens, Olympia and Delphos. But lest that some
man should say that Colossi were never any garnishing for a house, I read in
Suetonius that there stood before the entrye into Nero his golden house, a
Colossus of 130. foot high, with bigness in every part and limme agreeable
unto the height. Of the prices of statuies and images of gold and silver I read
not: but of many made as one of Gorgias Leontinus a rhetoric teacher of gold
set up at Delphos, and an other of Mithridates brought by Lucullus to Rome
in his triumph: and also in Pompe^^s, one of king Pharnaces in silver, and
many were erected of that metal in the honor of Augustus, the which
flattery at the length brought them, to be very common at Rome: but as I said
I do remember none valued, but only two Dolphines brought by C. Gracchus at
five sesterties that is xxix. a pound. And correspondent unto their sumptuous
houses was also their household stuff. All the Vtensiles of the kitchen had
Antiochus Sedetes in his expedition against the Parthians, Plin. 53. cap. 11
and Marcus Antonius, of silver, which Caluus the Orator complains in
Pliny, to be common in every man's house at Rome: but Antonius with Bassus in
Martial, and Heliogabalus, in Lampridius, Lamprid. in vit.
and Antonius Sopus in Pliny, had their close stools of gold, and
Heliogabalus his pispotts of precious stones: in what stuff then may we think
their meat was served, who abused gold and precious stones unto so filthy an
office? As for close stools and chamber pots of silver had every woman of any
countenance at Rome, ye and of gold to be no dainties at Alexandria and in
Asia, Pli^. lib. 33. cap. 11.
it may appear by Clemens Alexandrinus. Before the civil wars says Pliny
between Sylla and Marcus were there 500. chargers in Rome of an hundredth pound
of silver, but our age sais he, is stronger: for in the reign of Claudius, a
bondeman of his called Drusillianus caused one to be made of 500. pound, and
his fellows 800. of 58.l. This would Aphricanus the younger have wondered at,
who left unto his heir but xxxij.l. of silver, and also when he triumphed of
Carthage, brought thence but 4476. pound, and that was all the silver which
Carthage had, which contended long time with Rome for the dominion of the whole
world, the which says Pliny, will not suffice a private man's table in our
days. His Brother Allobrogicus was the first Roman that had a thousand pound
of silver, and anon after Liuius Drusus, the troublesome tribune of the
commons, left 11000.l. for that an ancient senator was noted by the Censor
for having of five pound of silver, will be taken now for a tale and a lie:
as also that the legates of the Aetolians found Aelius Catus served in his
Consulship in vessels of clay, and had no other plate all his life time, then
one cup, the which his Father in law Aemilius gave him when he overcame
Perseus king of Macedonie, who had wonderful store both of golden and silver
plate. We also find this jest of the Carthaginians, that they say that in no
country they lived more friendly and familiarly together, then they did in
Rome, for wheresoever they supped, or with whom, they were always served with
one and the same plate. But after those homely days, L. Crassus gave for two
cups made by Mentor, the famous goldesmithe, without plate of whose
woorkmanshippe there were few tables at Rome served (says Iuuenal,) 781. he
had also other plate that cost him forty five pound, a pound. Lib. 33. cap.
12.
Pliny also reports that Pitheas ingraued upon a cup Ulysses, and
Diomedes, stealing the Palladium every ounce whereof was priced and sold at
tente sesterties, that is lxxviii. pound two shillings and vi.d. Unto this
chargeable plate were ye Greeks and the Asians maruellously given, in so much
that Cicero does affirm against Verres, yt there was no man in Sicyl of any
wealth to speak of, yt had not at the lest, if he had no plate else, a great
chalice or cup, with the Images of the Gods, and a boole which ye women should use
in sacrifice, with a pair of censers, and al those parcels made by some of
those famous ancient Goldsmiths, and artificers with singular cunning. Pli. lib.
37. ca. 1
Pliny also reports, yt a widow at Rome, and she to not very rich, did give
for a dishe made of Crystal, fashioned like unto a trey, 15000. sesterties, ye
is, 11718.l. and of a cup of Myrrh, which would hold but. 3. sextaries, yt is,
a pottle and half a pint, yet was sold for lxxx. sesterties, that is, 625.l.
But Titus Petronius, that he might disherite Nero his table, brake at his death
a cup of Myrrha, which had cost him 300. sesterties, the which is. 2343. l.
15.s^. But Nero, as it became a prince, exceeded all men, by getting a cup
which cost him tricies, 32437.l. ten shillings.

Moreover, the use of glass (says Pliny) to drink in, has driven away the
use both of gold and silver, and grown into such estimation, ye two small
drinking glasses were sold for.6000. Pli. li. 35. ca 12.
sesterties, the which is almost forty seven pound. Yea, riot (says he) is
now come to this pass, that vessels and dishes of potters work, are esteemed
more in value then platters of Myrrha. For Vitellius caused one to be made
which cost him.200. sesterties, yt is, 1500.l. But Budey does otherwise
interpret this place, taking the dish for the meat contained therein, the
which he valueth at decies sestertium (for so he reads) that is, 7812.l.
10.s^. to the which interpretation I would not assent, seeing ye Pliny in that
chapter entreats only of vessels of potters workmanship, and the prices of
them: but that in the next sentence before he says: for when we told you
before, entreating of the nature of birds, that one dishe of Aesopus the
plaier did cost 600. sesterties, I doubt not but the readers would be angry.
But in deed Vitellius etc. The which does make me incline unto Budeis
learned lore, that he made a platter of clay so great, (for the which purpose
he caused a new furnace to be built abroad in the fields) as contained so
much dainty viandes, as amounted to that sum. But to return unto ye rest
of our fine furniture of household, I read that the flourishing Friar Cardinal,
Bap. Fulg. li. 9 cap. 1.
of who^ I spoke before, had the teekes of his bedds made of silk, and cloth
of gold, and Heliogabalus his beds stuffed with the soft hairs of hares,
Lamprid. in vit.
and the down that grew under ye wings of partriches. The beddestedles to be
covered and plated over with silver and gold and garnished with mother of
pearl, Plin. lib. 33
and Indian torteises bought at unreasonable prices, ye and with precious
stones was common at Rome, Metellus Scipio, says Pliny, accounted, it among
the capital faults, Martial. in Epigr.
that the hangings of one dining chamber of Babylonian work were sold for
800000. sesterties, the which is above 6000. l. when as now of late years
Nero bought them which cost him quadringenties, which is above 300000.l. so
that those hangings which Verres took from Heius were not of the best sort,
although Cicero says they were notorious thoroughout all Sicyl, seeing that
they were valued but at 200000. sesterties, that is 1500.l. or else if it were
of the best kind of Attalica, then were the Attalica nothing comparable unto
the Babilonica, the which I marvel at the Attalica being interwouen with gold,
and ye other but of diverse colors. But to make ye excessive prices of hangings
more credible unto them ye do measure al things passed in ancient time by the
unjust rule of their own age: Leo the tenth bishop of Rome, since the memory
of man, Paul. Iou. in vita Leonis.
had ye history of ye Apostles wroght in Arras to set over the altar of S.
Sixtus chapel, ye cost him. 50000. ducats. The Romans had also their chaires
and stools of iuory, and silver very cunningly engraven and guilt, and their
chariots also like garnished, Lamp. in vita.
the which thing Alexander Seuerus, a hearty hater of all riot, in so much,
that he would not possess him self above two hundredth pound of plate, and
thought that neither gold nor silver decent to be worn by men, suffered them
to be used for the honor of the city. Neither was the madness of the Romans
less in their costly tables, with whom the women did use to stop the men's
mouths, when that they would cast them in the teeth with their pearls. In
that poverty (says Pliny) of Tullies time, Pli. lib. 17.
and that which is more to be marvelled at, in that age, tables of Cedrus,
(which wood does only grow on the mountain Atlas in Africa) were sold for
ten sesterties a piece, that is lxxviij.l. ij.s^. vj.d. With them are
remembered the tables of Afinius Pollio, sold for eleven sesterties, that is
lxxxv.l. xviij s^. iijd. and two by king Iuba, the one for fifteen, that is
Cxvij.l. iij.s^. and the other for little less. But perhaps some man will take
them to be tables of great length, or compass. No says Pliny, the largest
that ever was seen yet until this day, was one belonging unto Ptolomey, king
of Mauritania, joined together of two boordes semicircles, four foot and a
half over, and three inches thick, and greater therein is the wonder of the
workmanship, that the joining of it together can by no means be espied and
found, then of one by nature whole of one piece, which took his name of
Nomius, libert unto Tyberius Caesar, lacking but three quarters of an inch of
four feet over, and so much of half a foot in thickness. In this place me
thinks (says he) we must not omit that Tyberius Caesar had a table two inches
and a quarter above four foot, covered over with mother of pearl, and
silver, whereas his libert had one far richer of a bounche of a tree, that is
a fault of the root. And yet in it was this most praised, that it grew all
under the ground, the which is a more rare thing, then bounches above the
ground, or on the stock or boughs: and that which is bought at so great a
price, is properly the fault or imperfection of a tree.

The eight Chapter. Of the great riot of the Romans in their feasting, with
the great prices of their acates, of the intemperance therein, of Timocreon,
Crispinus, Vitellius, Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Lucius Verus, two
Antioches, Marcus Antonius, and Cleopatra, Aesopus the player, and his son
Clodius, Lucius Lucullus, Galeazo, a Venetian, two Cardinals, and Mulcasses:
and again, the ancient frugalitie in diet of the old Romans, and of
Augustus, and Alexander Seuerus, and also the daily proportion of diet for
household of the king of Persia, and Alexander the great. The great charges of
precious ointments, and the ryotous use of the^: and how Plotius and Mulcasses
were betrayed unto their enemies by their sweet odours. The manifold sorts of
wines, and alterings of water found out by riot, and the rare devises to make
men have an appetite to eat and drink superfluously. The great incommodities
of excess in diet, the great death in Wittenberge with drinking of wine, and
at Alexanders game of drinking: the wonderful grosnesse of Nicomachus,
Ptolomey, Alexander, Dionysius, and Sanctius, of the rare virtue of an herb
to make one lean. Of the nature of the beast Rosomacha, and of certain
strange sheep and swine.
But upon these costly tables were more chargeable viands set. This ravening
Harpie, this bottomless gulf, this insatiable sink the belly, did exercise
the Roman painful idleness, with the care of fetching of fishes, the
Coracine out of Egypt, the Salpa from Eleusis, Aul. Gelli. Pli. and Macro.
the Salmon out of Aquitaine, the Murene from Tartessus in Hispaine, the
Pelamis from Calcedon, the Haddocke and the Whiting from Pissinnutus in
Phrygia, Oysters from the forelande about Sandwiche in England, Cockels from
Chius, the Helops from Rhodes, and all these to be eaten fresh, and of flesh
the Pecocke from Samos, the Attagen or Francoline from Phrygia, the Crane from
Melos, the Kid from Ambratia, the walnut from Thassus, the acorne from Iberia,
although that almost all these things were also bred at home. The unreasonable
prices of fishes at Rome in their flourishing state, Prices of fishes.
may be proved by that Cato the elder was commonly wont to say, that it could
not be that the city could thrive, where that a fish was sold for more money
then an ox. Asinius Celer gave for a Mugil, a fish which sildome says
Pliny, exceedes the weight of two pounds (but Macrobius affirms, that in his
days many far greater were found, and Bellonius holds it to be a Mullet)
8000 nu^mu^: which is above 60.l. A Mullus (the which I do take to be a
barbill, and the frenchmen do call a bearded Ronget) weying sour pounds and an
half, being commanded by Tyberius Caesar to be sold, did Timocreon a Rhodian
buy for five sesterties, that is, above 40.l. Crispinus in Iuuenal gives for a
barbill six sesterties, that is, 42.l. 10.s. and their fine flesh to be very
dear, may appear by the testimonies of Marcus Varro, De re rust.
a noble man of Rome, of great authority, and one accounted in that learned
age of Rome, the best learned of the Romans, the which mollified the heart of
that merciless tyrant otherwise, who would not spare his mothers dear brother,
that he gave him unrequested his pardon, being wickedly proscribed by his
colleges. For he writes, that young pigeons if they were fair, of a good
color, sound, and of a good kind, were commonly sold at Rome for.200. Li. de
re rust.
sesterties, that is, 23.s. 4.d. yea, and if they were excellent, for.1000.
nu^mum, that is 7.l. 16.s. 4.d. And of late, says he, when a merchant cheapned
a pair of pigeons of Lucius Appius, an horsma^ or gentleman of Rome, and he
held them at.1000. nummum: no quoth the merchant, I will give you for them
then.400. denaries, which is.12.l. 10.s. Peacockes also were sold for.50.
denaries, that is.31.s^. 3.d. and their eggs for five denaries, that is, 3.s^.
1.d. ob. and Thrushes says Pliny, were commonly sold for 1.s^. 9.d. ob. a
piece. So that it is no marvel that Varro does affirm, that Aufidius Lurcho,
who was the first that kept and franked peacocks, did make yearly of the
poultrie and foul that he kept about his house.6000. nummum, that is.476.l.
9.s^. and believed Albatius, who said, that if he had built his manor near
unto the sea, where he might have had the commodity of fish, he would have
made of it yearly, 20000. nummum, that is, 1532.l. 10.s^. where now it yeldeth
him for poulterie and venerie, not above 20000. that is, 151.l. 5.s^. A kind,
says Pliny, of rathripe peaches called Duracina, Lib. 15. ca. 12.
were sold at the first coming of them to Rome, for four sesterties, that is,
7.d. ob. a piece, but after when they were passing well liked, for 30. that
is.4.s^ 8.d. ob. the which says he, is strange, because they will not last
above two days after they be gathered, and therefore force the owner to sell
them. If that fruit were so dear, then may one the more safely believe that
which he says in another place, that a tree near unto the city was hired out
by the year, for 2000. sesterties, which is.15.l. 12.s^. 6.d. By these
excessive prices of fresh acates, be coniectured the sumptuousness and
intolerable charges of the supper which was made unto Vitellius the Emperor,
by his brother: Lib. 17. cap. 1. The riot of Vitellius and his brother. Sueto.
at ye which there were.2000 of ye most deintiest fishes, and 7000. birds. But
this supper did he him self pass, says Sue^^^us, by the dedicating of a
dishe or platter, the which for his unmeasurable greatness he called Minerua
her shild, wherein he mingled together the livers of fishes called Scari, to
whom says Pliny, the principality is given, the brains of phesants, and
peacockes, Pli. lib. 10.
the tongs of the birds Phenocoptori, the which to be of the most excellent
taste, Apicius, of all unthrifts the deepest gulf had taught him, the la^te^
of the fishes called Murenae, fet from the Carpathian sea, ^^^e the Rhodes, and
from the straites of Marrocke by Galleyes. This is the dishe whereof I spoke
before, when I entreated of the riot in furniture of household, valuing it at
seven thousand viij.C.xij.l. x.s^.

He would bid himself to banquettes and feasts unto diverse of his companio^s
in one day, and the provision of the feast cost none of them less then three
thousand l. Cornelius Tacitus does affirm, that he riotously spent in banquets
in the eight months that he reigned, nonies millies sestertium, which, is
above threescore and seven hundredth and fifty thousand pounds. And his good
Lord Nero spent at one banquet, on banqueting dishes made with honey, as ours
are now of sugar, whereof it was called the honied supper, quadragies, above
thirty thousand pounds. His manner was oftentimes to continue his feasting
from noone to midnight. And such an other was Caius Caligula, The riot of
Caligula.
who (says Suetonius) did exceed in gluttonous charges the wits and
inventions of all unthrifts, devising new baines, and most monstrous kinds
of meats, and suppers: in so much that he would be washed both with cold
and hot ointments, and would suppe up most, precious pearls, being dissolved
with vinegre, he would at feasts set on the table bread, and meats of gold,
often saying, a man must be a pinchpeny or else a Caesar. Consol. and Albinam.
He spent says Seneca at one supper, centies sestertium, that is lxxviij.
thousand 125, pound. And although he was herein helped with the wits of all
vnthr^^^s, The riot of Heliogabalus Lamprid. in vit.
yet could he scarce find how to cast away upon one supper the tributes of
three provinces. But Heliogabalus would have been ashamed that any man should
have passed him in shameful things: for he besides the invention of a great
number of chargeable dishes, would always eat fish, and nothing else, when
he was in the midland countries far from the sea, and near unto the sea
coast no fish, but all flesh: ye and strange birds, as Phenocopteri, and
such like fet out of far countries. At one supper was he served with 600.
heads of ostriches, for their brains, ye and he promised his pot companions
to serve them at the table with a Phoenix, or else to give them a thousand
pounds of gold for him. When he was very far from the sea, would he feed,
ye the peasaunts of the country with the most dainty lactes of the fishes,
Lupi, and Murenes. And look how many dishes of meat were served unto his
table, so many would he also wastfully throw out at the windows, and apples
with flowers, and precious stones among them. He never bestowed less upon a
supper the^ centum sestertia, which is above 780.l. and very oftentimes 3000.
sestertia, of our money more then 22500.l. But of all his mad feasts two are
most famous, or more truly infamous: at the one were two and twenty courses,
furnished with wonderful dainties, and between every course he and all his
guestes washed, and used women. The other he celebrated after this manner: he
would that at all his friends their houses a sumptuous feast should be
prepared with the self same dishes of meat, that he him self should be
served, and although the one dwelt in Palatio, an other in mount Celius, and
other on mount Capitolinus, and some beyond Tyber: finally some in one place,
and some in another, yet must they eat their dishes in order, and not one man
be in a course before another, and men were sent from one unto an other to
bring news in what course they were: so that one meal was scarce ended in a
whole day, they washing and using women between every course. I find it also
recorded in authors of credit, The riot of Lucullus. Plut. in vita.
that Lucius Lucullus becoming very riotous after his triumph of
Mithridates, ordained stews for Sea fish, and also great pooles for fresh, and
houses to frank all kinds of fowls and venerie, and also appointed a rate of
expenses for every one of his dining chambers: of whom one called Apollo had
his proportion, The rate of Darius and Alex ander in diet. Athen. lib. 4. cap.
6.
50000. nu^mum, that is iij.C.x.l. xij.s^. vj.d. but Plutarch affirms it to be
five myriades of drachmes, which is, 1562. l. ten shillings, the which did five
times exceed the ordinary rate of Alexander the great in his great glory:
who having at meals with him usually lx. or lxx. of his familiars, spent 100.
mines a day, that is 312. pounds, ten shillings. But the king of Persia
daily feeding fifteen thousand, spent at a supper 400. talentes, which is
threescore and fifteen thousand pounds. The frugality of the ancient Romans.
But least that any man should think that this excess in diet was common at
Rome, we read it recorded besides the law made by Licinius Crassus in the
time of Lucullus, for the charges of diet, whereby they were forbidden to
spend upon the Calendes, Nones, and fair days above 30. asses, which is
xxii.d. ob., upon their diet: but on other days there should not be served to
the table more then three pounds of dry flesh, and a pound of salt meat,
and whatsoever grew on the vine, The slender diet of Augustus and other
Emperors.
tree, or earth, that Augustus, who (says Suetonius) was a liberal house
keeper, had ordinarily but three dishes served to his table, and when he had
most but six. But when he was alone he was contented with household bread,
small fishes, curds, and green figs. And also the daily proportion of
Alexander Seuerus his boorde in those riotous days, was for the whole day
thirty sextaries of wine, that is five galons, one potle, and a pint, and of
fine manchet thirty pound, of household bread for his retinue fifty, of diverse
kinds of fleshes thirty pounds: he had also hens, and eggs, and upon a
holy day a goose, and on principal feasts a feasaunt, and sometimes two, ye
and two cocks, and every day a hare, and often venison, whereof he would
always send part unto his familiars: that I may omit the sparing of Pertinax,
who would have half lettices to be set up to serve him again: and his
successor Julian, who would make three meals of a hare, or a pigge, and often
suppe with out fish or flesh. But unto these two lascivious banquets of
Heliogabalus, will I adioine two other famous feasts, not only for the number
of dainty dishes, but also for the magnificent gifts that were given thereat
unto the guestes. Capitolinus writes, that Lucius Verus copartener in the
Empire unto Antonius Co^modus, made a feast, In vita Vari. The riot of Lucius
Comodus.
whereat were first seen in Rome twelve persons, for they in the ancient
world never used to have above nine, according to that saying of Varro in
Aulus Gellius, that a feast must begin at the number of the graces, and end
with the muses, that is to wit neither be fewer then three, nor above nine. And
Capitolinus says, that it was a common proverb in every man's mouth, Septem
conuiuium, nouem vero conuititium. But to return unto Lucius, he gave unto
every one of the guestes the beautiful boy that waited on his cup, and also
the caruer, and all the dishes that were served in, and unto every one of them
of all those byrds, beasts, and fishes that were served at the table one
alive: and also at every change of drink, and as often as they drank, cups
of myrrha, and crystal of Alexandria, ye and of silver, gold, and precious
stone. They had also given garlandes with many pendentes of gold hanging down
like unto ashen keys, and flowers, strange for the time of the year. Boxes
also of gold, like unto Alabaster boxes, full of precious ointments, were also
bestowed on them with charriottes, whose joints were of silver, and their
moyleliters, that in the^ they might return from the feast. The charges whereof
is said to be valued at sexagies, that is five and forty thousand pounds:
but when Antonius Co^modus heard of this riotous banquet, he bewailed the
public state of the Roman Empire.

And of such like feasts where also live birds and beasts were given unto
the guestes, Lib. 5 cap. 9. Lib. 4. cap. 7.
and also crowns of gold, and silver, and the Camelles, which they did
drink, The riot of Cleopatra.
did after their manner mount on, does Atheneus report to be made by two
Antioches kings of Syria: who also tells that when Cleopatra Queen of Egypt
came into Cilicia to receive Marcus Antonius, she prepared for him a roial
feast, all the furniture where of was of gold, magnificently adorned with
precious stones, and wrought with excellent workmanship: and also the walls
were hanged with purple and gold. And when she had in this sort furnished and
garnished twelve dining chambers, she invited Antonius, and other whom it
pleased her. But when that Antonius woondered at the magnificence of the sight,
she smiling, said: that she did give it him all, and desired him with his
familiars, and capteines to suppe with her the next day: where the furniture
was so passing gorgeous, and rich, that the first seemed very palterie: and
this also she gave unto Antonius. But the rich and brave bed whereat every
captain sat, and the cups they drank in, with the sumptuous stools and
seats, she gave unto the capteines, and willed them to take them away with
them. And when they departed she gave unto every man that was in dignity, a
rich licter, and the men that bare it, and to the rest goodly horses with
their brave and rich ornaments. And of such a magnificent feast tells
Iouius in the life of Galeazo the vicount of Milan, The magnificent feast of
Galeaze.
who at the marriage of his daughter unto Lionel son unto Edward the third,
King of this noble Realm, commanded that after every course, the which were
above thirty, so many gifts of unwonted magnificence should follow, as there
were dishes in the course: all which things John Galeazo his son, who was
Prince of the chosen young gentlemen that waited, bringing unto the table
presented unto Leonell. There were at one course threescore and ten goodly
great horses, covered with saddles of velvet and silver, but at an other silver
plate, hierfalcons, hounds, greyhounds, armor for horses, sumptuous shirts of
maile, glittering complete harness of strong steel, head pieces adorned with
mighty high and rich crestes, garments wrought with pearls, harness
girdles: last of all, rare precious stones set in jewels, and a mighty mass
of clothe of gold and purple. But such was the furniture of the feast, that
the meat which was taken from the table, would abundantly suffice ten
thousand men. The riot of a Venetian.
Of such a sumptuous supper also do Sabelicus and Egnatius mention made of
late years by a gentleman Venetian unto an hundrethe gentlemen of the same
city: which supper continued until day, or after Egnatius, seven hours, and
for the variety of dainties, number of courses, and of dishes in every course,
and the diversity of melody before every course, deserved to be numbered among
the most riotous feasts of the Sybarites, The riot of a Cardinal.
ye and of the Roman Emperors. Of a very riotous banquet read we also in the
secrets of nature, made by a Cardinal in Province, which puttes me in mind
of the carnal Cardinal spoken off by Iouius in his book of fishes, who used
to glory that he had buried in his belly 20000. ducats, which might more
honorably have been bestowed upon so many poor folks. Rap. vol. com. Vrb.
lib. 33.
But my before mentioned Friar Peter, passed him, for he within two years spent
says Volaterane, in riotous banquets and trifles.300000. ducats. But to
return again unto Heliogabalus, he was not contented so sumptuously to feast
himself, and his friends, but that he would command great store of the
renowned grapes of Apamea in Syria to be wastfully thrown into the maungers
unto his horses, and would feed his dogs with the farsed livers of geefe, (a
dishe of great price among the riotous Romans,) and Lions and Libardes with
Phesaunts, and Parrates, the tounges of whom, and of all other sweet singing
birds would he greedily eat: not I think to know whither that they would
delight the palate as much as they did the ear, but because of their great
price: which he loved of all meats to be told him to be far greater then
it was in very deed, that it might make him, as he used to say, to have the
more eager appetite unto it. The riot of Aesopus.
But in this kind of riot the dishe of Aesopus the tragedy player, is most
famous, Pli. li. 10. ca. 51.
or rather infamous: which was valued at 600. sestertia 4500.l: wherein he had
put birds of great price either for singing, or else for imitation of man's
speech, being induced thereunto by no other sweetness, but that he might in
them eat the imitation of man, no not once reuerencing those rich and great
gains of his, Who first franked henns
and gotten by the voice. Now me thinks in this place is it worthy of the
noting that Pliny writes, that ye inhabitaunts of Delos first began to cramme
hens. I find it forbidden at Rome by the law of C. Fannius 40. years before
the third Punical wars, to have any foul set on the table, except one hen,
and she should not be franked: which clause being taken from thence, walked
throughout all the laws of charges of feasts which were made afterward in
Rome: but there was a starting hole found out to frank capons, which the
law spoke not off, and to put milk unto their meat, and so are they liked as
far the more pleasant to the palate. The first that ordained coupes to shut
up all kinds of birds, was M. Lelius Sirabo, one of the order of the Equites
at Brundusium, from him we began to restrain in prison those living things,
to whom nature had assigned the air.

But this cramming of birds is no news unto us, but to have mighty stews,
or arms of the sea enclosed to keep sea fish in, is rare. Plin. 9.54.
Sergius Crata first invented in the creek Baiae stews for oysters, in the
age of L. Crassus the Orator, before ye social wars, Pondes of salt water.
not for his throat but for covetousness, reaping great revenues by this
invention: in the same age Licinius Murena invented stews for other fishes:
whose example the nobility followed. Philip, and Hortensius, Lucullus also
cutting out a hill with greater charges, then he had built his goodly house,
did let in the sea, and made a ponde, the fishes whereof were sold after his
death for quadringenta that is 3000.l. The first that invented a stew only
for Murenes, was C. Hirius, who at the triumphal suppers of Caesar the
dictator, lent him by weight six thousand Murenes: for he would take for them
neither money, nor yet any other reward. This man's manor house being a
very pelting little thing, did his fish pondes sell for quadragies 30000.
pounds. Fuluius Hirpinus made stews of cockles a little before the civil
watres between Pompey and Caesar, seuering also the kinds of them: that the
white which be bredde in the territory of Reate, might be by themselves, the
Illyrian, who be the greatest, by themselves, and so the African, who are most
fruiteful, and the Solitane who are most noble.

He also invented a fatting of them with Sapa and Far, and other things, that
also franked cockles might glutte the gourmandise of the delicate. Of those
that devoured pearls and precious stones.
But yet there is some affinity between Fish and Flesh, and the palate, for
they have some taste, but pearls and precious stones have neither good nor ill
smacke, and therefore no aliaunce with the gullet, nor could bring any
pleasure unto it, unless that their great price did make them sweet, which
reason would should sower them. There were, says Pliny, two pearls which did
excel all other which have been since the beginning of the world, Cleopatra.
both of them did Cleopatra, the last queen of Egypt possess, being delivered
unto her by the hands of the kings of the East. When that Antonius her sweet
heart was every day franked with exquisite banquettes: she with proud and
malapert statelines and scornefulnesse, like unto a harlot Queen, debased and
dispraised his dainties, and the provision, and furniture of his table. But
when he demanded of her what greater magnificence could possibly be made, she
answered: that she would absume at one supper centies sestertium, 75000. l.
Antonius was desirous to learn, but he did not think that it could by any
means be done. So then after that they had laid a wager thereof, the next day
when the matter should be tried, she did set before Antonius, least the day
should be lost, a supper otherwise magnificent, but of their ordinary
proportion: then Antonius began to scoff, and called for a reckoning of the
supper, she said that the dishes which he had, was but a surplusage, and that
she her self alone would spend at that supper the valewe, and suppe at 75000.
l. commanding the waiters to bring in the second table, (for with their
fruit they always in the old time changed their table.) By her commandment
the waiters did set before her one only dishe, wherein was nothing but
vineager, whose sharpness and strength does resolve pearls. She ware at that
present time, that singular, and in very deed lovely work of nature on her
ears. He alludeth to the name unto
Then Antonius expecting what in Gods name she would do, she pulled off one
of them, and put it into the vineagre, and when it was resolved supped it up.
L. Plancus the judge of the wager laid his hand on the other, whom she was
about to dress, and absume in like manner, and pronounced judgment that
Antonius had lost the wager, the man chasing thereat. Let the fame of this
pearl accompany his fellow, who after the Queen the winner of this so
worthy a wager was taken prisoner, was cut into two parts to be set on both
the ears of Venus, in the Pantheon, being but half their supper. And yet for
all this shall they not carry away this price, and they shall be spoiled of the
glory of riotousnesse. For Clodius, Clodius.
the son of Aesopus a tragedy player, being left by him his heir of
abundant riches, had done it at Rome before that time in pearls of great
valewe, lest that Antonius should be too proud in his Triumuirate, being
compared unto one almost a plaier, and he not brought unto it by any wager,
wherefore it was the more kinglike, but that he might try with the glory of
the palate, what taste pearls had: and when they had wonderfully well liked him,
that he should not know it himself alone, he also gave unto every one of his
guestes one to drink up. But, think you that Caligula Caligula.
would not strain all his sinews to win so gay a game, who used to drink
most precious pearls and stones, and would use at his table bread and meat
of gold, as you have heard before. Neither is the beastly belly satisfied
with the robbing of the Indian and Arabian seas of their pearls, but that also
she can eat no meat, unless it be seasoned with the bitter berries, rindes,
and roots of those far countries, and of excessive price. The prices of
spices at Rome in Plinies days.
A pound of long pepper (says Pliny) is sold for 25. denaries, ye is 15. s^.
7. d. ob. of white for 17. which is 10. s^. 7. d. ob. of black for 14. eight
shillings nine pence. It is marvelous, says he, that the use of it has
liked men so well. For in some other things the pleasantness of them have
caught men: in other the lovely look and outward show and beauty has
invited: but in pepper is there not any commendation, either of apple or berie:
and only it pleases for his bitterness, and this in Gods name must be fet
out of India. What was he that first would try so ougly a thing in meats? and
who did so greedily eat it, that it had not been better for him to have
remained still hungry? It grows wild in his country, and yet is it sold
here by weight, like gold and silver. Cynamon, says he, was worth but 1000.
denaries a pound, that is, 31. l. 5. s. now is it risen half in half: But
Isocynamon, or cynamon wood, at 300. denaries a pound, that is, 9. l. 6. s^. 9.
d. A sextarie or pint and an half of Baulme, was worth 1000. denaries 31. l.
5. s^. and yet Heliogabalus used no other oil in his lamps: Malabathrum at
300. denaries a pound, that is, 9. l. 6. s^. 9. d. the ears of Spikenarde at
90. 56. s^. 3. d. a pound. Of these costly drugs and such other, were their
ointments made in ancient time, The riot of sweet ointments.
of whom some did cost 310. denaries. 9. l. 12. s^. 11. d. a pound, and
doubtless, considering the price of the stuff, they were made of, many were
far dearer, specially seeing that Marie Magdalene a poor woman, washed our
Savior his feet with a pound of ointment of Nardus Pistica, Io. 12.
which was valued at 300. denaries. With these costly ointments did they use to
anoint, not only their heads, but also all parts of their body, yea, the soles
of their feet. Pli. li. 13 cap. 3.
And Heliogabalus swimmed, neither in baine nor ponde, but filled with precious
ointment, which thing Pliny affirms Caligula used to do: and Nero both in
cold and hot ointments. And lest this may seem to a good thing which only
happens to princes, a bondma^ of Neroes, accustomed to wash him self in his
tine filled with precious ointment. This, says Pliny, is a riot, of al most
superfluous. For pearls and precious stones yet go unto the heir, and garments
lengthen and prolong their time, but ointments incontinently breath away, and
die in their hours: Moreover, they are no pleasure unto him self, but unto
other, for he that wears it, smelles it not. Their highest commendation is,
that the smell does inuit a woman passing by, who never before once thought of
him, but went about her business: yea, but oftentimes more worthily the
enemy. As we do read that Lucius Plotius proscribed in the Triumuirate, and in
our days Muleasses the expulsed king of Tunes being hidden, were bewrayed and
betrayed unto their enemies by their fragrant odors. Whereby the Triumuiri were
acquitted of cruelty, and Amida Muleasses son, of impiety: for who will not
judge, but that such men worthily perished? It was thought by men of experience
(says Pliny) yt al Arabia brought not forth in one year so much sweet odors,
Lib. 12. cap. 18.
as Nero burnt upon ye last day of his pomp. It was also common at Rome for
private me^ to besprinckle ye walls of their baines with precious ointments, yea
they used to anoint upon holy days, the fierce and dustie ensigns, as though
that ye puissant Eagles corrupted with this wretched reward had conquered ye
whole world: no rather hereby they sought defense for their vices, that by this
rite they might use to annoint their heads under their helmets. But also in
good faith (says he) some put them into drink, and bitterness is so highly
priced, yt they may have and take prodigal odor at both the lower and upper
end of the body. And yt they used them with meats, specially with herbs, and
roots, yea, ye very peasants, do ye Sataristes report: and such a kind of
costly cookerie used Muleasses ye king of Tunes, Muleasses his costly cookerie.
Paul Iou. hist. sui temp.
for a peacock and two pheasants infarsed after the manner of his kitche^ with
musk, ciuet, and amber grease, (ye lack of ye which precious odors, the souls
of the ancient riotous Romans sore in hell lament) did cost above an hundredth
ducats. Hereof grew cooks into great price. They (says Pliny) ye complained
of riot, bewailed it, The great price of cooks.
ye more money was given for a cook, then for a horse, but now cooks are
bought with the prices of triumphs, and fishes of cooks, Pli. li. 9. ca. 17.
and there is almost no man which is more esteemed and accounted more worth,
then he that can very cu^ningly drown his masters wealth. This fine cookerie,
the corrupter of nature, Lib. 19. ca. 4
caused Pliny to complain, that herbs, yea, and water, which are common
unto all living things, are exempted from the commons, and made meat and
drink only for noble men. But it can not be better expressed, then with his
own words. Out of the garden is the commons their shambles, Riot in herbs and
water.
with how much more innocent and harmless diet? No, I do believe it is
better to diue into the bottom of the sea, and kinds of oysters to be sought
by shipwrackes, and birds to be set beyond the river of Phasis, who one would
have thought should have been safe from fetching, by reason of the fabulous
terror that we read in Poets: no, for that they are the more precious, to go
a fouling for other into Numidia, and Aethiopia, among the graves, or to fight
with wild beasts, coveting to be eaten of that which an other man does eat.
But oh Lord, how good cheap are herbs, how ready for pleasure and
satietie, if that the same indignation and spite which does every where, did
not also here occur and come in the way? it were in deed to be borne
withal, exquisite fruits to grow, of whom some for their taste and verdure,
some for their greatness, other for their strangeness, should be forbidden
poor men, and wines to be made to last until great ages, and to be gelded
with bags, neither any man to be so old, that he may not drink wine elder
then him self: and also riot to invent a certain food out of corn only and
the fine flower of it to be taken, and it to live and continue longer then the
works and ingrauings of the bakehouses: some to be bread for noblemen, some
for the commons, bread corn discending in so many kinds, even unto the
basest of the commons. What, is there a distinction also in herbs? and has
riches made a difference in a meat, yea, which is to be bought for an
halfepenie? And some also of them do the tribes say grow not for them the
stalk by franking being made so great, that a poor man's table may not
receive and hold him. Nature had made sperage wild, that every man might
every where gather them, but behold now there is francked sperage, and
Ranenna sells them for pounds a piece. Out alas the prodigies of the paunch?
it would have been a marvel not to be lawful for cattle to eat thistles, it
is not lawful for the commons. Water also is separated, and the very Elements
of nature are severed by the power of riches. These men drink snow, they ice:
and do turn the punishments and pains of mountains into the pleasure of the
throat. Coldenesse is kept in heat, and a device is found for snow to be
cold in foreign and contrary months. Other water they boil, He alludeth
unto the two departures of the commons out of the city unto those hills when
they were oppressed by the noble and rich men.
and that also anon after they winter, or use in the winter having warm water
in winter. So nothing does please man, being such as it pleases nature. And
be there also some herbs which grow only for rich men, let no man look
about for the holy and Auentine hills, and the departure of the commons out of
the city, for surely death shall make them equal, whom wealth has
ouermatched. Thus far Pliny, who also in his 14. book tells the
waywardnes of men to be such about their wines, How many kinds of wines.
that they had invented 195. kinds of them, and of special kinds of those
general, almost double the number. Neither did the immeasurable charges of
their meats, Devises to make men eat and drink
satisfy their unthrifty minds, but that by vomiting they must make
themselves ready to eat often, as though there had been no other use of eating
meat, but to vomit it up again: The beast Rosomacha. Car. de sub. 10.
not much unlike unto the Rosomacha in Lithuama, a beast of the bigness of a
dog, and the face of a catte, the back and tail of a fox, who uses when
he has filled his belly with meat, as full as it will hold, to scummer out
that which he has eaten, with squising his belly between two trees standing
near together, and then incontinently to return again unto the carreine, and
so to do continually so long as he can get meat. But the roisting Romans to
have a quarrel unto the cup, besides salt meats, and old rotten cheese,
which are in use also now a days among our tipplers, they used to drink
cold poisons, as hemlocke, that death might make them power in strong wine
lustely to save their lives: other took the poulder of a pomise stone, and
other like things most abominable, which by rehearsing I am ashamed to
teach: The incomodities of surfeiting and drunkenness.
the wariest of those tiplers, says he, do we see to be boiled with baynes,
and to be carried out of them half dead: yt they may drink the harder: but
other can not stay for the bed, no not for their clothes but incontinently
naked, and hasing take mighty great cups, as it were to show their
strength, and plentifully power in the wine, that they may immediately vomit it
out, and again swill, and up with it straightway, and so the third time: as
though they were borne to destroy wine, as and if wine could not otherwise be
shed, but through men's bodies. But the fruits or rather incommodities of
ravenous gluttony does he set down in that place. That it fall out the best
unto them, they never see the rising of the Sun, and they live the less
while. Hereof comes palenesse, hanging eyliddes, ulcers of the eyes, shaking
hands, which will shed full cups (which is a present pain) furiall
sleapes, disquiet and ill rest in the night, the next day stinking breathes
cast out of the mouth, and oblivion almost of all things, and the death of the
memory. It is recorded by Plutarch, that at a game of drinking made by
Alexander 41. drank them selves dead. An. 1540. was a very good year for
wines, in the which there were found to die in the duchy of Wittenberg, Io.
maus. in Loc com.
at feasts from Autumn unto the first sunday of Lent 400. persons: so that we
need no ancient examples. Many dishes, says sage Seneca, bring many
diseases, and innumerable diseases do reward innumerable cooks: which is
agreeable unto that golden sentence of Pliny, great diversity of dishes is
very pestilent, but of sauces and dressings of them more pestilent. Ask me,
says Seneca in his controversies, why we die so soon, because we live by
deaths. But admit that a man did not with excessive quantity of meat, put
the veins in danger of breaking, nor set on fire the spirits with hot
wines, (which the Phycisians will never grant) yet who would not think it
more intolerable then death, by gourmandise to be so ouerloden with flesh, and
fat, that he can not move, as Nicomachus of Smyrna, or not go, as was
Ptolomei Euagetes king of Egypt: Gal. de morb. diff^r. Monstrous fat men.
who in many years before he went forth to receive that Peerless Paragon
of the world Scipio Africanus the younger, walked not on foot: or Alexander
king of that Realm, who could not walk for grosenesse, Athe. lib. 12. cap. 27.
but stayed up with two men: or be like unto Dionysius the tyrant of Heraclea,
Ath. li. 12. ca. 26
whose fatness would not suffer him to fetch his breath, and did put him in
continual fear of smouldering: wherefore the physicians prescribed very long
and small needles to be made, with whom his servants should prick his sides and
belly, when he was fallen into a dead sleep: as long then as they were driven
through the fat only, he felt nothing: but when that the needles were come
unto a more pure place, Sheep and swine monstruously fat Vide Card. de sub.
10.
and touched the quick flesh, then would he awake. This I think was one of ye
kind of weathers, that Ioannes Leo reports, that he saw at Asioe, a city of
Egypt: of whom the tails weighed some 80.l. and some 150.l. by the which
weight they were made immovable, unless that their tails were laid in little
wheeleborowes: or of the hogs mentioned by skilful Scaliger, De sub. ex. 199
cap. 2.
that could not move for fat, and became so insensible, that mice made them
holes to needle in their buttockes, Athe. lib. 12. cap. 27.
and they not once felt them. Maga the King of Cyrene was choked with his foul
paunche. Tarapha de r^g. Hisp.
Which thing Sanctius the King of Castill fearing, whose mighty mass of
belly and fat had taken from him all function of man's life, chose rather to
be killed out of hand by taking of a pernicious heart, of the king of
Corduba, a Moore, to make him lean, then to abide the intolerable torments of
many years pressing to death with so great a weight.

The ninth Chapter. Of the riotous magnificence of the Pyramides, Laberinthes,
Obelisces, the gardein at Babylon, the vain sumptuous ships of Ptolomey,
Hiero, Sclostres, and Caligula, the chargeable fruitelesse bridges of Traian
and Caligula, the theater of Seaurus, the incredible charges of the Romans in
plays games and triumphs.
Now leaving private riot I will rehearse examples of public, which they do
cloak with the honorable name of magnificence. The Pyramides. Pli. li. 36.
ca. 12
And first will I speak of the Pyramides, the idle and foolish ostentation of
the Kings of Egypt, seeing that it is recorded yt they were made for no other
use, nor purpose, but that they should not leave money unto their successors,
or those that lay in await for the crown, or else to keep the people from
idleness. Within 78. years and four months were there three made. The
greatest of which Pyramides is reported by Herodotus, and Pliny, to have been
built by 360000. men in twenty years, of Arabian stone. It is engraven in the
Pyramid, that there was laid out for the provision of the workmen in persely,
onions, and garlike 1600. talents, which is 288000.l But Pliny has 1800.
which amounts to 324000.l. which if it be so, says Herodotus, how much is
it credible was consumed upon the tools, meat, and apparel of the workmen.
Every front of this Pyramid (for it was fouresquare) being eight acres broad,
and so many high: which acres of theirs being 240. long, and 120. broad,
contain 28800. foot, and multiplied by eight amounts to 230400. foot, and
al of square stone, and very decently and finely shut together: never a stone
being less and shorter then thirty foot. But whereas the Pyramides be
wonderful, yet do the Laberinthes far exceed them in sumptuous folly. The
Laberinthes.
The Egyptian Laberinthe has twelve haules covered over with one roufe, and
six gates on the north side, and six other on the southe, directly one over
against the other: and enclosed with a wall. The houses or rooms of it, are
part under the ground, and part above, built one upon the other, and both in
number 3500. The upper buildinges, says Herodotus, we saw, and report that
which we beheld. But we learned the lower by hear say, and relation of
others. For the governors of the Egyptians would by no means have them
showed, because yt they say, there were both the sepulchers of the kings, that
built the Labyrinth, and also of the sacred crocodiles: so that of the lower
edifices we relate that, which we know by hear say: the upper we ourselves
saw, greater then men's works. For the goings out through the houses, and the
goings back through the haules, most diverse, did strike me with infinite
admiration. From the haule, we go into parlours, out of parlours into
chambers, out of chambers into other solars, and out of parlours again into
other halles. Of all these edifices the roof over head is of stone, as be also
the walls, and garnished every where with engraven imagerie. All the halles
for the greatest part, are of fine wrought white stone, set round about with
pillars: close to the angle where the labyrinthe ends, stands a pyramid of
forty paces, every pace being six foot, every foot four hand breadth, in
this pyramid be there great beasts, engraven: where the way is under the
ground. And whereas the labyrinthe is such, The lake of Merios.
yet the standing poole of Merios where the labyrinthe stands, makes me much
more to marvel, whose circuit is 3600. furlongs, that is to wit, as much as
Egypt is unto the sea. Where it is deepest is it 50. paces. That it was made
by hand and dug down so deep to the two pyramides convince which stand
almost in the midst of the lake, being fifty paces above the water, and so
much under. Upon both of whom is there a collossus of stone setting in a
throne, so that the pyramides are 100 paces high. The water of the poole is
not natural, for the soil is very dry, but derived out of Nylus, six
months, flowing into the poole, and running back into Nylus so many. In
those months that it runs out, enriching the kings treasure every day with
a talent of silver, for the abundance of fish which is in it, and when it
flows into the poole, every day with twenty pou^ds. This poole do the
inhabitants say, runs out into the Syrtes of Africa, through a mighty ditch
dug under the ground through the midst of the land. Of these monstrous
mazes thus writes Pliny. The first of them that ever was made was built in
Egypt, The description of labyrinthes out of Pliny.
about 3600. years ago, of the which Dedalus no doubt, took a plat to build
his labyrinthe in Creta: but he imitated not above the hundredth part of it:
which does contain goings round of ways, and occourses and recourses,
meetings with ways, and goings back of ways, out of whom no man can get him
self: and this happens not because the ways do often turn, and wind this
way, and that way: but only by reason of the thick standing of doors, set of
purpose to deceive men, when they meet with the right way, and to make them go
back again into the wrong ways. This was the second labyrinthe: the third
was in Lemnos, the fourth in Italy, all of them vaulted above with polished
stone. The Egyptian labyrinthe had at the coming in pillars of marble of
Paros, but all the rest of the pillars of the house were of marble of Syene:
which I marvel at, seeing that Syenian marble is far fairer, glistering with
thick red spots like fire: the stones are so strongly compacted, that no not
many ages can dissolve them, the Hieropolitanes helping to their uttermost, who
did wonderfully annoy that envied work. To declare the position of the work
and all parts of it I mind not, seeing that it is divided into regions and
into sixteen shires, which they call Nomos, unto the names of them, so many
huge houses being attributed. Furthermore, it does contain the temples of all
the Egyptian Gods, and moreover, fifteen Nemeses included in chapels.
There be a great number of pyramides of forty yardes high, every one having
at the foot six walls. Now when they be weary of going, come they unto
that inexplicable error of the ways: but also before that they go up into
the high dining chambers, and galleries, all of them being of ninety stayres:
within are there pillars of Porphyrite stone, images of the gods, statues of
kings, and idols of monsters. But such was the standing of some of the houses,
that when they opened the doors, there was a terrible thunder heard within:
but for the greatest part the entries and ways be dark, and again, without the
walls of the labyrinth, be other huge pyles of buildings adjoined, which they
call Pteron. And there also are other houses under the ground. Enough is spoken
of the Egyptian and Cretan labyrinth. The labyrinth of Lemnos is like unto
them, only more marvelous for a hundredth and forty pillars. Also Porsena
king of Hetruria made one for to be his tumbe: and also that the vanity of
foreign kings might be passed by the Italians. But seeing the fabulositie
does exceed al credit, we will use in the declaration of it, Varro his own
words: he was buried hard by the city of Clusium, in the which place he
left a monument of square stone, every one of the sides being thirty foot
broad, and fifty high: and within the base of the work, is there within a
labyrinthe, inextricable, into which if one go without a clewe of thread, he
cannot find the way out. Upon that square work stand five pyramides, four in
the corners, and one in the midst, being at the base three score and fifteen
foot broad, and a hundredth and fifty high, made spire like, and on the
top of all is a ball of brass, and a Pegasus upon it, from whom small belles
hang down by chains, who being driven by the wind made a noise, which may be
heard a great way off, as in the old time it was at Dodona. Upon the which
ball be four other Pyramides, every one a hundredth foot high, above whom
upon one ground, or floor are five other Pyramides set, whose height Varro
was ashamed to put in: the tales of the Hetrusces say, they were as high as
all the rest of the works: such was the extreme foolish madness of the king, to
seek for glory by cost which would do no man good: and moreover, to weary the
wealth of the kingdom, but yet so, that the praise of the workman should be
the greater. From Egypt also, Of Obelisces.
the mother of all naughtiness, came obelisces, so called: because that they
resemble the form of a spit, being long stones of marble of Syene, set up in
the the honor of the sun, whose beams they do very well express. The first
says Pliny, that ordained them in Egypt was Mitres, being admonished by a
dream, Herodotus affirms it to be Pheron, and that it was 400. cubits long,
and eight broad. Pliny tells of many in Egypt, and among al other of one
the work of twenty thousand men: which when the king Ramises would have to
be raised, and feared that the engines were not able to bear the weight of
him, to denounce greater danger unto the care and charge of the workmen, he
tied his own son to the top of the stone, that the saving of his life
might procure the stone good of the workmen. For a miracle, says Pliny,
Augustus brought one by sea from Egypt of a hundredth and twenty five feet and
nine inches besides the base. And Caligula one more marvelous then all the
things that ever were seen upon the sea. No less difficulty had Semyramis
to bring one cut out of the Armenian mounteines 150. foot long, and 24.
broad, and thick: carried from Armenia in a great number of joined carts,
unto Euphrates, and from thence by ship unto Babylon, where it was set up,
being reckoned among one of the wonders of the world. It is also commonly held
that she made an other of the miracles, that is, the garden at Babylon The
Garden at Babylon.
which stands upon arches: yet Diodorus Siculus does attribute it unto a
king of Assyria for to please his wife, who being born in Persia was very
desirous to see green meadows on mounteines, and persuaded her husband by
workemanshippe to raise up a garden, that should represent her country in
trees and meadows. Every side of this garden contained four acres: the coming
unto it was as it were unto a mounteine: edifices being one built upon other,
that they might see standing in it all the country round about. There were
vaults set on the ground to bear the weight of the whole garden, then other
were built upon other, always greater and greater. For the vppermoste upon
whom stood the walls of the gardens were fifty cubits high. And thus did
they make the ground and flower of the garden. There were laid ioyces of stone
16. foot long, and 6. broad. Upon the^ for the pauiment were ^eedes laid
compacted with asphalt: and upon them two courses of brick laid with gypsum:
and thirdly sheets of lead, that no wet should sink into the vaultes. Also
places were made to receive the water, and to void it. Upon this pauiment was
so much earth laid, as would suffice for the roots of mighty trees, and
this made the garden: in the which high trees of all sorts growing made a
very pleasant sight. Some of them rose up five hundredth foot above the
ground, and bare fruit as well as if they had come out of the botome of the
earth. He that saw this garden a far off would taken it for a woodde^ upon a
mounteine. But the vaultes and arches did one give unto an other such light,
that in the^ were lodgings for the kings. And besides all this was there a
conduite covertly made, which did privily water all the garden.

Ptolomeus Philopaters ship.
To this gay garden will I adioyne two as vain ships: the one made by
Ptolomeus Philopater, only for the river, was half a furlong long, that is
125. paces, every pace containing fiue-foote, Ath. li. 5. ca. 6
and above thirty cubits broad. The mast was 70. cubits high, the sails
were of silk, which in those days was as costly as gold, and so I read it
valued, the cables of purple: double walks on three sides, the compass of
whom was no less then five acres. At the puppe was there a large porche of
Iuorie, and other precious stuff, which had a door with four leaves, and of
both sides of it were fair large windows to let in the light: then came men
into a great house, or room in figure round, having in it twenty meat
beds, or tables: the greatest part of this room was made of Cedar, and
Cyparissus of Miletus: the gates or doors which were round about that room,
being in number twenty, were of till tree boordes, garnished with Iuorie, the
nails and hammers of them were of read copper, and by cunning woorkemanshippe
made to glister as fair, as if they had been guilt: the bodies of the pillars
were of Cyparissus, but the^ heads were wrought by Corinthian art, and
garnished with gold, and Iuorie: but all the Epistilium or archegraue was all
of gold, upon the which was there a beautiful border having carved beasts of
Iuorie in it, above a cubite long, wrought in deed with mean art, but with
marvelous cost. There was also a very fair ba^quetting house, four square
built of Ciparissus, the ornaments whereof were carved, and guilted, to this
adjoined a chamber, with seven beds or tables, close whereunto stood the
nurserie, where was a place able to hold seven tables: which for magnificence
was not unlike unto the great chamber, and an other chamber of fi^e tables. And
thus were the places of the first story garnished. But they which went up
the stairs, which were near unto the chamber, which we last spoke of, came
unto a chamber, wherein were five supping beds, and by it a fair vaulted
temple of Venus, in the which was her image of Iuorie. Over right against this
was there a sumptuous ^ound banqueting place, whose pillars were of Indian
st^^^es, whom followed other chambers having the like furniture and garnishing
that they had of whom I spoke of before. And going forth toward the stem, was
there a round house dedicated to Bacchus, containing fifteen tables, which
was guilt. But the Goddess her house was finely proportioned, at the right
side whereof, there was a cave, having the color of stone, for it was
gorgeously builte of very stone indeed, and gold, and there were in it the
images of them which were of affinity unto the kings, ^orse like Lychnaean
stone.

There were a great many of other such dining chambers as costly garnished, as
well in the mids of the ship, as in all other parts of it, which I do
willingly omit: The ship of Hiero. Athe. li. 5. ca. 7
hasting unto Hiero the King of Syracusae his ship, made by Archimedes the
famous Geometrician: of so great burden, that she carried unto Alexandria
60000. medimnes (a medimne is two bushels and a pecke) of corn, 10000. barels
of salt fishes 20000. talents of flesh, and 20000. of other burdens, besides
the provision of the men and mariners. There went a wall with bulwarks round
about the ship, and a trenche of iron and eight towers; two at the stem and
two at the puppe, and four in the middle. There was a sling in the ship,
which would cast a stone, that weighed two hundredth, and arrows of twelve
cubits, whom she would shoot a furlong. There were in the mids of the
ship three fair dining chambers, having in them thirty dining beds. Al
they had their pauimentes of stones of diverse kinds, and colors, in whom
with wonderful workmanship, were al things contained that are written of the
siege of Troy: all which things are set forth in the furniture, the seeling
over head, and the doors. There was also a place of exercise, and walking
places, in whom were diverse sorts of gardens, filled full of plants,
herbs and flowers, set in vessels of earth and lead. There were also benches
growing full of white iuie, and vines which took their nutriment in tubbes,
filled full of earth, and had the same watering that gardens have, these trees
did shadow the walking places. After all these was Venus her parlour, whose
pauimente was of Achates, and other precious stones, which were found in the
I Will. The walls and seeling over head was of Cyparisse, the doors of iuorie,
and Thyia, which were very bravely garnished with pictures, images, and great
magnificence of cups. There followed this rome a parlour with five tables
dedicated unto a school, which had the doors and walls of Box, and within
it a library. There was also a bayne, which had three vessels of copper apt
for the fire, and a tine or cauldron, of diverse colors of Tauroncinian stone,
which would hold five metretes, that is 56. gallons and a quart: there were
also ten stables for horses: and at the stem a place enclosed with pitched
bourdes, and canuasse, wherein water was kept to the quantity of 2600.
metretes, that is 27500. gallons: where was also a fish pond made of lead and
boordes full of salt water, in the which was kept great store of fishes, with a
great number of such like sumptuous buildinges. But omitting the ship of
Cedar 280. cubits long, guilt without and siluered within, built by Sesostris
king of Egypt, which he offered up unto the God which is worshipped at
Thebae, Caligula his galley.
I read also in Suetonius that Caligula did build him long ships of Cedar
with the puppes set with precious stones, with sails of diverse colors, with
mighty great baines, galeries, and parlours, and great variety also of vines,
and trees that bear fruit: sitting in who^ with great melody, singing and
reuelling, he would row along the coast of Campania. And Tacitus writes that
Nero had his banqueting ships garnished with iuorie and gold. This colt
Caius in building of palaces and manor houses in the country, Caligula his
mad buildings. Suetonius.
contemning and refusing all reason, coueted and went about to do nothing so
earnestly, as that which men told him could not be done. Wherefore he did cast
up peers in the raging and deep sea, he cut out rocks of hard flint, he
would with earth make low vales equal unto mounteins, and dig down the tops
of mounteines leuel with the fields, and yt with incredible speed, all tariaunce
bringing present death. By these and such other riotous deeds, he spent all
ye huge sum of money of vicies septies millies sestertium, which is,
20250000.l. left him by Tyberius, before one year was gone about. Which
unmeasurable prodigality Nero did not so much commend in words, as gladly
imitate in deeds. Nero his pond. Sueto.
For he began a pond from the foreland of Misenus to the lake of Auerne,
covered over and enclosed round about with fair galeries or walks, that all
the bathes of hot water which are at Baiae, might be brought together into one
ponde. He also began a ditche from Auerne, even to Hoscia, that they might go
between them by ship, Nero his dich. Sueto.
and yet not on the sea, (surely a goodly thing:) this dich should have been
160. miles long, and so broad, that quinqueremes or galies with five orders of
ores meeting, might pass one by the other. Upon these works he spent al his
treasure, so that he had not wherwt to pay his soldiers their wages, and so
was forced to leave ye vain work unfinished. But to speak again of Caligula.
Caligula his bridge. Sueto.
He made a bridge of 3. miles and a half long, upon the gulf of Baiae,
reaching from Baiae to P^teols. gathering together for that purpose from al
parts ships for burden: whom lying at anchor in two rows, he filled up with
greet, and made a fair caulsey, over the^ like unto ye Appian calsey: and this
wonderful bridge made he for no other use, but that the people might two days
together behold him galloping from the one end of it unto the other: the first
day on his horse very richly trapped, his garlande of oken leaves on his head,
with his sword, his battle axe, his cetra, and soldiers mantell of gold: but
the next and last day apparelled like unto a chariot man, and in his chariot
drawn with two goodly horses. Yet more magnificent was the bridge built by
Traiane over the mighty river of Danubie, but yet to be numbered among ryotous
works, Traianes bridge. Dion.
because it was not commodious, and therefore broken down by his wise
successor Adrian, and made by Traiane only to show the magnitude of his
mind, which was able to do those things, which were thought impossible. The
arches of this bridge were in number twenty, all of square stone, every arche
standing without any foundation, a hundredth and fifty foot high, and sixty
broad, and one distant from the other a hundredth and seventy foot and were
joined together by vaultes. The charges of the which work, although it were
wonderful, yet has it the greater admiration, because that it was made on a
river full of gulfes, and with a very slimie channel, and also for that the
course of the river could not be turned an other way. Moreover, the bridge
being built at the narrowest place of the river, did cause it to be the more
hardly and painefully done: by reason that the river running from a broad
channel into a narrow, did run the more violently, and was also the deeper
there.

But we will not suffer Traiane to enjoy this glory of fame, for we will show
you yt this magnificent madness of an Emperor, was passed by the works of
Marcus Scaurus, a private man: whose Edilitie (says Pliny) I know not,
whether of all other things it most destroyed the manners of the city, or
whether Sylla did more mischief by proscribing of so many thousand citizens, or
by aduau^cing his son in law to so great riches. Who when he was Edilis, made
the greatest piece of work of all that ever were made by man's hand, not only
for to serve and endure for a time (as his was) but also being builte to
continue for ever: this was a Theater. The scene whereof was threefolde, of the
height of 360. pillars, in that city which had not suffered six of Hymettian
marble, with out the reproach of the noblest man in the common wealth.

The lowest part of ye scene was of marble, the middle of glass, a kind of
riot never heard of, no not after his time: ye highest pillars having their
boords guilted, ye lowest being of 38. foot. Between the pillars stood there
3000. Images of brass. On this Theater might 80000. people sit, whereas
Pompeyus his amphitheatre, the city being so often multiplied, and
consequently, so many the more people, serves very well, and yet could not
there above forty thousand set. But so great was the rest of the furniture of
hangings of purple and gold, called Attalica: of tables painted, and the rest
of the furniture which appertained unto the players and musicians, that after
the plays were ended, which lasted thirty days, and the Theater pulled
down, it being carried back unto his house at Tusculum, and the house set a
fire by his angered bondmen, the stuff there burnt was valued at bis millies
sestertium, 1562500. l. I read also, that Murena and Antonius made Theaters,
with scenes of silver, and Pompeyus made one of stone, which Nero guilted all
over. Whereby we may gather the wonderful charges that the Ediles and other
were at, that did set forth plays or games of sword players at Rome, fetching
a great number of wild beasts out of Asia and Africa, as Lions, Lybards,
Elephants, bears, Panthers, tigers, Unicorns, Rhinocerotes, Hippotami, and
such other, who were slain upon the amphitheatre before the people. Pompey
had at one time eighteen Eliphants, and five hundredth Lions, and the Emperors
after him many more. Vol. Anthro. lib. 24.
Traiane exhibited unto the people spectacles 120. days, upon some of them
were 1000. and on other 10000. wild beasts and tame slain. The charges of
which plays and games may yet most manifestly appear by that Cicero does
signify says Paedianus, that Milo spent on them three patrimonies, Lib. 3.
epi. vl.
and Cicero writing unto his brother Quintus of the games and plays given unto
the people by Milo, affirms, that he had bestowed 300. sesterties 234375. l.
whereby he thought he had quite undone him self. Then what an inestimable
mass of money spent Julius Caesar, and other of the emperors, who exhibited
plays and games of all sorts, yea, and dug mighty ponds, and so great,
that in them might at ease fight galleys, and brigantines: and Domitian in so
great number, that they might rightly seem to be great fleetes: their feasting
of all the whole people, giving unto every man corn and money, in that mighty
city, which was worthily called an abridgement of the whole world. As this
magnificence and munificence which did commonly accompany triumphs, were of
inestimable charges: so, neither can the costs of the bare triumph it self
be declared, or being told, be believed. The trumpeters went before, clothed
in cloth of gold, all the soldiers bravely apparelled, and gorgeously set
forth, The Roman triumphs.
the forum with all the temples, were richly hanged, and perfumes with
continual burning of sweet and precious odors, tables filled with all kind
of dainty dishes set in every streate of the city for the soldiers to eat
of, as they went along through the city unto the Capitol: a mighty number of
oxen with guilted horns, yea, and sometimes with garlandes guilt about their
necks, which should be offered in sacrifice, all the martial surniture,
treasure, plate, noble Images, and pictures of the conquered enemies were
carried, the Images of all the ships and towns gotten: (which in Pompeyes
triumph were of ships 949. of towns 1538.) then lastly, the rich robes of
him that triumphed, with his chariot plated over with silver, yea, and gold:
his seat, of gold and precious stones. Before whom also were a great number
of crowns of gold, adorned with precious stones, and pearls carried, with a
thousand more such magnificence. I read in Pliny, Pompeyus his triumph.
that in Pompeyus triumph over the East, were there carried before him, a pair
of tables with dice made of two precious stones, three foot broad and four
long. A Moon of gold of thirty pound weight, and three banqueting beds of
gold: nine cupbords of plate of gold and precious stones: three Images of
gold, one of Minerua, the second of Mars, the third of Apollo: thirty three
crowns of pearls, a fouresquare mount of gold with dear, and Lions, and
fruit of al kinds, enclosed about with a vine of gold. A closet or study of
pearls, on the top whereof was there a dyall. The Image of Pompey of
pearls, being, as truly says Pliny, more truly a riot then a triumph. The
triumphs of Antiochus and Ptolomey
Two counterfeit triumphs, set forth by Antiochus king of Syria, surnamed the
mad, and by Ptolomeus, Philadelphus king of Egypt, does Atheneus at large
describe, and affirms the pomp of the one to cost Ptolomey 2239. talents and
fifty pounds, which amounts to 413968. l. 15. s^. of our money.

The tenth Chapter. What trouble riot does bring unto man, how it caused
Catiline, Antonius, Curio, and Caesar, to raise up civil wars, and of a dumb
show of Heraclitus, that nothing does more cause rebellion, the shameless
shifts of Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero, and Domitian, to maintain their
ryo-expences, and of Cheopes to finish his pyramid, and how Apitius murdered
him self, because he was not able to bear the charges of his wonted riot.
But now what troubles and torments this riot does bring unto man, for the
which cause I have with so many words related unto you so many examples of
many kinds of riot, may very well hereby be gathered, that so many things,
and out of so many countries, and so far distant off, yt so great riches to
be able for to do it, ca^ not be gotten without continual care both day and
night, tyring toil, and noisome unrest: but most plainly does it appear by
the shameful shifts that those great rioters, make to maintain their
prodigality, and to fill that bottomless barell. Was not this it which caused
Catiline with his confederates, Salust. why Catiline rebelled.
to attempt the murdering of the senate, the burning and destruction of the
temples of the Gods and the city, and finally, the utter extinguishing of the
memory of their sweet country? What else made Antonius and Curio to revolt
from the senate, Dion. Pliny. why Antonius and Curio rebelled.
and the city unto Caesar, and to infer wars unto their country, but
because they had unthriftily spent al their patrimonies, and yet would continue
in their wonted outrageous reuelling and riot, which they knew not by what
means to maintain, but only if yt they unhappily obteyning ye victory, and
oppressing the liberty of the commonwealth, could obtain the spoil of many
rich, good, and temperate citizens, yea, and of the whole world, chosing
rather to adventure loss of life, (for goods were already gone) wife,
children, yea, and utter destruction of stock and country, then to live
moderately within the bounds of nature. Yea, their chiefteine Caesar him
self, Why Caesar invaded his country. Suet.
if ye Pompey beelyed him not, because that he was not able with his private
wealth, either to finish the works which he had begun, or to fulfill the
expectation of the people which he had made of his coming, did trouble the
whole state of ye public weal, and disordered and confounded all: seeking to
piece ye out with public spoils, ye private riches could not rech unto. The
which to be true may we conjecture, because yt the magnificence and munificence
which he had promised unto the people, did far surmount all private wealth, and
also by ye dishonorable, yea, dishonest dealings which he had used at other
times before, to help to garnish his painted sheath: for when he was first
Consul, Caesar's dishonorable dealings for money.
he stole out of the Capitol three thousand pound of gold, and laid in for
it the same weight of copper guilt. He sold societies and kingdoms, whereas
of many other then of Ptolomey the king of Egypt, who then was driven by his
subject out of his kingdom, for a bribe for himself, and Pompey, 6000.
talentes, which is eleven hundredth fourscore and five thousand pounds. And
when he was Praetor in Hispaine, he enemy like sacked diverse towns of
Lusitania, that refused nothing that he would command them, and also opened
their gates unto him. In Gallia he robbed Chapels and Temples of their gifts,
and ornaments, and oftener sacked cities for spoil then for offense. But
afterward did he with most manifest robberies and sacrileges sustain the
charges of the civil wars, his triumphs, plays, and games. Yea, what say
you that Appianus does affirm in flat words, that before he began the
civil wars, Caesar's great debtes.
he was so oppressed with debt that he openly said, he must needs have bis
millies quingenties, the which is xix. hundredth and three and fifty thousand,
Cxxv.l. the which could not be gotten but by the spoil of the whole world.
Wherefore wisely did the Philosopher Heraclitus, Heraclitus his advise against
rebellion.
who being requested in a sedition to declare his advice, how the city might
be brought to live in peace and concord: as soon as he was ascended the
pulpit, called for a cup of cold water, wherinto he strewed a little meal,
and then mingled therewith glecho, the which is either wild peniroyall, or a
kind of poulse, and when he had drunk up the cup he came down, speaking
not one word: but signifying hereby after his wonted dark manner, that so the
city should be without sedition, if that they would forsake their delicates,
and enure themselves to be contented with simple diet. And I pray you what else
was the cause of the outrageous cruelty of those tygerlike tyrauntes,
Caligula, Nero, and Domitian, but to get wherewith to maintain their riot? for
says Suetonius, when Caligula had spent riotously that monstrous mass of
money left him by Tyber^^^, of one and twenty thousand thousand, x.C.iij.
thousand vij.C. and fifty pounds, within less then one year, Caligula his
shameless shifts for money.
he being very beggarly, and bare for all the accomptable revenues of the
Empire, turned al his mind to rapines or robberies, using sundry and most
exquisite kinds of false accusations, sales, tributes, or impositions. He made
all such to fine and compound again, whose ancestors had obtained for
themselves, and their posterity, the freedom of the city of Rome, unless
they were sons unto them which had purchased the chartre, restraining the
word posterity unto children only. He disproued and disanulled all the wills
of those which had borne in the wars the office of Primipile, or leader of the
first band in the Auantgard as unthankful, who from the beginning of Tyberius
his reign had not left Tyberius, or him self heir. And also the wills of
all other men as vain and void, whatsoever they were, if that any knave
would say, that they were once minded if they had died to have left ye Emperor
their heir. Wherewith all men being feared, when that he was openly nuncupated
heir by men unknown among their familiars, and by parents with their children,
he would call them mockers and deriders, that would live still after they had
made their wills, and him their heir, and unto many of them he would send
poisoned dishes of meat. Of such matters would he have the hearing himself,
but first of all should the sum be taxed that he would have, to appoint the
which he would sit, and as soon as ever that was dispatched, and agreed
upon, would he incontinently rise up, and hear the rest of the matter who
would: ye and not being patient of any very short stay, he once by one sentence
condemned forty men, being accused of diverse crimes: and bragged unto his
wife Cesonia, when she arose from sleep, what a great piece of work he had
done, whilst that she took her noone nappe. He made an open portsale of the
things which were left of all the shows unto the people, he himself asking
the buyers what they would give, and recked the price so high, that many men
being compelled to buy things at an immeasurable price, and thereby being
quite undone, did let themselves blood to death. And among other there is a
merry jest of one Aponius Saturninus, whom the Emperor espying to sit napping
and nodding with his head, cried to the crier not to forgette the gentleman
which had borne the Office of Praetor, who beckened unto him with his head:
neither made they an end of offer and proffer (as though the sleeping gentleman
had talked with the^) before that thirteen sword players were sold unto him,
he being altogether ignorant of it, for nonagies sestertiu^. 70312. l. In
Gallia also when he had sold at unreasonable prices, the ornaments, householde
stuff, bondmen, ye and free men of his condemned sisters, he being allured and
fleshed with the gain: fette from the city all the old household stuff and
furniture of the court, and his own palace: taking up, ye carts and wagons
that traueled for hire, yea and the bakers iades, and mill horses, in so much
that bread often lacked at Rome: and many men that had matters in law, because
they being absent could not appear at their days, were condemned. For the
selling away of the which stuff he used all kind of deceit, and facing:
sometimes he would blame the buyers of couecousnesse, that they were not
ashamed to be richer then he: and other while he would make as though he had
been sorry, that he had let private men have those things which had belonged
unto the princes.

He had learned that a rich man of the Province had given unto them which did
inuit the guestes that did sit with the Emperor, two hundredth sestertia.
1562. pound, ten shillinges, that he might sit at the Emperors table:
neither was he offended, the honor of his supper to be esteemed so much
worth. To him the next day setting at the sale sent Caligula one, who should
deliver him I can not tell what trifling thing, for the which he should pay
200. sestertia, and tell him, yt he should suppe with the Emperor by the
Emperors own bidding. He exacted new kinds of tributes, and never heard of
before, at the first by the Publicans and Customers, and afterward, because the
gain grew great, by the Centurions, and Tribunes of the soldiers of the
guarde. There was no kind of thing, nor men, omitted: upon whom he did not
set some tribute: for the victualles which were sold in all the whole
city, was there a certain and stinted custom exacted: for suites and matters
of Law in what place so ever they were entered, the fourth part of the sum
that they sued for: neither without a penalty if that any plaintiff were
convinced, either to have agreed or released. Of the daily earninges of the
poor porters the eight part, and of common harlots takinges, so much as they
got for one journey. This shameless toll or custom for baudes, harlottes,
and abused striplings it may seem was ever after retained. For I do read in
Lampridius, that Alexander Seuerus did forbid that it should be brought into
the sacred common treasure: but assigned it unto the reparations of the
theater, tiltyard, Amphitheatre and common treasure house. But to return unto
Caligula his laws, it was also added, at the head of the statute, that they
also should be bound to pay toule, that had exercised either harlottes or
bawdes craft, ye that married folks also should be subject and payable
thereunto. Such tributes being commanded and proclaimed: but the law not set
up according unto the use, in a public place of the City: when that many
offended, because they were ignorant what they were commanded: at length after
long earnest suit of the people of Rome, he did in deed set up the law, but
written both with very small letters, and also set up in a very narowe place,
so that no man could take a copy of it. And lest there should be any kind of
pray and spoil that he should not try: he did set up in the Palace a
stews, building a great number of selles in whom matrones and young women
should stand to be prostituted. He sent about unto the courts, and the Guild
and common haules, and unto all places of meetings and assemblinges of men
nomenclatores, (who were men that knew the names of many men, and for that
cause were retained by Noble men to prompt unto them their names, when they
sued for any dignity) for to inuit young men and old to lechery: they that
came thither should have money lent them upon interest, and some were
appointed, who should openly note their names, as they which did help the
Emperors revenues. Neither also contemning the gain by playing at dice, he
got more by lying, ye and by forswearing him self. And on a time willing his
next fellow to play for him, he went out into the court of the palace, and
espying two rich Gentlemen of the order of the horsemen, he commanded them
without any tariaunce immediately to be apprehended, and all their goods
seized: and when he had done this, he came in again skipping and rejoicing:
and said that he never had a better hand at dyce in all his life. But when
his daughter was borne, he complaining of poverty, and now not only of the
charges of an Emperor, but also of a Father, received contributions for the
findeing and marriage money of his daughter. He also made proclamation that he
would receive new years gifts on new years day: upon which day he stood
in the porche of his house, for to receive the almesses or gifts which all
sorts of people with full hands and bosoms threw down before him. Finally,
this unthrift who knew no other use of money then to dash it away riotously,
and thought it high treason in any man to be rich, was inflamed with such a
lewd lust to touch money: that very oftentimes he would cause immeasurable
heaps of money to be strewed abroad, in a large room, and he would walk upon
it with his bare feet, Nero his shameless shifts for money.
and ever now and then tumble up and down upon them. But when his kind cosen
Nero, who used to call them stinking churles, and misers that did spend
according unto their revenues, and praised them for good fellows, Gentlmen like
men, and magnificent in deed, that would abuse their goods, and spend it
away they care not how: when I say he by keeping no mean, either in giving or
spending, allowing Tirydates the King of Armenia during his abode at Rome, six
thousand pounds a day, and giving him at his departure away, above millies
sestertium 781250. pound, by enriching rascal knaves with senators wealth, and
burying them with kinglike funeralles, by playing at dice 3000. pound a speck,
by fishing with nets of gold, twyne, and ropes of purple and scarlet, by
never wearing one garment twice, by never traueling with fewer then a 1000
wagons, a great number of whom were of silver, and finally by his mad
buildings, and works had brought himself bare, and quite without money, that
he was not able no not to pay the soldiers their wages, nor the Veteranes
their rewards and pensions: he bent his mind to false accusations and
robberies. First of al he decreed that he should for half have three parts of
all the goods of such libertes, as without probable cause were called by ye name
of any family or stock that was of kin or aliance unto him and the Caesar's.
Furthermore, that the Testaments of all men unthankful unto the Emperor,
should apperteine unto ye Eschequer of the Prince. And neither that those
which had written them, or told other what they should write, should escape
scotfree: and also that all acts and words, to whom there was any promooter,
should be within the compass of the statute of high treason, the penalty
whereof is agreeable to ours. And when that he had forbidden the use of purple
color, and had suborned a verlotte upon a markette day to sell of it, two
or three ounces, he imprisoned all the merchauntes of the city, forcing them
to fine at his pleasure. Moreover as he was busy in singing, he espying out of
the spectacles, a matrone appairelled in purple, which was forbidden: he showed
her unto his atturneis and agentes, and turned her not only out of her gown:
but also out of all the goods she had. He revoked also al ye rewards of crowns
which the cities had given him before at any time at plays and games. He never
gave office unto any man, but he said unto him, thou know what I lack, and
let us this do, that no man may have any thing. He robbed a great number of
Temples of their gifts, he melted their Images of gold, and silver, and among
them also the Images of the household Gods of Rome, whom Galba afterward made
again. Finally when he had wilfully set on fire the city, which burnt seven
dais, and seven nights continually consuming beside an immeasurable number of
fair palaces, the houses of the ancient captains, which yet at that time
were adorned with the spoils of their enemies, the Temples of the Gods built
by the kings, ye and those which were afterward vowed and dedicated in the
wars with the Carthaginians and Galls, and to be short all that had
remained of the antiquity, worth either the seeing or memory: and the
people, for fear of being burnt had forsaken their houses, he would suffer no
man to come again unto his goods which was saved, and with subsidies and
collections almost quite beggered both the Provinces, and also all private
men: ye and murdered most of the city, which were of any notorious wealth.
But leaving Nero, these are Suetonius his words, of Domitian: that he being
brought quite out of money through the charges of his works and games, and the
augmenting of his soldiers wages, attempted to abate the charges of the
wars, diminishing the number of the soldiers. But when he perceived that by
so doing he was obnoxious to the Barbarians, neither was he in less
difficulty to dispatche other charges: he had no regard, but by all sinister
means took the goods in all, places as well of the dead, as the living, at
every varlots accusation, for every light offense were men put to death, and
their goods escheated. But of the tygerlyke tyranny of Caesar Borgia, bastard
unto Pope Alexander the sixth: the daily proportion of whose tables was 200.
ducates, that gave 1000 suits of apparel to Parasites, that continually kept
in wages 8000. soldiers, I shall have occasion to speak hereafter. Yet
nothing yt I have rehearsed, does more evidently set forth unto us, the
torments of riot, then does the example of Cheopes king of Egypt: who lacking
money to finishe his folly, begone in building a pyramid, and being destitute
of all other means, beastly against nature, abandoned the beautiful body of
his dear daughter, and the kings child, to the filthy and shameful abuse of
every slave, that would give her a stone ready hewed, to help build the
Pyramid. I read also in Seneca and Albidian, that when Apitius had spent in
reueling, and buried in his belly millies sestertium, 781250. l. and
understood that he had but centies sestertium, 78125. pounds left: then
perceiving that he must needs appaire his port, for extreme grief poisoned
himself.

The eleventh Chapter. The torments of love the inordinate lust of man, both
before, after, and against nature, of an harlotte that said she never
remembered that she was a maid: how Solomon and Achaz begat children at eleven
years of age, of a Camel that killed his keeper for deceiving him in horsing
his damme: of a man in Germany in one day that begat a child upon his
mother, which child he afterward married: of an horse that killed himself
after that he perceived that he had served his damme: of diverse that burned in
the love of them whom they never saw, of diverse that raged in lust upon
statuies of stone.
With no fewer nor less torments is man torn by that daughter, and as all
men do hold, companion of riot: and her lackey love: in whom says the
schoolmaister of that wicked art, there be as many sorrows, and greefes as
there be heirs upon Athon, bees on Hiblus, berries on the Olive tree, and
shelles on the Sea shore. No living thing does rage so inordinately in love as
does a man: not only naturally, but also before nature, after nature, and
against nature. Well known is the saying of the harlot in Arbiter Petronius:
who swear deeply that she could not remember that ever she was a maid. And
I would to God we had not rife examples daily of such lechery in both sex.
We read in the scriptures that Solomon and Achaz begat their heirs at the
age of eleven years. But that, as Iuuenal says, the lust and lechery of
those aged persons is worthily suspected, that attempt venerie without ability
to do it: it has ever been, and also is also now in our days alas to to
common. The abominable glass also of Horace, which with false representation
augmented the deuelishe delight of his beastly master, may they that list
find in Seneca, but it shall not come in my book: who unwillingly write, ye
man spares not his sister, his daughter, no nor his mother, Histo. animal.
lib. 9. cap. 47.
which Aristotle the diligent sercher of ye nature of things, affirms the
camel to do: and tells of a camel that having horsed his mother or damme his
keeper having covered her with a cloth that the stallion should not know her:
but after he had served her, knowing by the falling off of the clothe, that it
was his damme, for just anger killed his keeper with his teethe. Any ancient
example of this beastlike lust will I rehearse none, but one out of Manlius his
common places, reported by him upon doctor Martin Luthers credit, to have
been done in his time at Erphurst in Germany. There was, says he, a maid of
an honest stock, and she her self also honest, which was servant unto a rich
widow, whose son, (a young man) being inflamed with the love and beauty of
this maid hotly solicitated her to be naught with him. The maid, abhorring
the foul fact did often repel the furious youth: but in the end, when he
became every day more troublesome instant, on her then other: the maid was
forced for the safegarde of her honesty, to declare all the whole matter unto
his mother, desiring her to bridle and restrain her son that lay in
continual awaite for her. The Mother after she had deliberated on the matter,
took this order with the maid: that she should consent unto him, and
prescribe him a certain place, and hour of the night, when and where she
would be her self: that by that occasion she might repress and chastise the
lewdness of her son. The maid liked very well of the devise, and made a sure
promis unto ye young man according unto her mistres her mind. At the prefixed
hour, the glad man went unto the place appointed, where he found in steed of
his maid, the mother, who had come thither to correct the leacherous rage of
her son: but (out alas) she being overcome with unnatural lust, prostituted
her wicked body to her own son. Of this heinous incest was there a woman
child born, which being for a time secretly brought up abroad, at the length
the mother took home unto her. The same unhappy son, being altogether
ignorant of all these things, began to fall in love with his sister, and
daughter being grown up, and made her also his wife. Where art thou now that
worthy horse of the king of Scythia, Arist. de hist. Anim. lib. 9. cap. 47.
who when thou could by no means be won wittingly to cover thy noble damme,
but at length being deceived by her being hidden with a cloth: and afterward
thy error perceived by the falling of it off from her head: did never
leave gallopping and flinging, until ye thou had willingly broken thy neck:
leaving unto us men a profitable example of hearty abhorring of filthy incest?
But what so abominable lust of man can I rehearse, that worse remains not
still untold? I would have been ashamed to have declared, if that the Apostle
had not written it before me, Ad To. cap. 1.
that me^ against nature do filthily abuse men, and women, women. Hereunto
will I adioyne, because it happens unto no other living things (although
otherwise compared unto man's unbridled and unruly lust, it be not worthy to be
rehearsed) that many men fervently burn in the love of them, whom they never
saw, as Crispine in Iuuenal, Verres in Cicero, Alcybiades and Zaariades in
Atheneus: Lib. 13. cap. 12.
and three gentlewomen in the Courtier, with the sight of a letter in
commendation of a Gentleman. Shall I for shame tell, that man, the Image of God,
and temple of the holy Ghost, does oftentimes defile his noble body with
congression with brute beasts?

Lib. 36. cap. 5.
But yet here stays not man's madness: for Pliny tells that one fleshly
loved the image of Venus at Guidus, and an other the statuie of naked Cupide at
Paris in Propontis, and Julius Pisciculus a horsman of Rome, with a statuie
standing in the temple of Felicity at Rome: Lib. 13. cap. 29.
and Atheneus writes of Clisophus that raged on an Image of white Parian
marble at Samos, and of one of the ministers of the temple of Delphos, with an
Image of a naked boy standing there. And that godly father and learned pastor
Clemens, bishop of Alexandria, In orat. ad hort. ad ge^tes.
reports out of Philostephanus the like fury of Pigmalion, toward an Image
of yuorie of naked Venus, and confirms the tale of the Guidian, by the
authority of Posidippus, and reme^breth also the pollution of the Roman
horsman. But of all other does the history written by Aelianus far exceed
for raging folly. There stood (says he) at the Prytaneum or Bursse of
Athens, a beautiful Image of good fortune: with whom a young man, a citizen
of good reputation fell fervently in love, often streigthly embracing, and
sweetly kissing it. And at the length pining away for love, he ran half
frantike to the Senate, desiring of them with most supplyant suite and earnest
prayers, that they would vouchsafe to let him to buy the Image, for the which
he offered them a mighty mass of money. But when that the Senate thinking it
to be a great dishonor unto the whole city, to sell any such goodly public
ornament, thereof, would in no wise grant his request: he being stricken with
deadly grief, repaired unto the image, whereunto his hotesome heart was strongly
tied with chains of Adamant: and binding fine fillets, and a gorgeous garland
about the head of the Image, as they used in sacrifices, and clothing it with
a rich robe, offered up sacrifice: and being impatient of the intolerable
torments of frustrated love, among innumerable tears, which like mighty
waters ran trickling down his cheeks, with his own wicked hand ended his
loathed life.

And this indeed beside the miserable habit, leanness, and palenesse of
lovers, (which be accounted proper unto love, by the master of that art) and
their often and deep sighs, their continual unquiet minds, their restless
nights spente in watching at cold doors, and windy windows, and a thousand
other incommodities, which lovers do swallow down: this I say, does most
plainly prove their griping griefs, to be of all other most painful: seeing
that so many of them do willingly run into the everlasting pains of hell
fire, by cruelly murdering them selves, that they may thereby escape and rid
them from the broyling brandes of Cupide, which will not long endure: being
much like unto Aesopes fish, that foolishly leaped out of the frying pan into
the fire. And thus much of riot, and her mate lewd love.

The twelfth Chapter. Of the torments of ambition, confirmed also by the
examples of Themistocles, Alexander, Julius Caesar, Mancinus Sabinus, and an
Indian, and of the wonderful sums of money given by the Romans to obtain
offices of their magistrates, and of their order and manner in chosing officers.
THE next incommoditie of man in Pliny, is ambition: a cross, says blessed
Barnard, that tormenteth all men: it pleases and delights every man, and yet
nothing does crucify more cruelly, does disquiet more grievously: then whose
troubles there is nothing more frequented among poor wretched men. The
ambitious man is always afraid, least he should do or say any thing that might
offend any man: he fayneth humility, he counterfeiteth precise honesty, he
shows affability, he uses liberality, he takes little rest: for he is up
betimes in the morning, and watches late at night, he trudgeth to the court,
he visits the Lords, he honors all men, he cappeth, he kneeleth, he
croucheth unto al men, he rises up to his inferiors, he imbraceth, he fauneth
on every varlot, that he thinks may in any point further his folly, he
curreth favor, he longs, he weepeth, he rejoices with all men, at all
places, at all times, putting on other men's countenaunces. Who has not heard
of that saying of Themistocles, that the famous overthrow given by the
Atheniens unto the Persians, at Marathon, would not suffer him to take rest
either day or night, while he incessantly sought to match the glory of
Milciades? This made Julius Caesar plentiously to pour down tears, when he
beheld the Image of Alexander the great, who at the age of thirty three
years, had conquered the greatest and noblest part of the world: and Caesar
at that age had done nothing worthy of memory: a man so desirous of the
supreme place, that passing by a pelting town of Hispaine, he affirms, that
he had rather be the chief man of that beggarly village, then the second man
in rich Rome. They write also of Alexander, that he shead tears abundantly,
when that a Philosopher told him, that there were innumerable worlds: because
that he had not yet thoroughly conquered one.

Caesar, says Cicero, was oftentimes heard to rehearse, and with high
commendation to like of those verses of Euripides: that justice was only to be
broken for to obtain and win a kingdom, but in all other things religiously
to be observed and kept. And from what other root, I pray you, do and have
all wars well near both foreign and civil sproung?

This causes so many cold nights to be watched abroad in the field, so
many scortching days abidden in smouldering armor, so many intemper at
countries paynefully traveled, and so many deadly dangers run into. This
vice breaks all bands of piety toward friends, parents, children,
country, of the which all histories, and common life are examples, as also of
them, who never left aspiring and climing until they had broken their necks.
Yet I can not pass over in silence Mancinus Sabinus, who for extreme sorrow
and envy, that Tullius Hostilius was preferred before him unto the kingdom of
the Romans, like a mad man killed him self. And may I aptly in this place
set down the Indian, who chose rather to be hanged up shamefully, then to
shoot at the commandment of Alexander: fearing, because he had long time
discontinued that exercise, that he might perhaps corrupt the praise and
glory before time won by that feate?

Moreover, this one thing I think worthy the rehearsing, that Cicero writes
unto his brother Quintus, that they which sued to be Consuls (whom I do take
to be Milo, Scipio, and Hypseus,) did openly offer to give centies sestertium,
78125. l. for the prerogative voice: and what that was, does Ascanius Pedianus
upon Diuinatio in S. Verrem declare. It was the manner (says he) that the
concord of the people might be strengthened, at their Comitia or chosing of
officers: that there should be two Comitia held of all men which sued for
office.

The first tribes, because they were first asked, whom they would have to be
officers, were called the prerogatives: and the second they named, they called
of right: because in them the people, as it often happens, following the will
and mind of the Prerogatives, all things were accomplished according unto the
law, or that of law ought to be done. And this will I make more plain unto
you, out of Dionysius. The people of Rome in choosing of their Consuls, and
their other chief Magistrates in their enacting of laws, and decrees touching
wars, (for of these three things had the people chief authority,) did give
their voices by the centuries or hundrethes: and therefore were they called
Comitia centuriata.

Now there were of all the Centuries, accounting the eighteen Centuries of
the equites or horsemen, (all the other were of footmen) one hundredth ninety
and three: who in giving their voices, had every one their dignity reserved:
so that they which were most valued in the Censors book, and bare the greatest
burdens of the wars (for Seruius Tullius ordained, that they should not pay
their tributes by the pooll as they did before, but every man according unto
his wealth) should first give their voices. But the first classis or company
(for they were divided into four) had in it eighty Centuries, with whom also
the horsemen gave their voices: who all being in number ninety and eight, did
exceed the number of half the voices. Whereby it came to pass, that what so
ever they were agreed upon, was accounted for decreed. But if that the first
classis or company, and the horsemen could not agree (which sildome times
happened) then were the Centuries of the second order called, and so forth
other in order, whereby they never lightly came unto the last classis or
company. Tullius his prudence using this equity, that they which were most
charged, should be requited in the suffrages and voices: from whom although
that no man seemed to be excluded: yet all the power and sway was in the
horsemen, and the Centuries of the first classis. This order in the suffrages,
and gyuing of voices, do Dionysius and Liuie write was not kept afterward in all points: neither yet does the one or the other express, what order was
used. I am not ignorant that Gruchius and Sigonius, who have exactly written
of the Roman Comitia, do interpret the Prerogative, otherwise then I have
seemed to do: wherein I will counsel no man to follow me, namely seeing that I
have set it down rather to declare the ancient order of the Roman election of
Officers, then for that I assuredly thought that the first classes, and the
horsemen were the Prerogative tribes: as also I leave unto every man's own
judgment to assent either unto Gruchius, who coniectureth, that Patritian
officers were chosen first by Centuriata, and then by Curiata Comitia: But the
comoner by Curiata and Tributa: the first Comitia being always called the
prerogative, or unto Sigonius, who thinks that the Prerogative was a band
chosen out of all the tribes: or else probably devise some fourth opinion. But
omitting this controversy, I read in Pedianus, that when Milo sued for the
Consulshippe, he gave money unto all the tribes: to every man a thousand assies:
that is three pounds, now the tribes being in number xxxv. If that he did
corrupt but a thousand in every tribe, the sum would amount unto an
hundredth and five thousand pounds: so that it is no marvel that Pliny
reports, that he owed at his death, Sextingenties, 546875. pounds. Julius
Caesar also gave unto Paulus the Consul, to stand his friend that he might
remain still in Office, 1500. talentes, which is 281250. pounds. So sweet
unto men is the supreme sw^y of superiority.

The thirteenth Chapter. Of the torments of covetousness.
ALl other earthly living things desire nothing but single food to sustain
their hungry bodies, and to have where to shrowde them selves against storms,
cold and heat: only man's immeasurable mind coueteth all that is within the
compass of heaven. For fortune, says a wiseman, has given too much to many
men, but enough to no man. For although (says Horace) wealth do grow
without measure, yet is there always some thing wanting unto wealth, which is
ever too short. Wherefore in an other Ode doethe he aptly compare covetousness
to the dropsy, which grows still greater and greater by continual feeding
of her humor with lugging in of drink, the which it vehemently desires. For
both the moisture, the ground of the grief, is augmented: and also the
liquor, which is powered in to quench the thirst, being turned into a salt
quality by the inward humor, increases the former thirst: the salt
moisture, the cause thereof, being augmented. In like manner covetousness
changing all that ever she does get into her own greedy desiring humor,
has not her insatiable desire satisfied, and filled by getting of much: but
rather made the greater: more matter being supplied, and added unto it: no
otherwise then Hippocrates says, that the more thou do nourish and feed
an unclean body, the more thou hurtest, and weakenest it: the quantity of
ill humors being by meat increased, and the ill quality of them still kept
and retained. To what pains does this greedy gulf put man unto? This makes
him to run day and night thorough thick and thin, fire and water, to
suffer killing cold in winter, to abide the hurtful heat in summer, to sail
the dangerous seas, to travel the countries burnt up with the scortching
sun beams, or oppressed with snow, and ice. What fact is so perilous, the
which it will not drive man to do? And when ye covetous have gotten great
riches, are they not Tantalus in the Poets, that continually is like to dye for
thirst, and yet the water touches his lower lip, and starve for hunger the
apple bobbing his upper? for unto the covetous according unto the old sawes,
as well that is lacking which he has, as also that which he has not: and unto
a poor man be many things wanting, but unto a covetous man all. And as he
coueteth those things which he has not, so fears he to use them which he
has, least he should spend them: but much more is he tormented, least they
should be taken away from him: so that in prosperity, he fears adversity,
and leeseth present joy for fear of sorrow to come. Wherefore most true is
that saying of the Mimographer, one can wish a covetous man no greater
mischief, then long life: for he is the cause of his own ill.

The fourteenth Chapter. The rites used at burialles of almost all nations, and
sects, as well ancient as modern with mention of diverse costly rumbes,
But how great man's care for burial is, which Pliny does set down for the
next incommoditie, the two Oceans of all knowledge and wisdom Homer and
Virgil, have declared, yea and long before them, God himself: who commanded
it to be told to a disobedient prophet, as a great terror and mischief, that
he should not be buried in the sepulcher of his ancestors: and threateneth
Achab and Iezabel for their great outrages: that either dogs or birds should
tear into pieces their dead carcases. But Homer in the 22. book of his Iliad.
makes courageous Hector to desire his cruel enemy Achilles, when he was about
presently to bereave him of light, not to spare his life: but only earnestly to
obtest him for the soul and piety of his parents, not to suffer the dogs
to tear him in pieces at the ships of the Greeks: but to take a great mass
of money, gold, and other rich gifts of his father and mother for his dead
body: that the Troi^^s and their wives might honorably burn it. And in the
xij. book of Virgils Aeneidos, the Italian Hector Turnus desires the
insulting Victor, to restore unto his friends his body spoiled of life, and to
extend his hatred no further. Also in ye tenth, that despiser of the Gods
Mezentius, when that Aeneas triumphed over him, (who lay flat on ye ground) and
said where is this valiant Mezentius, where is that savage fierceness of heart
of his? answered: O cruel enemy, why do thou insult over me, and
threatnest me death? why staiest thou thy happy hand? why man it is no
cruelty to kill me, neither came I hither and challenged thee to the cumbat, yt
I might be victor and vanquisher neither did my dear son Lausus make any
such covenant with thee for me: but now he is slain, it is life for me to
die. But this one thing I do request of thee, if ye a vanquished enemy may
obtain any pardon or benefit at thy hand, yt thou will suffer my body to be
covered with the earth I know the cruel hatred of my subjects inuiron me round
about, I suppliantly beseech thee, defend me from this one extreme fury, and
let me be partaker of my sons sepulcher. The foolish gentiles did hold yt ye
souls of deadmen could not pass over ye Srygian lake into the place of rest,
before that their bodies rested in some seat and place: hereof came it, that
the soul of Patroclus in the xxiij. of the Iliades appearing unto Achilles,
complains of his flouthe, desiring him to hasten his funeralles and burial.
And Palinurus in Virgil can not pass the Stygian lake, because that his bones
lay unburied. Moreover Virgil in the same sixth book does affirm, that the
souls of the unburied do wander about the hither shore of the lake 100.
years: which is, says Seruius, the just years of man's life, which being
complete and ended, they may pass over the river: that is, go into the place
of purgation, that they may return again, (according unto Pythagoras his
doctrine) into some body. Cel. Lec. antiq.
Hereof it came that among the Athenians, if any captein did not honest with
burial his soldiers slain in the wars, he should leese his life for it.
And there was among the Macedons almost no so solemn a function of warrefare,
as to bury their dead fellows. But at Rome he that had taken up a dead man,
out of the grave, or dug up ye bones, if he were a man of low degree, says
Paulus, he suffered death: but if of more honest calling, he was banished into
an I Will, or condemned to work in the mines. Yea this care of burial is so
common unto all mankind, that I know not whither there were ever any nation
so barbarous, or sect so savage, which has not had their solemn funeralles
and burying: although in deed diverse, The Persian burial.
yea and quite contrary one unto an other. The Persians after that the dead
body is torn in pieces either by dogs or birds, The Babilonian burial.
wrapping it in wax, buried it in the ground. The Babylonians honied them, and
in other ceremonies were like unto the Egyptians: among whom, The Egyptian
burial.
when one died, the women of the house did cover their face and head all over
with dirt, and ran out of the doors through out the streets, crying and
wringing their hands, with their clothes tucked up, and their dugges naked:
and with them in like manner did all their neighbors run: but the men
bareing their breasts, did beat and thumpe themselves. After they had done
this: then they carried the dead body forth to be seasoned and dressed. There
were certain appointed for this purpose: who when the body was brought unto
them, did show them which brought it three images of wood: painted every one
like unto a dead man. And they say that one of them was very curiously and
cunningly made, whose name, says Herodotus, if I should name I shall not do
holily. The second was inferior and of less price. The third very good
cheap. Then they demanded, to which of these patterns they would have the
Image of their dead person made. Then after they were agreed of the price, they
departed. But the seasoners trimmed the body very diligently after this manner.

First of all they drew out all the brain out of his head through his nose
with a hooked instrument, filling up the place again with medicinal matter.
Then they ripped his belly with an Ethiopian stone, and took out all the
paunch, which when they have made very clean and filled with wine of
Phoenicia, they stuffed full of beaten odors: and then farsing all the belly
with pure myrrh, cinnamon and other odours, except franckincense, they sowed it
up again. When they had thus done, they keeping it in a secret place within,
did salt it 70. days for longer it is not lawful to salt them. When that the
70. days were expired, they washed, and wrapped it in a sheet of bissine,
mallng it with whip cords, which they anointed with a gum, that the
Egyptians do for the most part use in steed of glewe. Then the kinsefolkes
of the dead man receiving the body, did make an Image of a man of wood, in
the which they do put the dead man, and so lay him up.

Thus used the Egyptians to burn their private men. But when the King died,
all the people lamented with common heaviness: The funerals of the Egyptian
King.
they tare their clothes, they locked the doors of their Temples, they
frequented not the courts, places, they kept no solemn feasts, defiling
their heads 72. days with dirt, two hundredth and three hundredth in a company
with a sheet gyrt under their breast, would walk round about the city twice
in a day, renewing their mourning, and sing to the instrument the praises of
the King. And during this time they absteined from eating of any living thing,
any boiled meats, wine and al furniture of the table. They used neither
bathes, ointments, beds, nor venerie: but as though their dear son had been
dead did they all this time mourn and lament. Now in the mean while all
things apperteining unto the pomp of the funeralles being prepared: the next
day after, they did set the body. being laid in a cofin, before the entry
into the sepulcher: where of custom they read a brief of all things that he
had done in his life time: and leave was given to every man that would to
accuse the dead king. The priests stood by praising the good deeds of the
king, the people which stood round about the funeral pomp, applauded unto
his true praises, and but at the rest reclaimed with great tumult. Whereby it
happened that many kings, the people repugning, lacked the wonted honor, and
magnificence of funerals. The fear whereof made the kings of Egypt to live
uprightly, fearing that they should have the everlasting anger, and hatred of
the multitude when they were dead. But the Aethiopians after that they had
dried the dead body, The burial of the Aethiopians.
either as the Egiptians, or else as other nations used covered it over with
Gipsum, and adorned it with a picture, the which did express the dead person,
as lively as might be: then they enclosed it in a tumbe of glass, in the
mids whereof, one might see the dead man, who caused no ill smell at all, nor
any kind of filthiness. This tumbe did the next of kin unto the dead man
keep in his house, twelve months, offering unto him the first fruits of all
things, and sacrifices. When a year was passed, they carried the tumbe out of
the house and did set it in some place about ye city. But Diodorus Siculus
contrarieth by the authority of Clesias, (who was in great credit 17. years
with Artaxerxes king of Persia) this rite of the Aethiopians written by
Herodotus, and says that they salted, and then burnt them, and did put the
ashes in holowe statuies of Gold, the which they enclosed in glass whom they
did set in some high place of the house: so that all men that beheld the
tumbe, might see not the dead body, but a lively statuie thereof through the
glass, but only the richer sort had statuies of gold, the poorer of silver,
the poorest of clay. But some of the Aethiopians, The burial of the Meroites.
says Diodorus, do cast the dead into a river, as the best sepulcher, as did
also some of the Meroites, but other of them kept them at home in their houses
enclosed in glass, other putting them in earthen pottes, buried them in the
earth about the Temples. But this was general unto them all to swear by them
and to account them for Gods. The Troglodites did bury the dead, The burial of
the Troglodites.
tying their neck to their feet with twigges of Paliurus: and afterward they
soudenly carried them forth merry and laughing, until they had with earth
covered the body, and then sticking a Goats horn upon the grave, they
departed. The burial of the Panebi. The burial of the Colchians The burial of
the Phrigians. The burial of the Chii.
The Panebi in Africa did put in the ground the body of their deceased king:
but his head being cut off, and guilted, did they set up in the Temple. The
Colch^ did not lay dead men in the ground, but hanged them up on high up on
trees: and the Phrigians their dead priests upon stones set-vp of eleven
cubits high. The Chij after they had burnt the corses, and gathered the
bones, they pounded all in a mortar, and embarking them in a ship, did sail
into the maine sea, and al a long as they went shifted them through a sieve into
the Sea, until all were quite dissipated and consumed. The Arabians buried
their kings in dunghils. The burial of the Arabians.
It was peculiar unto ye Cathei of all Indians, The burial of the Cathei.
for the wife to be burned with her husband, and she that refuses so to do,
was ever after accounted infamous, which Herodotus in his fifth book affirms
also to be the manner of the Scythians above the Chrestonei. The burial of the
Chrestonei
Some of the Indians The burial of the Indians.
used when they felt themselves sore sick, to cause a great pile of wood to
be made, upon the top whereof they would ascend, and it being set on fire,
burn them selves: and thus did a Gymnosophist in the campt of Alexander the
great. The Derbices The burial of the Derbices.
killed them that were past 70. years, and the next of their kin did eat
all the flesh of them, (which Strabo does also affirm of the Irish men, The
Irish burial.
) but they strangled old women, and buried them. They that dyed before they
were 70. years old did they not eat, but put in the ground. The Caspians The
burial of the Caspians.
starued him that lived past 70. years, and casting him away into a desert
would stand a far off and watch his event. If he were pulled and torn out of
the head by birds, they judged him happy: if by wild beasts and dogs, not
so fortunate: but if by neither, then altogether unhappy. If dogs devour my
dead carkase (said Diogenes) I shall have the burial of the Hyrcanians, The
burial of the Iberians.
if vulturs of the Iberians. Onesicritus writes that the Bactrians did use to
cast alive such persons as were quite worn with age or sickness unto dogs
which they kept for that purpose, The burial of the Bactrians.
and calling them sepulchrall dogs. But it is not true says Strabo who
writes that the Massaget^ thought it to be the best kind of death, The burial
of the Massagetae
that men w^^ue with age should be chopped into pieces, and eaten mingled with
mutton. But those that died of sickness did they cast away as wicked folks,
and worthy to be devoured by wild beasts. The manner of the Thracians in
burying of their noble men was thus. The Thracian burial.
To bring forth the corse, to kill all kinds of sacrifices, and to feast
three days: and then the corse being first bewept, and after burnt, they
buried, or otherwise covered it with earth, making a mighty high heap, and
setting forth all kinds of games, and specially combats. The burial of the
Transi.
But the Transi among other buried their dead in the ground with all joy and
mirthe, rehearsing from how many calamities and evils he was delivered. The
burial of the Scythian kings.
When any of the kings of Scythia died, the people dug a great hole four
square, which when they have prepared, they took the dead king his body,
being wrapped in wax, his paunch taken out and cleansed, the which when they
have filled with beaten silver, sweet herbs, persely seed, and aniseede, they
sowed it up again, and laying the corse in a waine, they carried him unto an
other country, who did the same that the other Scythians had done where he had
been resident: they did cut round his ears, they rou^ded his hairs, they
circumcised his arms, they wounded his nose, and forehead, they thrust his
left hand through with arrows. Afterward they carried the kings corse in a
wain to another nation that he had reigned over, who did accompany the^ unto
ye country from whence they first came. Now when they carrying the dead king
about had traueled all the countries, over who^ he had reigned: they laid him
with them ye dwelt in the farthest part of the Gerrhi, and in the solemn
sepulchers of the kings: and when they had seen him laid upon a bed in a tumb,
spears being sticked here and there, they also did set up posts round about
upon whom they hanged a cloak yt covered ye tumb. But in the wide tumb with ye
king, they buried one of his concubines, being stra^gled, and his cupbearer,
his cook, his horskeeper, and ye man yt used to go on his messages, and also
horses: and the first fruits of al other things, ye and also cups of gold.
When they had so done, they any hurled earth upon him, coveting to make a very
great and high mount. After a year was passed the like did they again. They
took the chiefest of the Kings servants: (and the servants of the kings
of Scythia were all freemen,) for no bondsman served the^, of whom when they had
strangled 50. and so many excellent horses, and taken out their intrailes, and
cleansed them: they filled them full of chafe, and sowed them up. And when
they had set on half of an embowed edifice turned topsie turuie, upon two
beams, and the other half upon two other, and set up many made after this
fashion: then they did set up on these edifices the horses, strong pieces of
timber being thrust through them along their backs and coming out at their
necks, who so stood that the foremost vaults or embowed edifices did hold up
the fore legs of the horses: and the hinder did bear up their bellies
close to their thighs, both the legs hanged down aloft: they bridled the
horses, and tied their reigns unto ye posts. Then upon every one of the
horses did they set one of the young men, a long piece of wood, which was
fastened at the lower end unto the post that went through the horse, being
thrust through them: which came out at their neck. These horsemen being set
up round about the sepulcher, who seem like unto a troop of horsemen set to
guarde the King, they departed. After this manner they buried their kings. The
burial of private Scythians.
But other Scythians when they were departed, did all their neighbors, laying
the^ in waynes, carry about unto their kinsfolks. Every one of their friends
receiving them, did make a feast unto all that accompanied the corse, as well
kinsfolks as other. After this manner were private men carried about forty
days: and then buried in the ground: but being first cleansed after this
manner, when they had taken all the brain out of his head, and washed it: this
they did with the body. They did set up three posts one shoring above toward
another: about these posts did they hang woollen caps, and into a trey set in
the mids of the posts, and cappes, did they throw fire stones, upon whom they
did cast seeds of a kind of flax that they have: whereof they made a
perfume, causing such a vapor, as no censars do among the Greeks. With this
odor the Scythians being brought into an astonishment used to cry out right,
and howl. But of the Scythians, says Mela, The burial of the Essedones.
the Essedones did celebrate the funerals of their parents merrily with
sacrifices, and festival assemblies, of their friends, eating the dead bodies
chopped together with mutton: but the heads after they had finely polished
the^, did they make mayzers of, trimming them about with gold: and these were
their last duties of piety. He also tells that in Thracia, The burial of a
country in Thrace.
when a husband died, his wives, who are always many, did earnestly contend
whom her husband best loved in his life time, and was the most worthiest woman:
that she might be slain upon her husbands body, and burnt with him: which
she, to whom it was adjudged, did joyfully fulfill: the rest mourning and with
lamentable voices and bitter beating did bring forth the corse unto burial:
and by this only way could they be comforted: if that certain men did bring
weapons and money or cattle unto the roge or funeral fire: and say that they
were ready either to compound with the fate of him that lay there, or else to
fight with it; but when there was place neither for money nor for fight, then
they remained suitors unto the women. The Massilians buried their dead without
any lamentatio^ or beating of themselves: The burial of the Massilians. Vale
Max. lib. 2. cap. 1.
finishing the funerals with a domestical sacrifice and a feast made unto
their kinsfolks. The Tauri The burial of the Tauri.
in Scythia did use to bury with their kings such of their friends as they
best loved in their life time. The Galls burned, The burial of the Galls.
and did put in the ground their dead folks, burying with them their books of
remembrances and ordering of their affairs and businesses, and also of their
debtes: there were some also that would willingly cast them selves into the
roges or burial fires of their friends, as though they should by that means
live with them together in an other world. The burial of the king of Macedon.
Herod. lib. 6.
When the king of Lacedemonia happened to dye, horsemen did carry news of his
death thorough out all the realm: and women went about the city, making a
great noise with ringing of brazen pots and basens. And while this was a doing:
of every house there must one man and one woman be defiled with mourning, or
else a great fine was set upon their heads. But at the funerals, they used the
same order that the Barbarians of Asia did at the burials of their kings. For
there must be at the funerals out of every region of Lacedemonia, all that were
of aliaunce unto him. Of whom, and also of bondmen, and the Lacedaemonians them
selves, after there were many thousands assembled together: then both men and
women pricked and punched their foreheades without fear, and used an
unmeasurable howling: affirming every last king to be the best. But that king
which dyed in the wars, after they had made a very lively Image of him, did
they carry to be buried, laying him upon a bed gorgeously trimmed. At his
interring, proclamation was made, that no Judges nor Magistrates should sit,
and that there should be continual mourning, but for private men they might
mourn but eleven days. But I think this burial was common unto all the
Greeks, The burial of the Greeks.
to burn their bodies: and putting the ashes into a pot or stone to bury it
in the ground, setting upon the grave a tumbe. Seruius, although Celius does
reprehend him for it, Who began burning of the dead.
thinks that the usage of burning dead bodies was begun by Hercules, who
burnt Argiuus the son of Lycimnius, bringing his bones with him unto
Lycimnius, that he might perform the promise which he had made unto him: that
he would bring him home his son again. The opinions of Heraclitus and
Thales of burial.
And upon the eleventh of the Aeneidos, he says: that Heraclitus, who would
have that all things consist of fire, holds, that al bodies ought to be
resolved into fire: but Thales, who affirms all things to be bred of moisture,
says, that bodies ought to be covered in the earth, that they may be resolved
by moisture. And on the third that the Egyptians, men skillful in all
wisdom, Why the Egyptians preserved the ded bodies.
do conserve their coorses, being seasoned (for says Mela, they keep the
dead, being medicined by art at home in their houses) that the soul may long
time continue and remain obnoxious and bound unto the body: that he may not
soon pass into an other body: the Romans do contrary, for they burn the
bodies, Why the Greeks burnt the bodies. Why the Persians, and Egyptians would
not burn their dead.
that the soul may incontinently return into generality, that is to wit,
into her nature. Herodotus writes in his third book, that the Egyptians and
Persians think it not lawful to burn the dead. For the Persians do hold the
fire for a God: and it is not meet and convenient to offer a dead man's
carcass unto a God. But the Egyptians be persuaded, that the fire is a
certain living beast, which does consume and devour all that ever it can get:
but when it has eaten and absumed all, that then both it, and also al those
things which it has devoured, do dye together: therefore the Egyptians have
decreed neither to burn folks, nor yet to cast them unto beasts, which many
other nations did: but to season them, that they may not be consumed by
worms. But to return again unto the Greeks, Homer thus describes the
manner of their burial, The funerals of the Greeks
when he writes how Patroclus was buried. They made a mighty oil of wood an
hundredth foot high, upon the which they laid the dead body, pouring into
the fire gallons of oil and honey, and threw in also sheep and oxen (always
provided that they were even) out of whom they had before taken the caules,
and talowe, and laid upon the coorse: and when the carcass with all these
gear were burnt, and the wood spent, they did put the fire quite out with
black wine, and gathered up all the bones and ashes, which being put into a
cup of gold, and wrapped in two foldes of tallowe, they dug a grave, in
which they laid the cup, throwing still earth upon it, until they had made a
great hillocke: The funerals of a captain slain.
whereupon they did set a tumbe. If that a noble man were slain in the wars,
they used to kill and burn with him for an infernal sacrifice to appease his
spirit, certain of the enemies prisoners. So does Achylles sacrifice twelve
Trojans unto Patroclus: and Aeneas as many Rutillians unto Pallas: and
Alexander unto Ephestion, (although he dyed of sickness) all the Cussei that
were above 14. years: which in old time to have been also used in Italy,
does appear by Seruius upon the tenth of the Aeneidos: where he has these
words: Inferiae be the sacrifices which are paid unto hell. Indeed it was
the manner in old time, for prisoners to be slain upon the sepulchers of
valiant men: but afterward when that seemed to be over cruel, it was thought
good that sword players should fight before the sepulchers, who thereof were
called Bustiarij, of ye bustes or burial fires. The sumptuous charges of
funerals.
The Greeks also used at burials to hold great feasts, plays, and all sorts
of games, as Achylles does in Homer, at the burial of Patroclus: and Aeneas in
Virgil, at the twelve months mind of his father. Hereof arose those incredible
charges of funerals, that Alexander bestowed 10000. talents, that is,
1875000.l. upon the funerals of Ephestion: and Isidorus a Roman, willed by
testament his heir to bestow upon his funeralles xj. The Roman funerals.
thousand sesterties, which amounts to above 87937. for the ryotous Romans
followed all the rites of the Greeks in their funerals: burning the body, and
laying the bones in a pot or stone in the ground, and setting thereupon a
tumbe, and holding of magnificent feasts, games, stage plays, and all such
other pastimes. Curio his marvelous Theaters. 36.15.
C. Curio, who says Pliny, had no goods to put into the Censors book, but
only the discord of Pompey and Caesar, did at the funeralles of his father
make two mighty Theaters of wood, the one set close unto the other, either of
them hanging by one vice: so that in the forenoone they stood back to back,
that the players in the one should not with their noise hinder the other, but
soudenly with all the people sitting upon them, were they turned round about,
so that the one stood right over against the other: and at the last their
horns (for they were made in form of a new moon) joined close together, and
made an amphitheatre round, whereupon fought sword players. But because I spoke
a little before of the great charges bestowed upon the funeralles of Ephestion,
The funerals of Ephestion.
I think it not unpleasant to rehearse out of Diodorus Siculus, somewhat of the
sumptuous manner of them. All the capteines and friends of the kings (says
he) seeking to feed his humor, and to follow his affection, caused Images to
be made of yuorie, gold, and other precious stuff. But Alexander him self
gathered together a great number of Architects, and the excellentest workmen to
adorn his funeralles. And first of all did he cast down ten furlongs of the
walls of Babylon, and all ye bricks being gathered together, caused he to be
carried away, ye the ground might be leuel to build ye roge or funeral fire
upon: ye which he erected four square, every side being one furlong long: ye
rest of ye plot he divided into 30. edifices, ye which were built with stories
boorded with palm tree: at ye lowest part were set 240. beekes of quinqueremes
or galleies with five ranckes of oars of gold, and upon every one of them, as
it were upon the stem of a galley stood two archers two cubits high,
resting on their knee: in the mids stood five statuies in armor, of five
cubits high: and all the places between them were covered with drawn
courteins of purple. On the second story were fifteen lamps whose feet were
enclosed with crowns of gold. In the top or highest story, where the fire
should be put and kindled, were Eagles portraytured, spreading abroad their
wings, and looking down upon the dragons, that stood beneath staring up
upon them. The third story was filled full of a mighty number of wild beasts
wrought for that purpose. The fourth had the fight of the Centaures made in
gold. The fifth had Bulls, and Lions of gold: first a Bull and then a Lion,
and so still in like order. Above all this was the highest story hanged round
about with the weapons of the Macedons, and also of all the Barbarians, both
to show the valor of the Macedons and also to signify what nations they had
conquered. Then upon the top of al did there stand holow Myrmaides, in whom
were hidden certain men that sang the funeral Nenia or song. The height of
the whole work was esteemed to be 130. cubits. And when that the capteins, the
soldiers, the ambassadors and the inhabitants did to the uttermost of their
power help to furnishe and adorn the pomp, there was bestowed above 12000,
talentes, that is, 572500. And after the rate and proportion of this
magnificence were all other things celebrated in the funerals, and burial
with surpassing bravery. And last of al were men commanded to sacrifice unto
him as unto a God president. To furnish the funerals of so dear a believed,
Alexander gave commandment unto all the cities near to help and garnish the
pomp by all means, and with all things that they could possible. He also gave
commandment to all the cities of Asia that they should put out the fire which
was kept in the Temples, and casted the holy fire: the which thing was never
used to be done among the Persians but at ye death of their king. In this place
also, although somewhat out of order, will I set down out of Thucidides: the
public obsequies the which the Atheniens The funerals of the Athenians slain
in the field.
kept for their countrymen that were slain in the Pelop^a ^stan wars, following
the ancient manner of their country. Three days before the burial was there
made a great tabernacle: within the which were laid the bones of them, yt were
dead, that their parents and friends might lay upon them, what they thought
good. Afterward every lineage or tribe of the town had a great cofer or cophin
of cypress, into the which they did put the bones of al them of that tribe
which were dead, and carried it in a chariot to the usual place of burial.
And after all the cofers, was there carried in a^ other chariot, a great bed
ready made, and garnished, without any body lying thereon, the which represented
these deadmen whose bodies could not be found. These chariots were conducted
and accompanied by all sorts of people, citizens or other (those yt would go)
unto the sepulcher: where the wives and parents of the diseased wept bitterly,
and made great lamentation. Then did they lay all the cofers or cophins in a
public sepulcher, or monument made for ye purpose, in ye fairest suburb of
the city the which sepulcher is called Ceramicon, wherein they used to but i^
al th^se that died in the wars, except it were they that were slain at the
battle of Mar^^^n. In memory of whose singular ^^wesse, they had willed a
^^^^^ar sepulcher to be (...) ^s the self same p^^e. And after the bodies were
buried the usage was, ye some notable personage of the city both for knowledge
and honor should make an Oration unto the people in ye praise of the persons
departed: the which being unded every body departed home? But for to make the
oration at that time was the vallaint and ^^quent Pet^^te^ appointed. And now
to (...) unto the Romin^^, Why the Romans burned the dead.
I do find in Pliny, (...) was not used among them (...) for to burn ye dea^
bodies (...) to (...) them in ye earth: but afterward when that they
understood, ye those which were over whelmed by wars, far from home, were
oftentimes taken up, an ordinance was made, yt all should be burnt: and yet
they kept the ancient rite diversely: for they do report that none of the house
of the Cornelij were burnt before Sylla the Dictator, who feared lest he
himself should be taken up and handled after his death, as he in his life
time had dealt with Marius his dead body. Learned Volaterranus does hold, that
after the time of the Antonines, (of whom Heliogabalus was the last) they
burnt no corses at Rome. And before that time I read in Tacitus, that when Nero
had slain in his mad mood his wife Poppea, he burnt not her body, but
stuffing it full of odours, after the manner of foreign kings, buried it in the
sepulchers of the Iulij: but the solemn accustomed funerals were kept:
Furthermore laying of the dead body in the earth, does Cicero truly think to
be the most ancient kind of burial (for the Patriarchs were so buried:)
whereunto Xenophon also seems to asse^t making Cyrus to will his son to lay
him neither in gold, silver, nor in any thing else: but only to restore him
unto the earth. Rites of burial common to many countries.
This also was common both unto the Greeks and Romans to bury the dead with
great lame^tations, and tears, without which, says Seruius, they thought that
they were not orderly and duly buried: whereof proceeds that complaint of
Drances against Turnus: ye we, an vnbewept multitude, may be slain in the
field: for the which cause they used to hire women to weep and houle at
burials: In Epistolam ad Cor. 8.12. In Mat. ho. 32. and in cap. ad Cor. 1. Ser.
13.
whereof Chrysostom does make mention in many places, and Horace also touches
in his book De Art Poetica, Chrysostom in his 69. sermon unto the people of
Antioche, blames in them the tearing of their hairs, the baring of their
arms, the dissipating of their eyes, and the wearing of black apparel, and
upon the first unto the Philippians scratching of their faces: and he rebukes
their immoderate and indecent mourning so sharply, that he threatens to
excommunicate them which would not cease to use it. And not without good
cause. For by Bellonius his report it is used among the Greeks even at this
day: that when one is dead, P. Bello in obseru.
all the women of the town or hamlet will assemble together even at ye hard
morning, and there continue until night, making a very piteous howling, and
woefully tearing their hairs renting their faces, and thumping their breasts.
And that their pauses (as the musicians term them) may be the better
understood, they hyre a woman that has a good wide and a clear throat, to
lead the song, whom all they follow, singing all the acts and life of the
deceased even from his nativity. Tacit. de mori Ger. The burial of the Germans
But the ancient Germans did soon wipe dry their tears, and leave off
their lamentations: but remained somewhat longer in sorrow, and sadness. It was
also permitted only unto the women to mourn, and unto the men no more but to
have them in memory. There was no ambition of funerals among them: this only
was observed: that the bodies of famous men were burnt with certain woddes:
neither did they make high the pile of the funeral fire, either with garments,
or odors, as did the Romans, but every man had only his armor and weapons
cast into the fire with him, and some of them their horses, the grave was
raised up with green turfes, they despising and abhorring ye painful and
laboursome honor of tumbes, and monumentes, as heavy and grievous unto the
deceased. But I read in Curtius ye Alexander in his great mourning for
Ephestion commanded the manes of all the horses and mules in the camp to be
shorn, The manner of the Persian mourning.
ye pinnacles of al ye cities nere about to be beaten down, and neither pipes
nor other instruments of music to be used for a time in the camp. Herodotus
writes in his ninth book, that it was the manner of the Persiani, when that
their king, or any of consanguinitie or familiarity with him died, to poule
themselves, and to share the manes of their horses, and other beasts either for
burden or the saddle. The manner and habites of the Roman mourning.
But the usage of the Romans was quite contrary, for they in all kind of
mourning and sorrow, did let their head and beard grow long: whereof came ye
merry jest of Sabinus: who being offered by the Cretes, A merry tale of
Sabinus.
because they saw the Proconsul Appius singularly to favor him, to bear the
chiefest office among them which officer must bear his beard and the hair of
his head long, thanked them heartily for their good wills, but he would none
of it: for he had borne it twice already at Rome, for he had been twice accused
of notorious crimes. But to shame their beards in mourning, may seem to have
been a fashion in France, yea of late years, for in Frosard, the Earl of
Foix shaueth his beard for the death of his son. Moreover, Suetonius
reports in the life of Caligula, that when the Romans heard of the death of
the noble Germunious, The manner of mourning of the Romans and diverse barbarous
nations for the death of Germanicus.
they battered their temples with stones, they threw down the altars of their
Gods, some did hurl their household Gods into the streates, and finally,
other did cast away their children lately borne. Also the Barbarians that had
either foreign or civil wars, as in a common heaviness consented to truce.
Some of the kings shaued their beards, and the heads of their wives for a token
of supreme mourning. The king of the Parthians commanded a Megistanu^: which
is to abstein from hunting, and setting at meat together: like unto the Roman
institium: which Caligula commanded to be kept so straightly for the death of
his sister Drusilla, that during the time it lasted, no man upon pain of
death might laugh, wash or sup, yea with his parents, his wife, or children.
Moreover, this I thee in Seranus, that men at the first did use to bury the
beade at home at their houses: In 6. Ae. Roman rites at burials.
and I dead yt it was permitted the Lacedaemonians to bury within their city,
yea, and to set up tumbes and monuments about the temple: but afterward, the
Romans were mostly buried in Appia Via without the city: and Vulpian
rehearses an Edict of Adrian the Emperor, that no man upon pain of forty
aurei (which I take to be twenty pounds) should bury any man within the
city, with a penalty also on the officers that suffered it: yet I read in
Plutarche, that it was granted unto noble and famous capteins, and their
posterity to be buried in the Roman forum or market place: but the Roman
Emperors were well near all buried in Mars his field, where they were made
Gods. Furthermore, this I note out of Appian, that the greatest cause, that
the rich men did allege against the law for division of lands among the
people, was: because they said, it was a wicked thing for to have the
sepulchers of their ancestors to pass unto strangers: albeit Pomponius the
lawyer does hold, that the Owners of lands upon whom they have builded
sepulchers, have right to resort unto, and visit the^ after that the lands be
alienated. Moreover (says Sernius) it was the manner among the ancient
Romans, In. 5. Aeneid.
that where soever a man dyed, he was brought home unto his own house, or of
his kinsfolks, and there kept seven days, and the eight burnt, so he were
above three years old, and the ninth buried: whereof the plays that were
kept in the honor of the dead, were called Ludi nouensiles. Every day of
these seven was the body anointed with precious ointments, and washed with
hot water, and called unto with a loud voice, to see if he would come unto
him self again: for many had returned to life in the mids of their burning,
and could by no means be saved. After this was he carried forth upon a high
bed with his feet forward, to be burned, Virg. Aenei. 11 Pers. satyr. 3.
Alex. Aphrod. in Proble.
the people following (although afterward in the time of Hierome they went
before) with torches, tapers, and candles, and trumpets sounding, and pipes and
other musical instruments playing, and also many boughs of Cypres were borne
before ye beer, the which were sticked down round about the fire, because
(says Varro) the people which stood about, should not be annoyed with the smell
of the burning of the corpse: the people continued there, answering unto the
weeping, words, gestures, and doings of the Prefica or leader of the
lamentations, until that at the length, ye last word was pronounced ilicet, ye
may be gone if ye list. Hist. lib. 5.
Polybius writes, that when a noble man died in Rome, they carried the coorse
unto a place in the city, where orations were used to be made unto ye people,
called the Rostra: where his son, or else some other of his kin, did make an
oration in his praise, and of his noble acts: and then they buried him, and
then did set up his Image in the noblest part of his house, and built about it
little chapels of wood. But when any notable man died, there rode round about
the coorse, diverse men yt seemed very like unto him in stature and other
points, who ware apparel, if he had been Consul, or General of an army,
guarded about with purple, if he had been Censor, of clean purple, but if he had
triumphed, interwouen with gold. Thus rode they in their chariots, and the
bundels of rods, the axes, and other ensigns belonging unto the office, that
he had borne in his life time, were borne before the^: but when they came unto
the Rostra, they did al set down in their seats of yuorie, and the^ was done
as you have heard before. Lib. 8. cap. 18.
Furthermore Pliny affirms, that it was the usage throughout the whole
world, to burn at burials great heaps and pyles of odors, whereas they
offered them up unto the Gods but by crumbs. This also was common unto the
Athenians, for the next of kin to make an oration, in praise of the dead
person at his burial. I read in Valerius Maximus, that it was first ordained
at Athens by Pericles, but Plutarche in ye life of Publicola, affirms it to
have come from Solon, to whom I do rather assent: but afterward it was enacted,
yt it should not be lawful to make an oration in ye praise of the dead, but
only at burials made by ye public weal, nor for every man to pronounce it:
but such an one, as was by public authority appointed thereunto. But ye first
that was praised at Rome, was Iunius Brutus the first consul, and that by
Publicola his college: and it was also permitted unto women in ye time of
Camillus, because they gave their iuels to make a cup for Apollo, ye which
should be sent unto Delphos. But this was peculiar unto ye Romans, to canonize
their good emperors after their death for gods, ye manner of ye which
consecration and funerals, The funeralles and deification of the Roman
Emperors.
is thus described by Herodian. When the emperor is departed out of this life,
there is in all the whole city as it were a certain mourning mixed with festiual
celebritie, for they bury the dead body, after the rite of their country, with
su^ptuous burial. But they make an image very like to ye emperor deceased,
which they lay forth at ye porch or coming in of the court, upon a very great
and high bed, covered with clothes of gold: and the image does lie pale like
unto a sick man. But about the bed on both sides set there a great part of the
day, on the left side all the Senate, apparelled in black, but on ye right,
matrones honorable for the dignity of their husbands or parents: none of them
wearing any gold, ouch, or tablet, but being clothed in straight short white
garments, seem to be women in great heaviness. This do they continually the
space of seven days, the Physicians repayring every day unto ye dead man, and
looking upon the image, as it were the sick emperor, telling daily, that he
waxes worse and worse. Afterward, when he has seemed to have changed life
for death, the noblest of the young gentlemen, and the very flower of the orders
of the Senators and horsemen, took up the bed upon their shoulders, and bare it
along the Sacred way (a streate so called) into the old forum, where the
Roman magistrates had used to give up their authority and ofices. But on
both sides of the Forum stepps or grieces were built like unto stairs upon the
which was on the one side a great company of the children of the most noble
men, and senators, and on ye other of noble women, which did sing hymns and
Paeans made with solemn and lamentable verse and note in the honor of the
Emperor departed: which being ended, they took up the bed again, and
carried it out of the city into Mars his field, where in the broadest place
of the field there was a skaffolde set up four square with equal sides,
built of nothing else but mighty timber, in the form of a tabernacle. Within
it was a wall all filled full of dry sticks, kixes, spray and all other
things, that will quickly take fire: but without, it is adorned with hangings
of purple, and golte, and with Images of Iuorie, and diverse kinds of pictures
and paintinges. But under it was there another less Tabernacle set, but in
form and garnishing very like unto the first, with gates and doors standing
wide open. And so also a third and a fourth, ever always lesser, and lesser
and so other beneath them until you come unto the lowest which was the least
of all. You may liken the form of this building unto those towers, that stand
over havens, who by showing of fire in the night do direct the ships into
safe rodes, the Greeks do vulgarly call them Pharos, and we towers serving to
such uses, as lantern toures. Then the bed being carried up into the second
Tabernacle, they get together spices, perfumes of all kinds, fruits, herbs,
and all sweet smelling iuyces, and powered them down by heaps. For there was
neither nation, nor city, nor man, excelling in any honor or dignity, but
every one of them did any one upon another, give those their last gyfts unto
the honor of the Prince. Now when they had made a mighty great heap of
odoriferous things, and all the whole place was filled full of them: all the
whole order of the horsemen rode round about the edifice, making their horses
to tread that solemn kind of dance, which the Lacedaemonians did use to
exercise armed, called Pyrrhica. Chariotes also were drawn round about it, who
were guided by men clothed in purple, bearing the persons of all the Roman
capteines, and of al their famous Princes. After all these solemnities were
celebrated, the successor of the Empire took a fire brand, and thrusted it
into the Tabernacle. Then all the multitude on all parts did thick and
threefolde put to fire and incontinently all the whole edifice being filled full
of that dry stuff, and those odoriferous things, burned with a mighty fire.
Anon, from the lowest and lest Tabernacle was an Eagle let go, who fleeing out
at the topp of a building, together with the fire, it was believed did carry
the Emperors soul into heaven. And then ever after that time was the Emperor
woorshipped with the other Gods. But the funerals and burial of Augustus The
funerals of Augustus.
is thus set forth by Dion. There was a bed or bane made of gold and iuorie
adorned with clothes of purple interwouen with gold. In the lowest part
thereof lay the dead body, enclosed in a chest, but his image of wax in
triumphall robes was laid above to be seen of all men. This did the nominated
Consuls carry: an other was of gold carried out of the senate house, and the
third in a triumphall chariot. Behind them were borne the Images of his
grandfathers and kinsmen dead, (except of Julius Caesar who was enrolled among
the half Gods) and of all other men that ever had been famous in Rome for their
acts, beginning at Romulus: among whom was also an Image of Pompey the great,
and all the nations which he had subdued, set forth in their proper apparel
and habit: and after them, all his noble acts, conquestes, and victories. The
hearse being set down at the Rostra, Drusus his adopted son read an Oration
in writing: but at Rostra Iulia, by the decree of the senate, Tyberius had an
eloquent speech unto the people in his praise: which being ended, they that
brought the hearse thither, did take it up, and bare it out at the triumphal
gate. There attended on the corse the Senate the horsemen with their wives, the
Pretorian soldiers of the guard and almost all men that were then at Rome.
After that his body was laid upon the roge or pyle of wood, which should burn
it, first of all the priests went round about it, after them the horsemen, then
the legionarie, and also the other soldiers, and lastly they which had had
any charge of custody, throwing upon him all the rewards that ever they had
received of him for their noble acts in the wars. After this the Centurions
or petie capteines, taking firebrandes did set on fire the roge: which being
absumed, an Eagle was let to go, who flying out of the roge, did as they would
say, carry Augustus soul into heaven. When all these things were done, the
rest departed: but his wife Liuia, with the chiefest of the horsemen tarying in
that place five days, gathered together his bones, and laid them in a tumbe.
The men did not mourn for him many days, but the women by decree an whole
year, as they had done before time for Brutus, Publicola, and other. Moreover
at Rome the wives used to mourn for their husbands ten months in white:
within the which time if that they married, Numa made a law that they should
offer up a cow with calfe: Plu. in vita Numae. Pomp. The funeral of the
Jews.
but afterward it was enacted that they should be reputed infamous.

But now leaving the Romans, I do find that the Jews used to annoint their
dead all over with precious ointments, and then wrapping them in a sheet full
of sweet odours lay them in a sepulcher or grave, as we read that Joseph of
Arimathea buried our Saviors body, embaulming it with a mixture of Aloe and
myrrha of an hundredth weight. Josephus in his first book of the wars of the
Jews tells this of the burying of Herodes.

All the hearses were garnished, The funerals of king Herod.
and set with gold and precious stones: but the bed it self was spotted
with purple: the body also was covered with purple. But a Diadem was set on
his head, but over it a crown of gold and a scepter at his right hand, and
about the bed attended his children with his kinsfolks. Moreover the guarde,
and the band of the Tetrarchie, the Germans, and the Galatae, went all before
in battle array and furniture. But the rest of the soldiers did decently
follow armed the capteines and chief of their orders. But five hundredth
bondemen and libertes carried odors. The body was with this pomp carried two
hundredth furlonges to Herodian, where it was buried. He was mourned for seven
days: for the usage of the country would allow no longer, which is
agreeable unto that saying of the Son of Syrach: the mourning for a dead man
is seven days. Yet I read no certain time appointed by the law, and also I
find that the Israelites mourned for Moses thirty days and for Aaron other
30. But why we do not read that Iosue was mourned for, as well as Moses and
Aaron, Jerome in his consolation unto Paula for the death of Blesilla, affirms
the cause to be, for that Aaron and Moses presignified the time before the
coming of Christ: but Iosue figured Christ and the time after. In the which
Epistle also he does report that the Jews in his time did use at the death of
their friends to go barefooted, and tumbled in Ashes, to lie on hair clothe:
and least that any thing should want unto superstition, by a lewd rite of the
Pharisees, the first meat ye they did eat was lentilles. Furthermore, these
rites I note out of the sacred Scriptures, to be used by ye Jews in their
solemn mournings to rent their clothes, 2. Reg. 1.13.9. E. 20.22. Ezech. 24
Mich. 1 Job. 1.2.
to go barefooted: ye sometimes all their body half bare, to lie prostrate on
the ground, and upon hair clothe, to shave their heads, and beardes, and cast
dust and ashes on their heads, to sit in ashes, to cover their face with a
whoode, to apparel them selves in hair cloth, ye to cut the brawnes of their
flesh: which thing although I find forbidden in Leuit. 19. yet this to be
commonly used among the Jews may we probably gathere by the sixteenth of
Jeremy: and Jerome upon that place does affirm, that diverse Jews still
used it in his time. Tob. 4. Pro. 13. Her. 16.
I find also that they used to go a gossiping, as we do now term it, unto
them that mourned: carrying with them bread and wine, and making them good
cheer. Number. 6
This also is worthy to be remembered, that the Nazarenes might not be present
at the funerals no not of their parents, Leui. 21.
brothers, nor sisters, and the high Priest, only of his parents, children,
brothers and sisters, so she were a virgin, but at no burial else, no not of
the Prince: and yet was it not lawful for him to pass by a dead body, and
leave it unburied: for the law commanded the Jews to bury their enemies. Of
tumbes.
And thus much of the Jewish funerals. But this was common unto all civil
nations to erect upon the grave namely of noblemen, and Princes, a tumbe: but
they began to be so sumptuous at Athens, that the city was forced to make a
law, that no man should build other tumbe, then such an one, as ten
workmen could make in three days: upon the which neither might there be any
Image of Mercury, which they called Hermes. Also Demetrius Phalereus
prohibited by statute any pillar to be set up upon any grave, above three
cubits high: or any table, but pillars were not set upon the graves of none,
but very noble and famous men: whereby was signified that they did exceed
other men, which now adays (says Pliny) is done by Arches, a new invention.
It was not lawful at Lacedemonia to ingraue any ma^s or woman's name on a tumbe,
but only of them which had valiauntly dyed in the wars. Plutarche in the
lives of the ten Rhetoricians, writes: that there was engraven in Isocrates
his sepulcher, The tumb of Isocrates.
a Ram of thirty cubits, wherein was a Siren of seven cubits, for a
mystical signification, and also near unto it a table, which had the Poets,
and his scholmaisters, among whom was also Gorgias, beholding an Astronomicall
sphere, and Isocrates standing by him. The tumbe of Augustus.
Augustus in his life time, built for him self in Mars his field, a tumbe of
wonderful workmanshippe, with twelve doors, in memory of the twelve Sages,
and an obelisce, wherein was engraven the interpretation of the nature of
things, out of the philosophy of the Egyptians. Unto the which obelisce,
August added an other marvelous good use, that was, to find out by it the
shadows of the Sun, the length of the days and nights. He added moreover
unto his tumbe a porticus or walking place of a thousand foot long, and
gardens of pleasure, with wonderful, beautiful, and goodly groves, yet could
not the sumptuousness thereof cause it to continue five hundredth years, De
cur bre. affect. lib. 8.
for Theodorite affirms, that in his time it was not to be seen: this tumbe
he called Mausoleum, by the name of a famous tumbe built in Syria, The tumbe of
king Mausolus.
by Queen Arthemisia for her husband Mausolus, and accounted among one of the
wonders of the world. The which monument was from the South to the North,
sixty three foot, but shorter in the frontes. The whole compass of it about,
was 411. foot, and 25. cubits high, environed round with 36. pillars. The
east part was engraven and cut by Scopas, ye south by Timotheus, ye north by
Bryxaxis, ye west by Leochares. Before they had finished it, the Queen dyed,
yet they departed not before it was done, judging that it would be a monument
of their glory and cunning: and at this day (says Pliny) the hands contend,
and no man can judge which piece is best wrought. There came unto them also ye
fifth workman, for a Pyramid drawing it self in, still less and less with
xxiiij. stayres, like unto a steeple being built upon the under side wall, the
which they called Pteron, does make it equal with the rest of ye work. Upon
the very top of all, is there a chariot drawn with four horses of marble,
which Pythis made: the which being six score foot high, does enclose the
whole work.

The tumbe of the king of Mien.
I read in Paulus Venetus, of a sumptuous tumbe made by a king of Mien, which
country is now under the great Cham, which was covered all over with plates
of gold and silver, and at the head of it, a Pyramid of marble, 70. foot
high, and as thick, on the top whereof was a sphere: all the whole pyramid
or sphere was covered with plates of gold, a finger thick, so that a man
could see nothing but gold. The sphere had a great number of belles hanging
on it, which when the wind blew, did ring. Such an other like pyramid was
there also erected at the feet, which was covered al over with plates of
silver. Ye have heard before of the tumb of Porsena, and also of the
labyrinthes, and pyramides were the tumbes of their builders. Yet I can not
moderate my self, but that I must needs relate unto you out of Diodorus
Siculus (who saw it) the tumbe of Symandius king of Egypt. The tumbe of king
Simandius.
At the coming in thereof, was there a porche or gate built of speckle stone,
the length whereof was two acres, and the height 45. cubits. After this was
there a square room set round with pillars of square stone, every side of it
containing four acres. In it for pillars were there set up beasts (made of
one stone a piece) of sixtene cubits, built after the ancient form. The
roof above was made of stones two paces broad, and garnished with diverse
blewe stars. Out of this room was there an other entry in, and at that a
gate like unto the first, but with greater store of carved work. At the
coming in, were three mighty statuies set of one stone a piece, made by
Memnon. One of whom be made fitting, with a foot above seven cubits, and did
in greatness exceed all the statuies of Egypt.

The other two were as her daughters, less then the mother, and came up but to
her knees, one standing on the right hand, the other on the left. This piece
of work was not only worthy to be seen for the greatenesse, but also was
excellent, for the wonderful art and nature of the stones: because in so
mighty a mass and pyle, there was neither clift nor spot. There was written
in it, I am Simandius the King of Kings, if any man would know what manner of
man I was, and where I lie, let him excel one of my works. They say, that
there was also an other statuie of the mother, of twenty cubits, made of one
stone, having over her head three Queens: to signify, that she had been
daughter, wife, and mother of a king. After this gate was there an other
quadrant, more excellent then the former, with diverse ingrauings, among the
which was the wars kept against the revolted Bactrians, over whom the kings
sons reigned: In this army which he divided into four hosts, was there
four hundredth thousand footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen.

The first part of the wall did contain engraven the siege of the city, on
that side where the river ran close by the wall.

Afterward the king encou^tering with a part of his enemies, a Lion also
entering with him the field, and they fighting together, did put the enemies to
flight. Some writers say it was a true history, and that the king was wont to
use in fight ye help of a lion, yt he had brought up at home. Other, that he
would by the likeness of a Lion, show his singular strength of body and
mind. The second wall was cut and engraven with prisoners without priuities
and hands, led by the king: which was a mark that they were vile in mind
and weak in body.

The third side adorned with diverse ingrauings, and gorgeous pictures, did
contain the sacrifices of the kings and his triumph of his conquered enemies.
At the middle side of the square room, lay two mighty statuies made of two
stones, either of them being of seven and twenty cubits: at the which Images,
there were three ways out of the quadrant. Near unto these statuies, there
was a house which stood upon pillars, every side whereof contained two acres.
In it were there set up statuies of wood, not few in number, representing both
them which went to law, as also the Judges which should give sentence. They
being thirty in number, were engraven at one part of the wall, and in the
middle of them was the chief Justice, on whose neck there hanged down
truth: and the Judge was pictured with his eyes half shut, and with a great
heap of books lying about him. These Images did show that Judges ought to be
upright, and yt the chief Justice ought to look upon truth only. After this
there was a walking place full of houses, and in them were diverse kinds of fine
fishes, very pleasant in taste prepared. Then was there the king engraven,
sitting on high in diverse kinds of colors, offering unto God gold and silver,
coming out of ye mines of gold and silver, which he yearly received. There was
engraued the sum of the whole, being reduced into silver: which was thirty
hundredth pounds, and two hundredth thousand thousands. Then followed a sacred
library, wherein was engraven these words: the medicine of the soul. In this
library were the images of all the Gods of Egypt, and also of the king,
bearing unto every one of the Gods, such gifts as were convenient for them,
and moreover showing that both Osiris and the kings after him, had done very
much good unto the behoof of man's life, both for their reverent worshipping of
ye Gods, and also for their justice among men, Behind ye library, stood there
a goodly house, wherein were twenty sacred beds of Jupiter, and Juno, and
also a statuie of the king: where also the kings body seemed to be buried.
Round about this house stood there a great many of dwellings, in whom were
there seen pictured many beasts of Egypt, all of them being apt for
sacrifices, and all ascending toward the sepulcher. There went round about
the monument a circle or band of gold of 365. cubits, and one cubite thick,
on the which were described by every cubite the days of the year, and the
risings and goings down of ye stars, and what after the observations of ye
Egyptian astrologians they do signify: thus much Diodorus. Great riches
buried with Princes.
But here stayed not the maddenesse of men, but their bodies must be wrapped in
silk, which Jerome notes in ye life of Paul ye Heremite, or costly purple:
ye they also used says he to bury in the sepulchers of Princes, Co. in
Ieroni. cap. 8.
and of the nobility, gold, and rich ornaments, both for men and women. So
we read in Josephus, Joseph. de Ant. Iudi. li. 7. ca. 12.
yt David was buried with great riches: in so much that 1300. years, after
Hircanus took out of his tumb three thousand talents to deliver himself and
the city from the dangerous seege of Antiochus Pius: and many years after
that, Herodes took out another great mass of money. I find also in Strabo,
that there was in Cyrus his tumbe, a licter of gold, a table with cupps, and a
pair of tables of gold, and great store of apparel inconstated with precious
stones. In like manner An Dom. 1544. was there found in the tumbe of Marie,
daughter unto Stilico, (which Marie had been sent to Rome to marry with the
Emperor Honorius, but dyed before the marriage was solemnized) besides the
rich robe which was about her, which being burnte was there gathered six and
thirty pounds of gold, a casket of silver a foot and an half long, and
twelve fingers broad, in the which were many small vessels of Crystal, and
of Achates, marueilously fair wrought: also forty rings of gold set with
diverse stones. There was also an emeraude enclosed in gold, which was valued
at five hundredth ducates, and as it were a cluster of grapes, compacted of
emeraudes, and other stones, a great number of ear rings, tablets,
bracelettes, and other jewels and ornaments for Ladies: and innumerable
precious stones, and a great deal of other magnificent stuff. Hereof I think
(for Polydore Virgil, who of purpose entreats of the invention of things,
shows not, from whom, or whence it came,) proceeded this foolish fashion of
latter years for the christian bishops of the West church to be buried in
their pontificalibus, that is, with all such robes and ornaments as they used
to wear, when they were consecrated, and the Archebyshop of Wirtzpurge has
also a naked sword laid with him. But this is most certain, The burial of
the christians.
that from the beginning all christians in all places used to bury their
dead, whole in the earth without burning, nor at the first the godlier sort
with such immoderate mourning and riotous funerals, as did the Gentiles. Yet
were there some corrupt christians that in immoderate mourning did imitate the
Paganes, In 9. ad Romans sermon. 17
whom as you have read before, Chrysostom sharply takes up, as he does in an
other place cry out against their madness, who when they died, would will
such and so much gorgeous geere to be bestowed upon their carkases, as would
quite consume all their substance and goods. Of such degenerate christians
does holy Augustine complain: Lib. pri. de mor. Eccle. Cath. cap. 34.
who would most riotously swill and tipple at the graves of ye dead, and
exhibit unto corses exquisite banquets, and burying them selves upon the
buried depute their raueninges and drunkenness unto religion. So in our days,
Joan. Macrus de Ind. hist. lib 3. cap 16.
the christians that inhabit the city Carangora in India, do use to feast
eight days together for the dead person, all his kinsfolks assembling
together. But I do think that of all the christian nations, only certain
Tartares do, Joan. Boc. de om. gent. mo. li. ^. cap. 10
not lay the dead body whole in the ground, but use this savage fashion, when
that their parents be worn with age, they do feed them altogether with
fat and talowe, that they may die the sooner. But when that they are dead, by
this diet, they burn them, and take up their ashes very diligently, keeping
them as some precious thing: and every day season their meat therwithal, until
they be al spent. But the barbarous christians the Sarmatians ye inhabit about
Cimerius Bosphorus use this manner. Musc. lib. 4. The burial of the
inhabitants of Meotis.
When one of their Princes dies, they make in a fair large field a great
pyle or heap of reeds, whereupon they lay the dead body being howelled: eight
days is he visited by his kinsmen, and subjects, and is honored with diverse
kinds of gyfts. There stand by the pyle two of ye princes ancient friends,
resting on their staves: and on ye left hand of the corse a maid with a dart,
and a piece of silk fastened unto the end of it, wherwithal she drives away
the flies, yea although it be in the winter. But ouerright against him, sets
his chief or first wife on the bare ground incessantly beholding him, but
without tears. Now when the eight days be ended, they bring a great cophin, in
the which they enclose the dead man with part of the gyfts, and bear him unto
the place where he is appointed to be buried: and there they set him down on
the ground, casting earth upon him not only until they have covered him, but
also made a borough or little hill or mount, and the greater his power and
Dominions were, the greater and higher do they make the hill, or grave. After
they have thus buried him, when it is upon the time of refection, they make
ready an horse garnished with fair furniture, and lead him unto the grave of
the dead Prince, and inuit and bidd him three times unto the prepared feast.
But when he makes them no answer, they return home with the horse, to bring
news unto the guestes, that they had received no answer. Then it is decreed
by them all, that they be exempted from his band and obedience, eating,
drinking, and feasting merrily in the honor of the dead prince. Musc. li. 3.
The bu^ial of the Liuonians.
The Liuonians, when they will bury a dead man do stand round about him,
tippling hard, and also inuit ye dead man to drink with them, pouring his
part upon him: but when they lay him in the grave, they lay by him an axe,
meat and drink, and a little money for to spend by the way, and speak unto
him thus: farewell, go into an other world where thou shall reign over the
Almaines, as they have done here over thee. This manner of burial of the
Liuonians has reduced into my memory, although somewhat to late, a usage of
the Greeks, which I have read in Epiphanius in Ancorato, the which was, to
bring meat, and drink unto the monumentes of the dead, and to call out unto
them aloude by their names: Oh arise up again man, come eat, drink, and be
merry: but on their days called Pandemes, they did burn unto coals their
meats, and offer up their wines, bringing thereby no good at all unto the
dead, and also hurting themselves.

But (says Theuet) although the Mahumetanes, and the Turks, the Persians, the
Arabians, and the Moors do dissent in diverse ceremonies, yet do they all agree
in the rites of burial, and the song used thereat. The burial of the turks
ye and of all the mahumetans.
When that any Turk dies they wash his body and socke it in a very clean
white sheet, afterward they carry him with his head forward, men bearing
men, and women women, unto some place without ye city to be buried, for it is
not lawful to bury any body wtin a church, no not the great Turks them
selves: wherefore the Bassaes do use to found great mosques, and hospitalles,
adjoining to whom they do erecte a round room in form like unto our pigeon
houses, where they be buried. Before the coorse go the monks with candles: but
Theuet holds it stiffly that they bear no candles nor any other kind of
lights: the priests come behind the bear singing very mournfully, as also
does all the people, until they come unto the place of his burial, eftsoons
crying out abound: the great God that made heaven and earth, and had
compassion of his prophets David, Abraham, Mahumeth, and Haly, will also take
pity on ye soul of this poor sinner, who has offended all his life long.
But if that any of the great officers do die, as a Bassa, a Beglerbey, the
Aga which is captain of the guard, the Nassangibassa who is Lord chancellor
or any such like, the news of his death is bruted every where, and the day
when he shall be buried, the which does cause a great number of people to
stand in the streets to behold the funeralles. They that bear the coorse
are of the nearest of his kin, clothed all in white rusette cloth, but the
rest of the mourners have every man a piece of white linen cloth hanging
down from the top of his tubban (which is his hatte) unto his knees. But if
he be a great captain that has served in ye wars, one does lead after the
coorse a horse, or two, into whose nostrels they do put the poulder of a root,
that makes them to neese and their eyes to water, the which they do say the
horse sheddeth for sorrow that he takes for his masters death. There do also
attend on the coorse, six or seven Solachers, they are a kind of ordinary
soldiers, and every one with a certain number of Ianisars, and the steward
of his house, and certain Timariotes (which be seruitours on horse back) who
bear diverse banners, and estanders. And before the corpse marches a Mutapharca
(an horseman of the turkish guard) who holds a spear in his hand, upon the
end whereof is borne ye Tulban of ye dead man, with a tail of an horse
fastened thereunto, but if one of the children of the great segniour die, the
pomp is very magnificent, and the master of the ceremonies causes many
sorts of arms to be borne before the coorse by the king of herhautes. But to
proceed in the relation of the general ceremonies: if that he that dies be a
poor man, they use to gather money through the streates for the pains of the
religious men. The friends of the person departed do often resort unto ye
grave with mourning, and set upon the monumente bread, fleashe, eggs, and
milk (a nouendiall feast after the manner of the Ethnickes) the which are
eaten for the soul of the dead, by poor men or birds of the air, or else
emottes: for they do hold that it is a like acceptable to God to give alms
unto brute creatures which are in lack, as it is to men, seeing that it is
given for the love of God. There be that do let fly birds which were kept in
cages, paying their masters for the^ and some for ye love of God do cast bread
into rivers for fishes, saying that they shall obtain most ample reward of
God for such pity showed toward them yt do want. Must. lib. 5.
But the great lords of the Turks, or as we do here commonly call them, the
great turks, lie all magnificently intumbed at Brusa a city of Bithynia in
many chapels which do stand round about the church, every prince has his
candlestick of gold with a candle burning set upon his sepulcher, and in the
higher parts of the chapels hang there many lamps alight. Moreover, there do
continually abide in that place twelve priests of their religion, who of their
green cappes are called Talismanlarie, who do by course incessauntly pray in
the church both day and night, three before noone, and three after, three
before midnight, and three after. But when that any man is sick amongst the
Tartares, Joan. Boe. lib. 2. cap. 12.
and is near unto the point of death, they do stick up before the tente wherein
he lies, a spear with a black cloth, that he that goes by come not in: for no
man if he see this sign dare go in, yea, though he be called. But after that
he is departed this life, all his householde assembles together, and privily
carries the coorse out of the tent into some place chosen before and digging
there a hole deep and broad enough, they set up over it a little tent, and
furnish a table with dishes of meat, and setting the dead body very
preciously apparrelled unto ye table, they ouerwhelme them altogether with earth.
There is also buried with him, one beast for burden, and one horse trapped.
But the mightier sort choose in their life time one of their servants, whom
being burned with their mark, they cause to be buried with them: and ye for
this cause, that they may use them in an other world. After this his friends
take an other horse, and kill him and eat up ye flesh, but the skin being
stuffed full of hay, and sowed up again, do they set upon four posts over
ye sepulcher for a sign of a dead man. The bones do the women burn for to
cleanse the soul. But the men of great power do an other thing with the skin
or hyde: they cut it in very narrow thonges, and measure with them so much
ground about ye grave, as they will compass: for they do believe that the
dead man shall have so much land assigned him in an other world, as his
friends have measured out for him with this hide. The burial of the great Cham.
The thirtithe day they end their mourning. But the Emperor of the Tartars,
the great Chame, must be buried in the mountein Altay, yea and thither is he
carried although he die an hundredth days journey from thence. All the men, the
horses, yea if they be worth never so much, that they meet withal as they
carry the Emperor to the place of burial, do they kill, and bid them go
into the other world, to do service unto the great Cham, for they do think
that they shall stand him in use there. The burial of the kings of the Moors
Hist. lib. 3.3.
In like manner does Iouius write that all the lords and princes of the Moors
and Numidians, dwell they never so far off, are all buried at the city of
Caruenna three days journey from Tunes: because they be persuaded that their
souls whose bones lie in the most ancient sacred temple of that city, are
most effectually commended unto God for to obtain the felicity of the
heavenly life, as they which are most purely purged and cleansed by the
exquisite ceremonies and prayers of the reverend college of holy priests, of
ye church. The burial in Tangute.
In Tangute a province under the great Cham, they use to burn the body of the
dead, as also do almost all the nations of the East: yet some do reserve the
body certain days, some seven days, and other while a month, and often
times six months, making at home a coffen for him, ye boords thereof being
joined together so close that no stink can breath out of it. And every day
whilst the coorse is in the house, do they at dinner time prepare and furnishe
a table besides the coorse, where upon they set wine and meats, letting them
stand there the space of an hour: for they do think that the soul of the
dead man does take and feed of the things which are set upon the table. In
the city of Tarnasseri, in the new found East Indies, they also burn their
dead, The burial of the Tarnassereus
and put their ashes in vessels of clay, which are seasoned with saltepeter, or
nitrum, the vessels being filled with the ashes in the ground do they set up
at home in their own houses. When they burn them, they cast into the fire all
kinds of sweet odors, as Aloe, Franckincense, Myrrh, Storax, Coral,
Saunders, and innumerable sorts of such odoriferous trees, the trumpets
blowing, and the pipers playing heauenlike: but fifteen days after the death
of her husband, the wife which suruiueth bids all her kinsfolks unto a
feast: and adourned with all her jewels goes unto the place, where her
husband was burnt: where a hole or pit is dug of great deapth and able to
receive a woman which they hang round about with black clothe, and the
pit burns very fervently being filled full of odoriferous woods: and
after that the guests have ended their feast, the widdowe eats great store
of Betola, whereby her wits are somewhat taken from her. Now a great number
of pipers stand round about the pit, apparelled like unto devils, and the
woman like one somewhat frantike goes to and fro, hopping and skipping, as
though she daunced, and at ye length when all the ceremonies be finished, she
throws her self down headlong into ye burning pit, even as though she
thereby should be received immediately into heaven. And vnlest the widdowe will
do thus after the death of her husband, she is noted with wounderful infamy,
and is a mocking stock unto all the whole region, as one that loved not her
husband. This fashion do none keep, but the noble men and the chief of the
city, wherefore they say the king is mostly present at such a pomp. The wild
people of America, as soon as ever the soul is departed out of the body,
lay the dead body in the earth, in that place where the diseased person did
lack greatest pleasure in his life time: The burial of the wild men of
America. Theuet.
thinking that they cannot lay him in a more notable and honorable place, then
in the earth that brings forth so many good fruits and other riches
profitable and needful for man's use. If that an householder happen to die,
his wives and his nearest kinsfolks, and friends, will make a merueilous
mourning, not for the space of three or four days, but of four or five
months: but the greatest lamentation is four or five of the first days:
you shall hear them make such a noise and harmony, as if a sort of cattes and
dogs were together: ye shall see as well men, as women, some laid on their
beds sorrowful, other sitting with their bare buttockes on the ground
embracing one an other, and saying in their launguage, our father, or friend,
was so good a man, he was so strong and mighty, he labored so well, and
dressed our gardens, he caught beasts, fowls, and fishes for our sustenance:
alas he is dead, we shall see him no more, but after that we be dead with our
friends, in the countries where the pages (they be their priests and
prophets) say they have seen them, with many such like words, the which they
will ten thousand times repeat day and night continually, for the space of
four or five days, never ceasing to lamente. The children of the deceased a
month after their mourning, will desire their friends unto a feast, or
solemnity, held in the honor of the dead man, and there will they all
assemble together painted with diverse colors, and bedecked with feathers, and
other bravery according unto the fashion of their country, vsinge a thousand
ceremonies, pastimes, daunces, plays, and pipinge on flutes made of the bones
of the legs, and arms of the slain enemies, and play also on other
instruments, which are in use amongst them. But the ancient sort cease not to
tipple all the day long without eating one morsel of meat, and they be
served by the wives and kinswomen of the deceased.

In the Isle of Cephale, when one is dead, Theuet. The burial in the Isle
Cephale
they bury him in the court of his house, until that his flesh be
consumed, and when this is done, they take up the bones, and mark them, that
they may afterward know whose they were, and then lay them on the table,
under a cloth of black fustion, whither one does bring bread, and flesh
baked, as an offeringe or sacrifice made for the dead, whom they do pray to
have them in remembrance. The principal effect of their prayers is to desire
him to be favorable and good unto their king: to make him prosperous in all
his affairs, and so to destroy and confound his enemies that he may keep the
Islande in peace, rest, and security. These prayers are made by the chief of
every house, all the rest that be there being silente, and clothed in white.
But when this prayer is done, they all rise up, and wash their faces and
hands, and then sit laughing and singing of the praise of the dead person,
and every one with his householde, eats up those things that were offered.
The burial in the Isle of Heremites. Theuet.
When one dies in the Isle of ye Heremites, and specially one of the
Heremites, or priests, all the women of the town or village, assemble
together in the dead man's house, who is put into the bark of a tree, in the
mids of the house.

About the coorse, they make with ropes, which are all covered with barks if
trees, as it were a tente, the which they cover all over with green boughs
of diverse trees, and in the mids thereof they make a place finely trimmed
with herbs, and in form like unto a pauilion.

Under these green boughs, and within the tent, do the most honorable and
honest women assemble, all clothed in black, having every one of them a fan
made of palm leaves: the rest of the women and the parents of the dead, are
in the house, weeping and sighing: then one of the women that is of greatest
estimation, aduaunceth her self, and cutts off the hairs of the dead man,
during the which time his wife remains all dismal, and weeping bitterly over
the coorse of her husband often kissing his mouth, hands, and feet. But when
yt all the hairs be shorn off, this weeping wife raises up her self, and
falls to singing with a countenance as merry and laughing, as it was before
monstruously sad. These things being done, they put into a vessel of
purcellane, wherein is fire, Myrrh, frankincense, Storax and other such
odoriferous things, perfuming therewith both the body and the house: in the
which joy and perfuming they continue five or six days: after which term
expired, they do annoint the body with camphore, a certain time, which being
ended, they enclose him in a cofine, the which is nailed with wodden pinnes,
and after wards lay him in the ground in some place where no body dwells.
But when the king is departed out of life, the greatest and most honorable
men of the realm assemble to celebrate the obsequies, and haueing apparelled
and clothed the body very honorably and reuerendly, they cut off the
heads, or snatche certain great personages of the chief of the men of
war, or the best of the soldiers, or some merchauntes of the retinue, and
certain of the kings best horses, to the end they may wait upon the king
in the other world: and when they do pute them to death, they do say: Go in
ye name of our Gods, to serve our king in our paradise, even as ye have
attended on him in this world: and as ye have been faithful unto him here
beneth in the earth, so also shall ye be in the glory of our Gods. Those that
be slain, be nothing sorry or dismaide therefore, but take their death in very
good part, laughing and rejoicing no less then they do among us, that go
unto a marriage. When one dies in Siam a country of India, Bell Forest.
beyond Ganges, his friends and kinsmen, for to honor him, do take his body,
and carry it into the mids of a field: where they do drive into the ground
two posts of wood, and lay a third upon the^: unto this cross post do they
fasten a chain with two hooks: in whom they do lay the dead man, and make a
great fire under him: and as long as the body rosteth, his children and
kinsfolks stand round about the fire: weeping, howling, and sighing: both as
pitifully, and also as loud as they can for their lives. But when ye the body
is well roasted, they take out their goblets, and fill them with their kind of
wine, and ordinary drink, made of rice and sugar: and every one also draws
his knife, and begins to cut off the flesh of the man: the which they do
eat, and drink of their goblettes: and yet they cease not to sighe and
lament. And the first that begins to eat of the dead man's flesh is the
person that is nearest of his kin: neither do they depart out of the place,
before that they have eaten all the flesh unto the very bones: the which they
do burn: a rite used by all the Orient. And they do say, that it is
impossible to give unto their friends a more honorable tumbe, and where he
shall be better, then their own bodies, who love him best, and are also of equal
dignity, unto his person. In the city of Fesse in Aphrica they use to bury the
dead men, The burial of the kingdom of Fesse. Sanseuino.
in a common field without the town, setting upon the grave a great stone,
made of the fashion of a triangle. But notable men, and of great reputation
have at the head a table of marble, and an other at their feet, in whom are
seen engraven proper verses, in comfort of hard and unhappy chances passed.
And a little beneath the name of him that lies there, and the name of the house
he was off, with the day and year of his death. There is also without the town
upon a hill, a palace, where are seen the tumbes of the kings made of marble,
with fine and witty epitaphes engraven in them, and the tumbes are garnished
with such surpassing workmanshippe, and beautified with the finest colors of
the world, so that it would make a man astonished to behold the excellency of
them. At Ormus in the Arabian gulf uses the wife of the deceased man, once in
a day for the space of four months, to make a pitiful solemn weeping and
howling: and sometime to hyre an other woman to do it for her. The like manner
says Bell Forest, the author hereof, have I seen in Perrigord, a Province of
France, among the peasaunts.

The fifteenth Chapter. The confuse and causeless fear of man, and
particularly of the Romans three times, of Augustus Caesar, of the Greeks at
Patras, Philocrene, and Trapezonda, of the league called the commonwealth in
France, before Paris, of the Emperials at Villa Francha, of Pysander, of one
that died with the sight of Hercules, of Artemon of Saint Vallier of Cassander,
at the sight of Alexanders Image, and other.
ANd this is enough, ye and I fear me too too much touching man's care for his
burying. Which hofulnesse does the confuse fear of man much augment, which
Pliny, rightly puts, as a misery of man, and truly affirms that no
living thing has greater. Hereof came the proverb among the Greeks and
Latins, a Panik chance: whereby they signify a soudaine, vain, and
causeless tumult of men's hearts, and it is so called, because that the
Ethnickes did think, that the God Pan did send into men such souden terrors,
and consternations of mind, making them like mad men, so impotent and
unstaid: that for the time they be not only void of reason, but also of common
sense. Such vain fears, according to the proverb, often happen in wars,
many in Alexander the great his voyage, and twice unto the Saracenes in that
famous expedition of Godfrey de Bolloigne, which chances be of such force,
that the famous Poet Pyndarus holds that it ought not to be accounted a
reproach, and dishonor, if that the sons of the Gods, or the most valiant
men, fly out of the field in such tumultes. I read in Liuie, that Claudio
Sulpicio, A vain fear of the Romans.
and Aemilio Ceritano Conss. there arose such a fear one night in the city
of Rome, that alarm was cried throughout all the whole city, and such a
tumult was raised, as though every streat had been full of the enemies: But
when it waxed day, there appeared author neither of the noise, or yet of the
fear. And in his third decade he tells, that when the Fragellans had brought
news that Hanibal drew near unto the city: all the Citizens fell into a
marvelous fear, and the women running out of their houses, sweeped the
Temples of the Gods, and the sacred altars with the hairs of their head, and
on their knees holding up their hands to heaven, besought the Gods with
abundant tears, and loud shriches, that they would keep the city and people
of Rome in safety. But after that he was come, and encamped within three miles
of the city, he approached almost to the hard walls with a chosen band of
two thousand horse, to view the city: with whom Fuluius, one of the Consuls
skirmished: and in the mids of the fight one thousand and two hundredth
Numidians, which had revolted from Hanibal, unto the Romans, and were at ye
hour on the Auentine hill: were commanded to march from thence, into a part of
the city called Exquiliae. Now they running apace from the hill into ye plain,
seemed unto them which were ignorant of the counsel, to be their enemies: and
thereof did such tumult arise, in the whole city, and such a fear and
trembling: that if Hanibal had not encamped him self so near unto the city,
that they could not fly, but into the lappes of the enemy, the dismayed
multitude had quite forsaken the city. The degenenerate fear of Augustus and
the Romans.
Yea Augustus, whom all the world stood in dread of, was put into such a
fear with the news of the overthrow and slaughter of Q. Varus, with three
legions, in Germany by the Cherusi: that although they were many hundredth
miles off, and the monsterous Alps between them, and the loss were nothing
in comparison of his great power, yet as in almost a desperate state he
commanded straight watch and ward to be kept, that no tumult should arise
within the city: he also prolonged unto the governors of the provinces the
time of their charge, that they might be kept in obedience by men of skill, and
such as had been used unto them: he vowed great plays unto Jupiter Optimus
Maximus, if that of his woonted goodness, he would change the public weal
into a better state. The people also following their prince, were so afraid,
that they made their wills, and conveyed away their goods, as though there had
surely been but one way with them: and yet the Germans never did set forth
on foot toward Italy. This people which conquered all nations, were so
affrighted with this one discomfiture: that they would not go into Germany
unto Tyberius aid, who with great felicity warred there: so that the Emperor
was forced to confiscate the goods of them, as the lot fell upon them, and to
note them with ignominy: but when that neither would serve to revoke the
courages of the cowards, but that many refused to go, he put them to death:
that assured death might make them to win doubtful victory.

Also I read in Gregoras, The fear of the Greeks before Patras.
that when John the brother unto Michael Paleologus the Emperor of
Constantinople, besieged with a mighty army, the despote of Thessalie in the
strong castle of Patras, whither he had driven him: the Despote being almost in
despair, how to get him self and his out of this present peril, attempted
this way, the which yet he durst not to communicate unto any man in the world;
it was so desperate. In a very dark night, he did let down him self from the
wall by a rope, and privily went through the camp of the Emperials (for other
way had he none) in clothes all to torn and ragged, crying and gaping, with a
loud and boystrous voice, and with words half barbarous, and clownish, as
though he had sought a horse which he had lost, the soldiers laughing and
flouting of him, as some poor lob of the country. By this means he escaping
them, came into Attica, where upon promise of much money, and the marriage of
his fair daughter, he obtained of the Duke five hundredth soldiers, with whom
he marched toward Patros: where he found many of the Emperialles abroad in
the fields, taking their pleasure, of whom some he did take, other of
purpose, hoping that which in deed happened, he coursed into the camp. By his
souden and unlooked for coming, arose there such a tumult in the camp, they
imagining some mighty power had come unto the Despotes aid, that before he
could come unto the munitions, the Emperials were all fled, some one way, some
an other, leaving all the carriages and furniture of the camp behind: vain
fear making them to flee, which twenty thousand men could not have done. And
in his sixth book writes he the like. The fear of the Greeks at Philocrene.
Andronicus Paleologus the younger Emperor of Constantinople, went with an army
against Archanes the great Turk, who invaded his dominions in Asia: and before
Philocrene, a little town not far from Nicea, they fought until that the
night parted them, the Greeks returning into their fortified camp: but the
Turk, who by trial made that day of the prowess of the Greeks, thought that
they would go farther up into the country the next day: marched forward
that night to take before hand the ways for passage, leaving yet behind him
near unto them, a band of three hundredth horsemen, to watch what they would
do. The emperor who had been a little wounded in his foot in the sight, went
into the town to have his wound dressed. Now the Greeks who were ignorant
wherefore he went thither, thought that he had been fled away for fear: then
also came this imagination into their brains, that the Turk would be there
that night with a mighty army, and that not one man of them should escape,
and see the sun the next day. Whereupon they that had brought small boats
thither (for the town stood by the water side) went aboard their boats,
leaving all their baggage behind them: other hasting to get into the town,
some of them trod upon and smouldered an other: some standing one upon an
others shoulders, got into the town, but other were pulled, and other thrust
down by their fellows, and slain in the fall. There were some also that in
this outrageous fear, dyed as they stood. But in the morning when the sun
was up, those 300. Barbarians beholding that incredible discomfiture of the
Greeks, and in their camp horses, armor, and weapons, without men, yea, and
also the Emperors own horses, with red saddles, two hundredth of them took
the spoil, and went away: the other hundredth came nearer, and with many a shot
galled and killed the poor Greeks that were left. The fear of the Greeks at
Tr^pesunt.
An other such history find I in him, when Ziges lay in siege before
Trapesunt, a poor woman that thought her hemp and flax (which was all her
wealth) lay not safe enough in a bastil near unto the wall, removed it thence,
and brought it by night into the great castle: where by misaduenture it falling
a fire, did also set on fire the house: the chief of the city and the people
seeing the fire, thought that some traitors had betrayed the city: whereupon
they all fled out of the town, some by sea, and some by land, leaving the king
in the city alone with about a fifty men, who yet kept the city. Yea, this
foolish fear makes men to affirm steadfastly, that they heard and saw that
which they never did. As when the Turk besieged the mighty rich city of
Argos, The fear of the Greeks at Argos.
assaulting it on two sides, they which were in the one part of the city,
immagined that they heard one say, that the town was taken in the other side,
wherefore they all ran thither, leaving at their own part an easy entry
for the enemy.

When that the Dukes of Berry and Britain, The fear of the Frenchmen. Paul.
Aemyl. Phil. Com.
the Earl of Charolois, and the rest of the league which called them selves
the public good, or the common wealth, were encamped against Jews the
eleventh before Paris: in the dead time of the night, the watch of the camp
heard the voice of one that said, that he was sent by certain of the city
that favored the confederates, and willed it to be showed unto them, that the
king had determined in the very dawning of the next day, to assault their
camp with all his power, being divided into three battelles or companies: that
the watchmen should with all possible speed certify the Dukes, that they were
not oppressed unawares. Incontinently all the whole army is raised up, the
soldiers commanded to arm them selves. Before it was day, all things were in
a readiness, both to defend the camp, and also to fight the battle, and the
scoutes that were sent forth when the Sun was up, brought news back yt
they had seen a mighty number of pikes and spear men.

The light was somewhat troubled and not good, by reason of a thick mist, which
arose that morning: again the horsemen being sent forth, confirm the first
news. Now was the enemy looked for, as though they would even at that very
instant salie out: but there was not one man in very deed, for the scoutes had
conceived a vain and false sight, both fear, and also the voice, and mocking
used in the night, representing unto their eyes false things for true. At the
length when it was far forth days, a clearer light opened the error: and
it was merrily iested among them, that the thistles with whom the fields about
the city are clothed, seemed unto the fearful to be pikes and spears. But
Iouius will match this history with an other more ridiculous. Histo. lib. 37.
The fear of the Emperials at Villa Francha.
Anno. 153 S. Charles the Emperor, Frauncis the french, and Paulus Tertius,
the bishop of Rome, were appointed to meet at Nicea, a town belonging unto
the Duke of Sauoy: and during the colloquie there, the Emperor lying at
Villafrancha, whither Andrewe Doria had brought him out of Hispanie, one after
noone, the idle Courtiers and Mariners walked along the sea side, and on the
high hills, that run along there, and chanced to see beside a farm house
built with towers, a great thick smoke to ascend ever and anon: incontinently
the foolish multitude imagined that it was Barbarosha the Turks high Admiral,
with a great fleet traitorously procured to come thither by the French king,
to take the Emperor, and the Bishop: and with this fearful news they came
running into the city. Immediately was there a mighty uproar in all the whole
town, with, Out alas, we be all betrayed, Barbarossa is at hand with a mighty
navy. The tale was so credited, that the valiant and prudent Marquis of
Guasto, who lay in camp on a hill above the city, with a band of soldiers for
the Emperors safeguard, in all haste clapped on his head piece, caught his
target, commanded all his soldiers, with all speed to be in a readiness:
and with all his power descended down into the town unto the Emperor,
appointing every man where he should stand on the cliffes, and higher places
to beat down with shot and stones, the landing Turks. Andrew Dori also an
other Neptune, with great tumult, makes the mariners to wey up their anchors,
to turn about their galleyes: and with all speed sendes out foistes, to
certainly epsy where their enemies are, and in what number. They went forth,
and not one galley or ship could they see: at length they sailed unto the
towred farm house, where this fleet was reported to have been seen: and
there could learn of never a ship, but understood that the good husband that
dwelt there, had that day been making clean and fanning of his beans in
diverse places: the dust of whom flying up, now and then with a space between
(as ye know, happens in making clean of al corn) was taken not only of the
rude multitude, but also of the expert soldiers, and skilful mariners, for to
be 36. galleys, for so many times they had marked the dust to fly up: and all
men trembled and shoke for fear, except only the Emperor him self, (such was
his hardy courage) and yet could no man of them al see from the high houses,
and mighty mounteines, in that very open and broad sea, either mast, sail,
or sail yard. And least I should be tedious, I omit in this place, how that
the old expert captain James de Caldora with great uproar aranged his
battles in Puglia, against a great heard of dear, whom he did take for a
mighty host of his enemies: and how wtin few years after, Ferdinand the
first king of Naples, retired back with his whole army to the walls of
Barletta, for fear of an heard of dear, which was supposed by the fearful,
to be a great army of armed men, and a thousand such like examples. Of this
foolish vain fearfulness of men came the proverb, Eras. in Chili.
I think among all nations, he is afraid of his own shadow: and among the
Greeks more fearful the^ Pysander, The fearfulnes of Pisander.
who was continually afraid that he should meet with his own soul, that he
dreamed it had forsaken him, while he was yet living: and more fearful then he
that looked out of the cave: which proverb arose of a man, Of one that died
with the sight of Hercules.
who being stricken with great terror of the same of Hercules, who men said
would come that way, hid him self in a cave: and popping out and in his head
(as it is ye manner of ye fearful) to see if he could espy him, chanced
unluckily to see him in very deed passing by: wherwithal he was so affrighted,
that he dyed presently. I read also of one Artemon, a man so fearful (if he be
not to be accounted mad) that as long as he lived, The fearfulnes of Artemon.
Brusonius.
two of his servant did continually hold over his head a target of brass,
that nothing should fall down upon him: and if he happened to go forth any
whether out of the doors, he was carried in an horslitter seeled over, and
thereof was surnamed Periphoretes. And in our days, S. Vallier, Duke of
Valentinois in France, being condemned to dye, for not disclosing the treason
of Charles the duke of Burbon, the king sent him his pardon, at that very
instant that the executioner was about to strike of his head, but the kings
pardon could not save his life. For the vehement fear of death conceived,
brought him into a pernicious fever, the which within few days maugre all
Physic, bereft him of life. Whereof came the French proverb, La fieure de
Saint Vallier, The fever of Saint Vallier, for a strong apprehension. Cassander
did so fear Alexander the great, The fear of Cassander. Sabelie.
that coming to Delphos long time after Alexanders death to behold the
statuies, that were set up there: and chauncing to see one of his old prince
Alexander: with the sight thereof was he that had won Macedonie and Greece,
shaken with such fear, that he could not in long time leave trembling, and
come again unto him self. In the like agony will many be with the sight of a
toade, other of a snake, as the Gentleman of late years that durst not go by
a writhed hat band of white and black that lay on the floor, because he had
thought it had been an adder: but many are more foolish then Sir Thomas Moors
ape, which fell into an ague, with seeing upon a scuden a snayle putting out
her horns: for they will be in a cold sweat, with the sight of many meats,
and diverse of a cat, and some swoone with the sight of their blood, or
beholding of other letten blood. It is common, that many men, otherwise of good
courage and hardiness, dare not lie alone for fear of spirits, no, nor go
alone in dark places, taking every thing they see, hear, or feel, to be a
devil. I have showed the more examples of men's confuse fear, because that the
great clearke Ludouicus Viues seems to doubt, whether that Pliny has
charged man truly with it or not: wherein I dare say Pliny has not belyed him,
no, nor yet in the next, that no living thing has more extreme rage.

The sixteenth Chapter. Of the furious rage of man, and specially of Walter
Earl of Breme, and Matthias king of Hungary.
FOr the proof hereof, will I only allege two examples among six hundredth,
namely, seeing that daily experience does continually give us a great number,
that of them that moved with wrath, and inflamed with ire, do in that raging
fit many things, which bring them assured destruction, indeleble dishonestie,
and sorrowful repentance. The wrath of Walter Earl of Breme.


Walter the Earl of Breme, having to wife the eldest daughter of Tancredi,
late king of both Sicyles, but then prisoner unto the Emperor: as next heir
unto his father in law his kingdom, invaded Naples with only four thousand
soldiers, and had, what through fortunes rare favor, and his own prowess,
recovered almost the whole realm: but at the last, he was taken prisoner in a
skyrmishe before Sarno, by one Thebald an Almaine: who within three days after
he was taken, offered to set him, and also his father in law Tancredi at
liberty, and to restore him unto his kingdom which he had lost: so that he
would confirm unto him the towns which he then possessed in the kingdom.
Walter bewitched with rage, considering nothing at all either the recovery of
the kingdom, or his own servile captivity, out of the which he might easily
rid him self: like a mad man answered him: that he would never take at such
a stinking scabs hand, either that Thebald had offered him, or things much
greater. The Almaine being justly moved to be so currishly answered by his
prisoner, threatened that he would make him repent those vilanous words of
his: which as soon as Walter had heard, he fell immediately into such a
rage: that renting off the clothes, and rolls with whom his wounds were
bound, he cried out, the fire flying out of his eyes, that he would live no
longer, seeing that he was come into such a villains hands, as would deal
with him by threats: and therwithall like a Tygre tare his wounds and bowels
with his cruel hands, and never after would either eat meat, or suffer any
thing to be applied unto his wounds, and so wtin a few days violently drove
his furious soul out of his tormented body: leaving his only daughter
destitute of al friends, to be a laughing stock unto the world: who if she
had gotten a modest father, should have been Queen of the flourishing kingdom
of both Sicyles.

Neither could that bulworke of christendom Matthias king of Hungary, The
wrath of Mathie King of Hungary Munster.
who valiantly ever overcame ye Turks, who never could be vanquished since,
overcome his own ire: and he that had so often slain in the field so many of
his fierce foreign foes, was killed at home at his own table by an inward
enemy. For he sitting very merry at dinner, upon a Palm Sunday, accompanied
with honorable Ambassadors sent from the French king, called for figs: but
when it was told him, that they were all eaten, he became so angry, and
raging, that he incontinently fell into an apoplexy, and never spoke word
afterward, but roaring out like unto a Lion, died the next day. Was it not,
think ye now, Hor. od. 16. A witty devise of Poets.
wisely fained of the Poets, that Promotheus lacking clay to finishe his man,
was forced to make it up with parts cut off from other living things: and
among other, did put the heart of a wood and mad Lion into man's breast? And
truly said Cato, Anger a short madness.
that anger differs not from madness, but only in this: that it continues
not so long. It is good for a man to look in a glass, when that he is angry.
Wherefore wisely does Plutarche will men to look in a glass, when they be
angry, and to behold them selves well, and then will they be afraid ever
afterward to deforme themselves again in such sort.

Yea, when they shall behold their fiery eyes, their swollen veins and
arteries, their terrible Lionlyke look: they will be no less afraid of
themselves, then was poor transformed Io in Ovid, when she beheld her
horrible horns in the water. But how hurtful it is unto the body do
Physicians show, who define it to be a setting on fire of the vital spirits
in the heart, whereby it is of near aliaunce unto an ague. But that which
follows this perturbation be long pining consumptions, which infeeble the
body.

The seventeenth Chapter. Of the great troubles that religion and superstition
do inflict into man, of the unutterable sorrow for sin, of David, Marie
Magdalene, Fabiola, king Edgar, the gryping griefs of a guilty conscience, and
the vain imaginations of the Melancholic.
AS no man does doubt, but yt these troubles do happen unto man only: so I
think no man will deny, but that all which have reason do feel the
molestation of them. We are willed by the Apostle to work our salvation in
trembling, and fear: and the wiseman accounted that man happy, Prou. 28.
which is always fearful: so that according unto saint Paul's counsel good men
are very careful that they fall not: and when they be fallen, are heartily
heavy, and sorrowful therefore. And as God does exceed in tender love toward
us, the kindest parents, and in gentle government the mildest Princes: and as
the pleasing of him does bring unto us unutterable joys, and the displeasing
of him unspeakable pains: so doubtless does the hofulnesse of the godly for
to please him, pass all worldly study, and the torments that tears their
hearts, when they have grievously offended him, do surmount all dolor
conceived for any other heavy hap. Hereof David, David.
whom neither the perilous persecution of his master, and Prince Saul, could
dismay, nor ye huge and monstrous might of Golias, or many other infinite number
of armed enemies appaul, neither ye sorrowful banishment, from wife, kinsfolks,
and country, wring tears from: being admonished of his fault rored out for
sorrow of his heart, watered his couch with weeping, did eat ashes like bread, and
mingled his cup with tears. The stout king Edgar, Edgar.
whose power and puisance made all his neighbors to quake, being warned of his
unchaste life, fell down flat at the feet of a beggarly Monk, with mighty
streams of tears waltering down his cheeks, from the bottom of a heavy
heart asking pardon of God, broken off with many a scalding sighe, and
discontinued by infinite sobbes, and loud shrikes: yea and to make manifest
his compunction, he that proudly had caused eight kings subdued by him, to
row him in a boat sitting in his royal robes: now became so lowly, that
during the space of seven years, he abandoned the use of the kingly crown:
thinking himself not worthy to wear the ensign of supreme honor and Empire
over the honorable and worshippeful of this flourishing Realm, seeing yt he
had debased himself by wicked fornication, to be one body with a vile strumpet.
From what other perpetual spring came those mighty streams of tears, with
whom Marie Magdalene Marie Magdalene.
washed our Saviors feet. Who can with words, express her immeasurable
sorrow, which so at one instant wroung out of her all the moisture of her
body, and turned it into repentant tears? whom she dried with the golden
locks of her head which with their beauty, sweet smell of precious
ointmentes, and curious and gorgeous trimming, had allured many great men unto
her lewd love, and made them her bestlike bondmen and slaves. Neither if
Cicero his soul were translated into my breast, Fabiola.
could I with words worthily utter the griping griefs, of that noble Roman
Lady Fabiola, Iero. de morte Fabiolae.
who nothing regarding the glittering glory of her honorable ancestors, the
Fabij, nor her own honor, nor yet the shame, and reproach which it might
seem to be unto the unwise world: casting off her gowns of silk, her costly
cawles, her rich attire of head, her precious Jewels of gold, pearl, and
stone, stood of her own voluntary will at ye solemn feast of Easter, bare
footed, bare headded, with her torn golden locks, hanging down detormously
over her shoulders, and her body pined away, and made loathsome with the long
pains of penitence: clothed in prickinge hairecloth, before a Church porche in
that city, where a great number of her noble progenitors had rode in their
triumphall chariots, richely adorned in their Picta Toga, and gyrtle of estate:
and with her horrible habit, cruel beating, and buffeting of that fair face
of hers, which had liked one man to well, her doleful sighs, sorrowful
sobbinges, flowing tears, she turned the bishop, the priests and all the
whole people unto compassion, and prayers: neither did this doleful day end her
penitence, but that which finished her life. For she builded a public
hospital, the first that ever was erected at Rome, into the which were all the
poor and lamentable lazars brought out of all the streets of mighty Rome: in
careful providing for whom, as she passed the liberality of all bounteous
mistresses: so did she in painful attendance, service, and awaiting on them,
more then match ye diligence of al good servants: thinking it not to be
sufficient to be pitiful in purse, vnlest that she also were merciful with
hand: yea, she spent al her goods which were inestimable, to have the^ yt might
with painful toil continually punish her rebelling body. How did she daily
tire her sender, and soft shoulders with the bearing of impotent beggars? The
swannish neck of that beautiful young Lady, which was wont to be adorned with
chains of gold, and precious stones, was now almost continually beclipsed
with the scuruie and scabbie arms of leperous Lazars, leaving behind on her
white skin, the marks of their filthy running sores, and their loathsome
creepers. Her eyes, whom before time fine fantasies did wholly feed, now
beheld nothing but scalde heads, scuruie hands, faces, and breasts eaten
with cruel cankers, running legs, and rotten bodies, swarming full of mighty
magots. Her nose in steed of her accustomed precious ointments, Arabian
odours, and sweet flowers, had with him but stinkinge ulcers, and rotten
carcasses, and all the filthy excrementes of the body. The ears who were wont
to hear ye sweet melody of voice, and instruments, are now continually
filled with the horrible groans and grievous gaspes of men laboring for life
and fetching the last painful panges, the lamentable moan of folks
tormented with incessante pains of the joints, and the loud cries of poor
wretches burned with hot scalding carbuncles, and gnawen with eating ulcers.
The tongue which had been used to talk of pleasant matters, was now wholly
occupied in speaking of lotheso^e lice, filthy ulcers, stinking corses. The
palate which before could taste nothing, but the pleasantest wines and the
delicatest meats, now was glad of an old hard dried brown bread cruste,
the vilest herbs, roots, and water, that she by pinching of her own belly
might have wherwithall to buy wholesome meats and things to make good
suppinges for the sick and impotente, and to satisfy the hungry mawes of the
almost starued beggars. Those five fingers, which whiledome must do no work
for marring of their whiteness, no scarce weaue their riottous purple queens
work, nor sow fine knacks, now were made as hard as horn, with scowring of
beggars piss pottes and pannes, and were all filthy, and foul, with quisshing
out of rotten matter out of mangie legs, and busied still in washing of their
stinkinge scabbie, and poisoned cloutes. Finally all her rich robbes, precious
iewelles and gay gear were soulde away to buy the naked beggars garments to
defend them against the cold, and she stripped into her patched peticote,
her clouted hose, her pegged shoes, and a course kerchiefe to trusse in her
neglected locks. But why stand I so long about Fabiola, as though her
sorrow for sin were rare, and all the aunciente ecclesiastical and sacred
histories were not full of the like? as our wicked age is very fruiteful in
bringing forth of men who tormented with the cruel remorse of a conscience
cumbered with the knowledge of innumerable heinous facts committed by them, The
torments of those that do despair of Gods mercy,
and doubling them with degenerate despair wickedly conceived of Gods
mercy, which surmounteth all his works, do wilfully murder them selves,
folishly thinking to ease the pinching pains of the soul by seperating it
from the body, when as in very deed they thereby immesurably augmente her
misery and torments. But besides these piteous penitentes, The torments of a
guilty conscience.
are there an other kind of sinful men, who being plunged over head and
ears in the mire of mischiefs, and sins, do contemn their deadly danger,
and seem to have an insensibilitie of their sins, and peril, finally, are
ashamed of nothing so much as to show ye any light sign of sorrow for their
horrible deep sink of sin: yet can not these lusty bloudes escape the
inward percinge prick of a guilty conscience which tormenteth them a
thousand fold more terriblye, then if it were the deadly stinge of a viper,
and works them more woe and unrest, then does the mad fly the coursed
cattle in ye rageing dog days. These jolly gentlemen tremble ^ shake at
every flash of lighteninge, and be half dead at a clappe of thunder: as
though they came not of any natural cause, but were sent down from heaven
by angered God, purposely to revenge their outrages. Not in the day time, not in
the night, will their vexed minds grant unto their bodies any rest. When
they go unto their meals, no one morsel of meat will go down their
throats, fearing as men that had their jaws dried up with a long wastinge
sickness, yea, they cast up their drink like unto young children, making a
sour face at sweet Hippocras, as though it were sharp vineagre, so
unsavory does remorse of their sins make al things unto them. But when the
time of the night does adhorte them to go unto their restless bed, they
dare not lie alone for fear that a thousand diuelles would carry them away
body and soul unto hell. Now after they be tired with tossinge and turning,
if they chance to happen on a slumber (for sound sleep will not the
tormenting torche, that burns without intermission in their troubled breasts
in any case grant them) with what dreadful dreams meet they, how starte
they, how hydeously cry they out? If the^ religion ingendereth such griefs,
The torments of superstition.
what torments may we think superstition brings? for I can not tell how,
says Seneca, vain things do trouble and vex us far more the^ true: for
the true have their certain measure and quantity, but whatsoever comes of
an incert^ntie, is delivered and given over unto the conjecture and license of
a fearful mind, and what that will make of them, may the strange
imaginations of the melancholyke manifestly declare: some steadfastly
beleauinge yt they have eaten venomous serpents, Trall. Aegineta.
so^e yt they have lost their heads, so^e yt they have drou^ke poyso^, so^e yt
they bear up al ye whole world, and faynte and fail under so heavy a burden,
other yt they see Atlas, Galen.
who^e the Poets feign to stay up heaven with his shoulders, to shrink and
give over, and presently ready to let fall the weighty engine of the heavens
on their heads, Matthew. de grand.
some that they be earthen vessels and merueilously fear breaking, other cry
out if they do but see one come into the chamber for fear he will tread on
his nose, some that they have deadly botches, where as in very deed there are
no such things: with 1000 such like vain fears, Amat. Lusit
al of whom it were as madd a part for me to rehearse, as it was and is for
the^ to imagine.

The eighteenth Chapter. The hoofullnesse of Jews the eleventh, Charles the
seventh French kings, of Dionysius, Commodus, and Aristippus, for the
prolonging of their lives.
Jews the eleventh.
ANd no less madness, considering the manifold miseries, the often
calamities, the great mischiefs and annoyances which happen unto man in his
life, is man's immesurable desiring of living, which Pliny assigns for a
proper inco^moditie of mankind. Jews the French king, the eleventh of that
name, when he had lived three score years, perceiuinge yt he was fallen into a
sickness which was likely to shorten his time, and also being feared with the
sixtieth year of his age, because that none of the Capetts had passed that
bound which yet could not content him, what ways wrought he to prolong his
loathsome life? to what solemn shrine offered he not great rich oblations? to
what famous house of religion throughout all France gave not he fair lands,
for a great part of it wrongefully wrou^g from pore men? which donations
because they were so great were revoked after his death: to what holy man of
name in all Christendom sent not he ye golden gifts? instantly desiring them in
their daily prayers to God to have a special memento for the large increase
of his years? But among all other he fet out of Calabria one Robert an
Heremite, a man of all them of his time most renowned for holiness of life:
at whose feet at the first meetinge he fell down, desiring him with many a
bitter tear to prolonge his life, foolishly hopinge, as the Heremite truly
told him, to obtain that of a man which God only was able to give. But yet
fearinge that he was not surely enoughe defenced against terrible death by
spiritual help, studiously also sought for natural by physic, and found
one Cocterius, who with large promises of long life, fed his folishe
humor, as the king again glutted the physicians insatiable desire of gold
with giuinge him ten thousand crowns a month, yea in five months four and
fifty thousand, besides many great promotions promised if he did recover
his health. Yet could not this rare liberality of the king, make the
physician courteous unto him, but he would continually handle him very
roughly, and churlishely, and with despitefull words vpbrayed unto him, his
wrongful and cruel demeanor toward diverse of the nobility and the
counsel: and used often to tell him that he would also handle him so one day.
Although this discourteous and proud dealinge greatly grieved the king and
made him often to complain of it unto his familiars: yet durst he in no wise
put him away, because yt he had constantly affirmed, that the king should not
live six days after that he were gone. Which direful denunciation the king
abhorred as gate of hell, as the man that in all his whole life could not abide
to have it once told him, that he must one day die, and would often in his
health will his friends, that when they should see him daungerously sick,
they should in no case put him in mind of death: where as in very deed he
should have meditated nothing so much all his life long: which should have
been a continual preparing of him self unto death, where unto he should most
assuredly come at the last, and how soon uncertain: neither yet during his
long sickness stood he in greater dread of death by inward diseases, then
he feared shortening of life by foreign foes.

Wherefore he imprisoned many noble men of great power, and diverse faithful
counselors upon vain imagination conceived in his fearful mind of their
infidelity.

He would suffer very few of the nobility to come near unto the place
where he lodged, much less come within the castle gate, which was guarded
day and night with four hundredth soldiers, of whom the one half were
Scotts whom he trusted better then his own subjects, commanding them to
shoot at all men which did approach near unto the castle without license
before obtained. The bottom of the castle diche caused he to be sticked full
of iron pikes, and the banks with rakes of iron, whose long teeth he would
ever and anon command to be whetted, and made sharp with a file. But this
fearfulness perhaps he had by inheritance from his father Charles the
seventh: Charles the seventh.
who for fear of being poisoned by his rebellious son, did six days
forbear all kind of meat, but when at the last through the persuasions of
the phisicians, who told him if that he continued in this wicked and obstinate
purpose, he would assuredly loose both this life and the life to come, he
would have eaten, his strength was so worn with fasting, that he was not
able to swalowe any meat down, and so by inco^s^derate wariness ran into
that mischief which he had thought to have avoided by fearing. But was not
their desire of life immeasurable, who having lived so long, that al men hated
them, and therefore would they have no society and company with men: yet in
this unnatural wilful wilderness in the mids of populous cities, in this
incessante fear, sought by daily bereauinge of other men of life, to prolonge
their hated life: vsinge many painful and troublesome means to preserve
that, which was unto them every minute cause of intolerable torments:
Dionysius the tyrant.
as Dionysius the tyrante showed unto his flatterer, that commended the stately
life of tyrants, by a very lively demonstration, setting him at his table
furnished sumptuously with all kind of delicates, but hanging over his head
by a small threade, a mighty sword, which continually threatening fall,
through continual fear thereof took away from this unhappy guest all the joy
of his great daynties and pomp. Massinissa the mighty king of Numidia,
Massinissa.
when he had lived four score and ten years, distrusting the faithfulness
of all men, guarded him self with fierce bawlinge bandogges: and yet had he
besides his large dominions, many sons, and the assured friendship of the
Romans, the Lords of the world. Dionysius Dionysius
the tyrante entrenched his bed chamber, as if it had been a town standing
in the mids of his enemies, with a large and deep diche, over the which
went a drawebridge, which he kept under lock and keye, but when he him
self used it. And Aristippus Aristippus
the tyrant of Argos climed unto his bed with his sweet heart by a ladder:
the which after they were ascended, and the Perculleis of iron opened, they
entered the chamber, his minions mother took away with her: and then did he let
down the Perculleis, on the which he laid his restless bed, that he
might soon hear if that any man went about to work his body treason in
his unsound slumbers. Dionysius Dionysius.
the tyrante trustinge, no not his own daughters, after they were grown up,
whom he had used before for his barbars, to clippe the hayres of his
suspicious head, nor shave his bearde, taught them to burn them off with
Nutte shales. And Commodus Commodus
the Emperor did not him self with blasinge coals.

Julius Caesar's sentence.
Had it not been, as Julius Caesar was wont to say, a thousand times better
for them once to have died the^ with so great grief continually to have feared
it. Moreover it would fill great volumes to rehearse all the examples of
those, which for desire of prolonging their lives a little while, have by
denying of God, and his faith, by betraying of their country, their parents,
wives, children, and friends, corrupted the glory which their virtues before
had gotten, and so while they endeavored to lenghten a little this temporal
life, oppressed on all sides with manifold miseries, lost the everlasting and
the eternal memory of the^ among men, or rather more truly won everlasting
death in torments of hell, Alexanders worthy saying.
and in reproach and infamy on the earth. They came not of the royal blood of
Alexander the great, who says in Curtius, that he was borne of such a
stock, that he ought not so much to wish for long life, as immortality of
name. This noble prince when that Penus had made a long oration, for to
persuade him to return homewarde out of India, and not to abiecte his
victorious army to be devoured by ye wild beasts, swalowed up by the mighty
rivers of those savage countries, and died with in short time after, said that
Penus had made too long an oration for so few days living, which was not
worth half his painful speech, Vitellius and Andronicus.
But I am almost a shamed to tell how shamefully Vitellius, and Andronicus
Comenus Emperors of Rome, and Constantinople, to save for that present pinche
their lives, yielded unto their enemies to be immediately after slain with
exquisite torments, after ten thousand vilanies said and done unto them,
the one drawn like a dog through the city of Rome by a rope fastened about
his neck, and half naked, the other thorough Constantinople set him upon a
mangie Camel, his head toward the tail of the beast, and all the unmannerly
multitude every where, emptying all their pispots, and close stools upon them
both, which they must needs receive on their faces: because a sword was put
under their chinnes, to hold up their hated heads. Unto these will I adioyne
Papirius Carbo, Papyrius Carbo.
who after that he had been thrice Consul, was drawn by the commandment of
the princoxe boy Pompey, afterward surnamed the great, with three chains like
a wild beast unto the butchers block. But when the hasty hangman was about
to strike off his noble head: the cowarde wretch, stayning his honor, that he
might a little moment prolong his life desired stay of execution, until that
he had discharged his belly of burden: the which he for greedy desire of
living long, was so long in doing, that his head was strucke^ off, and his own
filthy dung became a meet tumbe for his degenerate body. This dastardly
demeanor of his, no doubt abating much the envy of his enemies, which he
should have incurred by this cruel and unwonted execution: but now no man
thought him to be worthy of life, who had sought such unworthy ways to
prolong his life, for reason would us to love life, but not to fear death.

The ninetenth Chapter. The shortness of man's life, and by how many casualties
it is shortened, and of sundry strange kinds of death.
SEeing then that man is thus incessantly tormented with infinite diseases of
the body, and no less molested with the perturbations of the mind, who can
blame the Thracians, or as Herodotus calls them, the Trausi, a people of
Thrace, seeing that they had no knowledge of the resurrection, and the bliss
which God has prepared for his elect to enjoy after this life, for weeping and
lamenting at the birth of their children, rehearsing how many miseries they
must abide, but carried them to burying with all mirth, pastimes and dancing,
numbering up from how many and great calamities and griefs they were
withdrawn. Menander in Stobeus thinks it to be sufficient, and enough to
bear the name of one altogether wretched, and oppressed with miseries, if he
be a man: and wittily says Plautus in Bacchides: that it is far better to
have lived, then to live. How solemn and vulgar an Epitheton unto man is
(wretched) in that flowing fountain of all knowledge and eloquence Homer? for
nothing (says he) that lives, that draws breath, and creeps along the
laynes, is so wretched as is man, and feels so often and grievous pains. And
therefore is it truly said of Pliny, that if we will judge and decree
uprightly, refusing all ambition of Fortune, there is no man happy: yea, and
fortune deals with that man very friendly, and makes him a wanton, which can
not justly be called unhappy. Our felicity (says Seneca) is no sound thing
and massy, Epi. lib. 7. epi. 11.
but only an ouercasting, and that very thin, and which is lightly broken by
so many violent chances, as I have already showed, and also by the shortness
of man's life: which life Homer calls a shadow: Pyndarus, the dream of a
shadow: Sophocles a shadow, and blast: Aechylus a shadow of smoke, Lucian and
the common proverb a bubble that ryseth on the water: of whom some vanish
away as soon as ever they rise, some continue a little longer, but all endure
a very short time, besides ten thousand diseases which do daily and hourly,
yea, to speak most truly, continually bereave men of life: do fewer chances
assault us? ruins, poisons, shipwracks, wars, earthquakes, lightnings,
thunders, falls, and what not? One is choked with swallowing down of the
stone or grain in a grape, as Anacreon the poet, a little hair in a mess of
milk strangled Fabius a Praetor of Rome, Valor.
Aeschylus the Poet had his crown so cracked, that he dyed thereof, with a
cockle let fall by an Eagle, who did take his balde scalpe to be a rock,
whereupon she might break her cockle to come by the fish. Pli.
Q. Aemylius with dashing his foot against a stone, and C. Aufidius against a
threshold, Iouinian the Emperor with the smoke of coals in his chamber, Fulg.
or as other say, with the smell of a chamber newly pargetted, some with a clap
on the cheek given by a gyrle: Hippon.
some avoided their bowels out, at the privy, as Arrius the archheretike, Fulg.
and Anastasius the second Bishop of Rome. Some are eaten with mice, Munster.
as Hatto Archbishop of Mentz, and Piast Prince of Poleland, and some with
toades, as in Wales Seisillus Elkerher, Ger. Cambr. in Itin.
some killed with lightning, as Strabo Pompeyus, father unto great Pompey,
Carus and Anastasius emperors of Rome: some are slain in the midst of their
pastimes in hunting, as Aistulphe king of Lumbardie with a boar, Basilius
Emperor of Constantinople with a stagge, Fulco king of Jerusalem, by the
foundering of his horse in pursuit of an hare, William Rufus King of this
land, with the glauncing of an arrowe: Drusus the son of Claudius Caesar the
Emperor, playing with a pear, Sueton.
which he would cast up and catch in his mouth, was choked with it: some dye
in the midst of their venerie, as Tytus Aetherius an horsman of Rome, and
Cornelius Gallus, who had been Pretour of the city: and two horsemen (says
Pliny) in our days, in one varlet: and Cornelius Tacitus notes a woman, and
Campofulgoso, Giachetto Gereua, a worshipful man of Saluzzo, with his minion.

And as though that sorrows and griefs did not sufficiently annoy mankind:
we read of many that soudenly died for extreme joy: as Diagoras, and two women
in Aulus Gellius, Chilo the philosopher, and Sophocles the famous poet, and
Dionysius the tyrant in Pliny, and Inuentius Talua a Consul in Valerius, who
also writes yt Philemon the poet, was choked with laughing at his own jest.
How innumerable are they whom daily experience and histories do teach us,
to have dyed soudenly of no evident cause, and without all forefeeling of
pains, some at feasts and pastimes, and some in their beds, of whom Pliny
reckons many examples? Therefore seeing that such is the infirmity of man
at his birth, and many years after, so many sicknesses and diseases, so many
molestations, and vexations, do continually chance unto him all his life long,
and that also is so short and uncertain: is there any man endued with common
sense, that will hold that any man can be happy in this world and life?

The twenty Chapter. That not great riches and Empires do make a man happy,
the which Socrates proved by an excellent similitude, whereunto is annexed a
golden sentence of Agesilaus.
ANd now then after that I have declared, that man can not in this life be
happy, I will descend unto my second proposition, that no man has continued
many years in so great felicity, that he never felt during that time any
cause to complain of Fortune, with protestation first made, that these great
Empires, conquestes, and riches, are not in any wise to be accounted things
which do make a man happy: no more then a scabberd of gold set with precious
stones does make a good sword: a rich gown, a persite body, a golden collar
a swift dog: because they be things without them, and no part of their
substance. A very lively induction whereof makes Socrates, with which kind of
Argument, did he singularly delight. The magnificent Nicias of Athens, had a
very goodly horse, which when he was ridden through the streates, did turn
the eyes of all the people to behold him, and with great acclamations to cry
out: yonder goes the noblest horse of the world. When I saw, says Socrates,
this horse so generally with one consent, praised of the whole city: I stepped
unto his keeper, and demanded of him, what mass of money this so singular a
horse, and so highly commended had? why sir quod the horse keeper, what money
should a horse have, he has not one farthing? why then, says Socrates, if that
an horse may be an excellent horse, and perfect in all points, which belong
unto an horse, and have neither money, no nor goods, nor an horse were never
the better horse, if he had great riches: what then should let but that a man
may be a good and happy man, without all goods? or what shall he be the
perfecter, and more blessed, if he have innumerable store of these fruits, or
rather follies of fortune? Wherefore that saying of Agesilaus king of
Lacedemonia is worthy to be written in letters of gold, or rather in deed in
all men's hearts, which he used unto one that called, according unto the
manner of the world then, the king of Persia the great king: how says
Agesilaus, is he greater then I am, vnlest he be more just, and more temperate?
justly measuring the felicity, and greatness of man by the goods of the
mind, and not of fickle fortune. But now after this protestation made, I say
and will prove, that neither these men which were, or would be called by the
name of Gods, nor no man surnamed ye great, or any of them which have boasted
of their felicity, and finally no other notable conqueror, or fondling of
fortune, has deserved justly to be accounted happy: but that they often felt
the roughness of frowning fortunes bitte, and had often admonitions of their
miserable mortality. And first speaking of my Gods, I will begin with
Alexander the great, both for the honor of his antiquity, and also for the
largeness of his Empire, the surpassing greatness of his conquestes, and the
rare felicity in them.

The xxi. Chapter. A discourse of the brittle bliss of Alexander the great.
AS it was singular in Alexander never to besiege city which he won not,
never to fight battle wherein he vanquished not, never to invade country,
which he conquered not: so I think was it singular unto him of all kings to
be often wounded, and endaungered of life by his enemies: never living long
without peril of death. His own father had nailed him to the wall with a
iauelin, if that he had not happily avoided the deadly stroke with swift
leaping aside. Even almost at his first entry into Asia had he been doubtless
slain in the first battle with Darius his power at Granike: if that Clitus
running unto his reskue, had not fortunately warded ye blow. And anon after
into how great danger of death fell he by bathing himself in the river of
Sydnus, when his enemy Darius was even at hand with a mighty host: the lively
heat was so mortified in all parts of his body: that his servants took him
up, and carried him being senseless at the extreme point of death. Neither
were his pains afterward any less, nor his danger seemed to be abated: when
he would needs desperately take a medicine which should presently upon a
souden rid him of his sickness, being at the first more like to have bereft
him of his life: was he not twice wounded at Gaza, and at the first time so
sore, that he fainted and fell down, and was taken up by his soldiers, and
carried into his tent? How long time I pray you passed, but that he was like
to be murdered by Dimnus: under color of which conspiracy he put to death,
the most approved captein, that ever served Prince, Parmenio, with his valiant
son Philotas. About the river of Oxus was he stricken in the leg with an
arrow, which being pulled out, the head was left behind: the anguish whereof
was such that he was forced to forsake the field, and to be carried on his
soldiers backs unto his tent. He had also such a blow in the neck with a
stone at the siege of the city of the Memacenes, that his sight failing him,
he fell down, and was taken up senseless for dead, all the whole host making
loud lamentation for him, as though he had surely been slain. I can not with
words express the agony he was in, when the Scythians went about to destroy
his new city of Alexandria built by him upon the River of Tanais, as Curtius
says: or more truly on Oxus, or Ochus, as Plutarche and Strabo have, (and
Ptolomey makes mention of Alexandria upon Oxus, but not of any by that name
upon Tanais,) and to destroy his fortifications on the Rivers side, and to
remove from thence the Macedons. When he saw that he was to enter into a wars,
for the which he was not provided, and his enemies to ride up and down in his
sight, and he himself so grieved with the pain of ye wound of his neck, and
also through long abstinence, that his speech failed him, called his friends
to counsel: to who^ he declared that he was not troubled with any fear of his
enemies, but with the iniquity of the time: the Bactrians rebelling, and the
Scythians provoking him, when he was neither able to stand on the ground, nor
strong enough to ride on horseback, nor in case to give advise, or exhortation
unto his soldiers. Therefore in consideration of the doubtful danger he saw
himself wrapped in: he blamed the Gods, complaining that he was enforced to
lie along like a block, whose swiftness before time none was able to escape.
The matter grew so great: that his own friends believed that he had
counterfeited his sickness for fear. And therefore he, who thinking himself
a God, had ever since the overthrow of Darius left consultation with the
Diuinours, and Propheciers, fear made religious: and them commanded his
southsayers to try out by sacrifices, what his success should be. But who can
worthily utter the anguish, sorrow, and grief, that griped him, for the drunken
murdering on his ale benche, of Clitus his foster brother: an old soldier of
his Father, a valiant Captain of his, and the savior of his life, and a selly
old man, yea and for praising of his father: for the which duty would, he
should have commended and rewarded him. He plucked out the bloody spear out of
the guiltless corpse, and justly would have thrust it into his own guilty
heart: if the standers by had not let him, and wroung it out of his hand.
That done they took him up and carried him unto his lodging: where he fell
flat down upon the flower, filling all the Court full of the pitiful noise
of his howling and lamentation: he tare his face with his nails, and desired
such as stood about him, that they would not suffer him to live in such
shame and dishonor. In these complaints, and requests was all that night
spent. Then another toye toye came into his head, to aggrauate his grief: he
thought that his friends, being astonished at his cruelty, would not resort unto
him, and talk familiarly with him, as they were wont to do: and that then he
should live like unto a wild beast in a wilderness, both making other
afraid, and being also afraid himself. He commanded diligent search to be
made, whither it were the ire of the Gods, that had caused him to commit so
heinous an outrage: and nothing so much assuaged his sorrow, says Plutache,
and brake off his wilful refusal of al kind of nutriment, wherein he had
continued three days, shut up in his chamber, continually lamenting and
weeping, as that Aristander the chief soothsaier affirmed, yt this mischeef
happened, because yt ye yearly sacrifices and feasts unto Bacchus were not
done, and kept at their due time: manifestly bewraying Alexanders weak
Godhead, that was not able to resist that drunken God.

And how near was this counterfeite GOD unto death, anon after his ungodly
practice at a banquet with his flatterers Hagis, and Cleon, to be adored of the
Macedons for a God? for if he had not very devoutly served his brother Bacchus
with drinking eue^ until two hours after the dawning was broken, he had lost
both life and Godhead by a great conspiracy made by Hermolaus, and his
fellows. At the first city of the Indians that he assaulted, was he hurt with
an arrowe. Afterward at the siege of Mazace was he stricken in the thigh with a
dart, which he pulled out, and without wrapping of the wound, called for his
horse, and let not for all his hurt to give order for such things as he
thought expedient. But at the length when by hanging down of his leg, the
blood drew unto the wound, and it waxed cold, whereby his wound began to
pain him: then could he say, that he was called the Son of Jupiter, but yet
he felt in himself the passions of a diseased body. But no peril that ever he
suffered, was comparable to that which he ran into through his own
desperateness, at the siege of the city of the Oxidracans, as has Curtius,
of the Mellumans, says Plutarche, or as it is in Iustine, the Sicambrians.
For, like a mad man he leaped down from the walls post alone, into the
town: it being a thousand to one, that he should have either been slain, or
taken alive er he could have recovered his legs, the walls were so high:
but it happily chanced, that he fell upon his feet, and an old tree adjoining
to the wall well defended him from being enclosed, and the boughs served him
for a target to keep off the darts and arrows of many thousands, that fast
flocked thither to end the cruel wars of the whole world, by one
mschiefous man's death: and to revenge so many flourishing nations which he
had spoiled, and so many free peoples, as he had wrongfully brought into
bondage. And at the length one threw a dart of two cubits long, which a little
above his right thighe passed through his corselete: by reason of the which
wound he did shead so much blood, that he was not able to hold his sword,
but let it fall out of his hand, as one at the point of death: so that the
Indian that had stricken him, came to spoil him, whose hand when Alexander
felt upon him: disdain of infamy revoked his spirits then passing out of his
body, and with his sword thrust thorough his unarmed enemy. But yet so
feeble was his strength, that when he endeavored to lift himself up with the
help of a bought of the tree: he straightway fell own again upon his knees.

During which time Peucestes, Timaeus, Leonatus, and Aristonius, were come
unto him, of whom Timaeus was slain, and the rest so sore wounded, that they
were able to do nothing: and they had undoubtedly died there with their
Prince, if that the whole army being made almost mad with the rumor, that
the king was slain, had not at that very instant violently broke into the
city, and delivered him out of assured peril of death.

Neither was the curing of his wound less dangerous, and grievous, then the
wound it self: because that the hooks or barbes of the darte fastened in the
flesh could not be plucked out, but by cutting of the wound wider, whereof
insued such abundance of blood, that he fell into a swoone, and stretched out
himself, as one at the the panges of death: in so much that all his friends
had verily thought, that he had been dead, so long was it er his blood could be
staunched.

Thus ye see how many and oftentimes this mad man which would be accounted
a GOD, was made painefully to feel within few years, the griefs of man's
flesh: the which was also, lastly incrediblie increased by the death of his
darling Ephestion: whom he loved as entirely, and mourned for as immoderately,
as ever man did for his freende. But when GOD saw that no admonishmentes
would serve to keep him in his duty, and that the Empire of the whole
earth would not satisfy his insatiable ambition, which by falling was
always made more hungry, but that he would also needs invade heaven: he did
cut his days shorter, then the commune fate of man is, not suffering him to
pass the age of thirty three years, and one month: and made a small cophin
to show, how small a thing in deed he was: who having all the Orient,
chafed that he was thruste up into a narrow corner, and squised together.
If he had followed the counsel that the Lacedemonian king gave unto his
Father Philippe, after the fortunate battle of Choronea: and had measured his
shadow after the overthrow of Darius, he should have found it neither
greater, nor longer then it was before: and sometimes he himself could find
it. For when Nicesias a flatterer, (the pernicious pestilence of Princes) saw
Alexander maruelously troubled with a medicine which he had taken, and said:
what pains must we poor wretched men abide, seeing that ye Gods suffer such
torments? Alexander sternly looking on him said: And what kind of Gods are we?
no, I fear we be hated of the Gods. And at an other time when Anaxander, a
fortunate Philosopher, as Atheneus terms him, one of the crows that haunted
that carrion, traueling with Alexander in a great and terrible thunder, which
appauled the hearts, yea of the stoutest, said: have you done the like, O
mighty prince? Alexander laughed, and said: I will not be so terrible and
dreadful as thou do teach me to be: who would have me to be served at
the table with the heads of kings, and princes cruelly cut off. It is also
reported by Plutarch, that he had been oftentimes heard to say, that whereas
many men called him a God: yet did he find that he was a man by two things:
that is to wit, the act of Venerie, and sleep: for that these two things did
most bewray the imbecillitie of his nature, but against all other things he
was invincible.

Now, sleep is an Image of death: and the act of venerie, as it were, a kind
of conuulsion. But this man who knew him self so well, and besides his often
dangers of death, and many painful wounds, did acknowledge that he had
ever in him two things, which manifestly declared unto him that he was a man,
and yet would be adored for a GOD: yea, and when he saw him self quighte
paste all hope of life, instantly desired his wife Satyra, privily to conueye
him away, and to cast him into the river of Euphrates, that he might seem
unto the world to have been assumpted body and soul into heaven: did not he
justly deserve to be deprived of those things, which the most vilest varlets
do enjoy? did not his woeful mother Olympias, when that she heard that his
body lay unburied many days (the capteines of the Macedons being busied about
the succession in his Empire) cry out with abundant tears, deep sighs, and
loud lamentatio^s? O son, thou that endeuouredst to be partaker of heaven,
hasting thither with might and maine, now alas art not able to obtain and get
so much as those things, which are common unto all mortal men, the earth
and burial. A worthy mirror to be set always before the eyes of great
Princes, for them to see in, that if they do covet greater and more honor,
then is due unto man, they shall not have that which has been often done unto
horses and dogs.

The two and twenty Chapter, Of the infelicitie and doleful end of
Demetrius, yea, his whole life and acts.
THe next of these proud Gods in aunciencie of years, is Demetrius son unto
Antigonus, a captain of Alexander the great: one whom I am not able to charge
to be so ambitious for Godlike honor, as was Alexander: yet do I blame him for
accepting of those divine honors, which the flattering Atheniens prodigally
heaped on him: whereby he began to fall into all incontinencie, riot, and
pride, in so much, that he ware garments wouen of purple and gold, (a rare
thing in those days) and golden shoes. Very hard access was there unto him,
and very rough were his answers. The Legates of the Atheniens, who might do
most with him, followed him, and daunced attendance two years, and then at the
last he dismissed them home, not once hearing their message. There was never
man with whom fortune sported more, and showed her mutabilitie, that worthily
that sentence of Aeschylus was often heard in his mouth: Thou fortune exaltedst
me, and thou also do cast me down full low. When he was but 22. years of
age, he fought a field with greater courage then cunning, with the ancient
politic captain long practiced in Alexanders wars, Ptolomey: where he lost
13000. me^, of whom 3000. were slain, and the rest taken with the camp also.
But having the royal tent, with all the furniture thereof, and also the
prisoners princely restored unto him without ransom by Ptolomey: who said
that princes ought not to contend for all things at once, but only for empire
and glory, he repaired his power, and invaded Mesopotamia, then being subject
unto Scleucus, ye which he conquered, with one half also of mighty Babylon
(the river of Euphrates runs in the midst of the city, and parts it in
two) but douting that he was not able to abide the force of Seleucus, who
hasted homeward out of India to the rescuse of Mesopotamia, he brake up his
siege, and took the sea, and sailed unto Halicarnassus, where he removed by
force the siege o^ Ptolomey, and fortune still favoring, he entered Greece, to
set them at liberty, who were then in subjection unto Cassander his fathers,
and his enemy. At his first arriual at Athens, all the citizens revolted unto
him, only there remained a garrison of Cassanders in a part of the city,
called Munichia. From thence he marched to Megara, where the intemperate young
man leaving his army, went unto a famous harlot called Cratesipolis, given by
Alexander unto Polypercon: the which woman it was told him was in love with
him. But being come to the place appointed, he had near ben taken by his
enemies (who had intelligence thereof) with his minion being together in a tent,
the which he had caused to be set up a little out of the sight of his army,
that he might cover ye more cleanly the access of his harlot. Yet as it happened
he escaped by showing a fair pair of heels, and returned in safety unto his
army, wan the town of Megara, and returning unto Athens, took Munichia, and
razed the castle, restoring unto the Atheniens their ancient liberties and
laws. Whereupon ensued that impudent flattery that I spoke of before. But
before he could finishe his exploite and purpose of setting of all Greece at
liberty: he was sent for from thence by his father to aid Cyprius, the which
Ptolomey had invaded. In his voyage thetherward, he discomfited Menelaus,
brother unto Ptolomey, and afterward in Cyprus before Salamina Ptolomey him
self, who had a mighty fleet of 150. ships, and also a great army by land. He
took 60 ships, and drowned all the rest, only 8. escaping with Ptolomey.
Demetrius having thus won ye victory, whereby he got all ye kings retinue with a
mighty mass of money and warlike furniture, had also shortly after Menelaus
with the city of Salamina, and the fleet, and 1200. horsemen, and 12000
footmen yealding unto him: all which prisoners he sent home without ransom,
and also honorably buried the dead. This notable victory did set Antigonus in
such a pride, that he with his son would be called kings: from the which name
the capteines of Alexander had absteined until yt time. But to pull down their
puffed pride: when that Demetrius after the victory at Salamina, sailed about
to strike terror into the hearts of his enemies, by souden tempest he lost the
greatest part of his ships, and Antigonus who led a flourishing army along
the sea cost, fell into such difficulties, that he returned home like unto a
vanquished man, having lost almost his whole army.

Yet after this Demetrius besieged Rhodes, where he lay until he was weary,
and could do no good: and to save his honor, there was joyful news brought
him, that he should have to the succor of Athens, then straightly besieged by
Cassander: whom he repelled, persuing him even unto Thermopile, and going yet
farther, he wanne Heraclea, and being from thence returned into Greece, he made
almost all Peloponesus free, expelling the garrisons of Cassander. Wherefore in
the memory of this benefit, he was in a parliament of the Greeks, elected and
proclaimed the captain or Duke of Greece: as Philip king of Macedone had in
time before ben. Immediately upon this, was he sent for to repair into Asia to
aid his father against Seleucus, and his confederates, who led a mighty army
of 40000. footmen, 10000. horsemen, 400. Elephants, and 1200. hooked chariots,
with whom they incountring with no less power, were overthrown, and
Antigonus slain, and Demetrius forced to flee unto Ephesus, with only 5000
footmen, and 4000. horsemen, with whom being there embarked, he directed his
course unto Athens, his only refuge. But when he was come unto the Islandes
Cyclades, the ambassadors of the Athenians met him, requesting him in the name
of the whole city, that he would not sail unto Athens, for the city had made
a decree, that he, who had been lately expelled out of a kingdom, should in no
case be received into a free city. Although this unlooked for message did
inwardly sore chafe him, yet seeing that presently to be revenged, neither time
nor power would serve him: he gave them fair words, and desired that he might
have the ships that he had left in their haven: the which being gently
delivered with his wife, and all his royal furniture of household, he sailed
into Peloponesus. But when he saw that his faction in those quarters waxed
worse and worse, the cities daily reuolting unto his enemies, he leaving
there Pyrrhus, son to Aeacus, to keep the cities in their obedience: sailed
into the Thracian Chersonese, to invade Lysimachus kingdom, where his affairs
prosperously succeeding, he maruellously increased his navy and army. And not
long after he married his daughter unto Seleucus, and he him self (having
buried his first wife) married Ptolomeyes daughter. Whereby he being again
recovered, besieged Athens, and forced them for famine to yealde the city unto
him. The famine was so great, that the father and the son fought with bloody
swords for a mouse that fell down from an house, and men divided beans into
diverse parts to give unto their children. Then placing a strong garrison in
Athens, he gave Archidamus the king of Lacedemonia, a mighty overthrow, and
entering Laconica, vanquished him again in an other battle, and besieged the
city: the which he had doubtless taken (the which never man had done until
that day) if that to interrupt the course of his victory in Peloponesus,
sorrowful news had not been brought him, that his cities in Asia were
assailed by Lysimachus, and Cyprus also would be won by Ptolomey, unless that
he hasted out of hand to succor his mother, and children, who were straightly
besieged in Salamina the chief city thereof. Demetrius being sore moved with
these heavy tidings, brake up the siege of Lacedemon. But being very pensive
and sorrowful for this mishap, fortune made him merry again with an other
good occasion. For Cassanders two sons, Antipater and Alexander, contending
for the kingdom of Macedonia, Alexander desired Demetrius to come unto his
aid, of whom he was at the first very friendly and honorably enterteined:
but anon after, Demetrius understanding that Alexander laid awaites to murder
him: he caused his soldiers to slay Alexander, as he came out from supper, and
then the cause of his death being declared in an assembly of the people,
Demetrius was proclaimed king of Macedonia. And also Lysimachus being oppressed
with the wars of the king of Thrace, gave him a part of the kingdom of
Macedonie, which had befalne unto his son in law Antipater, the other
brother, that he might not have wars with him also, seeing that he was then
not able to match the Thracian. And to augment his good luck, he was certified
that Ptolomey was departed from Cyprus. Demetrius having thus gotten Macedonia
with Thessalia, subdued also all the Boetians. And then having intelligence
that Lysimachus was taken prisoner by Dromichetes king of Thrace, he invaded
his kingdom. The which occasion the Boetians having gotten, rebelled: the
which revoked Demetrius into Greece, and while he was busied in subduing of
the Boetians, Pyrrhus king of Epyrus, soudenly becoming his enemy, wasted
Thessalia. Wherefore Demetrius, after he had won Thebes, and made a rode into
Aetolia, leaving a part of his power in Aetolia, under the government of
Pantachus, went forth him self with the rest of his army, to revenge the
injuries of Pyrrhus, whose countries he wasted. But Pyrrhus marching in array
of battle to fight with Demetrius: I know not by what adventure, happened on
his Lieftenant Pantachus, whom he slew in combat, whereunto Pantachus had
challenged him: and then the army being dismayde with the loss of their
captain, incontinently fled. The fame of this overthrow got Pyrrhus a great
name among the Macedons, whose hearts Demetrius his pride had much alienated
from him: in so much that when he fell sick at Pella, Pyrrhus spoiled and
wasted almost all Macedonia, and not one man would go out into the field against
him, until that Demetrius was recovered: who having greater matters in his head
dissembled this injury, and made peace with Pyrrhus, preparing a mighty army
of 100000. footmen and 10000. horsemen, and a navy of 500. ships (among whom
were galleys with sixteen banks of ears) for to invade Asia, and to recover
his fathers kingdom. But this huge army was almost oppressed before it did
set forth. For Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Ptolomey, being feared with this so
great preparation, did knitte them selves in a league together against him, and
did set forth both by sea and land, all the power they were able to make: and
they had also won by embassage Pyrrhus to invade Macedonia, telling him
plainly, that Demetrius would no longer have peace with him, then until such
time as he had done his exploites in Asia, and then would he upon him with all
his power to hurl him out of his kingdom, all the which things they easily
persuaded Pyrrhus to believe.

Whereupon he at one side, and Lysimachus on an other, at one time inuading
Macedonie, and also a fleet sent by Ptolomey soudenly setting upon the sea
coast of Greece, filled all places full of fear and trembling. Then Demetrius
leaving his son to guard Greece, went him self in person against Lysimachus.
But before he was come unto this enemy, behold, news was brought with a great
uproar, that the city of Beria in Macedonia was taken by Pyrrhus, and all the
country near aboutes miserably wasted with fire and sword. This news much
troubled Demetrius mind, but the reuolting of the Macedons far more: who
now began to refuse to serve in that voyage. Wherefore Demetrius to retain
them in their duty, promised that he would go against Pyrrhus to save
Macedonie from spoil. This he pretended, but the very cause in deed was, for
that he would be far off from Lysimachus, to whom the talk was, that the
Macedons minded to revolt, because he was their countriman.

Wherefore thinking that they were not so much inclined unto Pyrrhus, he had
retired from Lysimachus: when that certain Macedons coming into the camp
from Beria, had by extolling Pyrrhus with singular praises, and commendations,
brought their countrymen unto that point, that they brake out into an open
mutiny and rebellion. Demetrius, having intelligence of those things which
were in bruing, and thinking it not good to expect a more hostile and worse
chance, did put off his royal robes and ensigns, and fled with a small
train in a black cloak unto the city Cassandria, where his wife wearied
with woe, killed her self with poison.

Not long after that Demetrius was crept away, Pyrrhus setting upon his army
(the which was forsaken by their capteines) at the first shout scattered them:
and being honorably received of the Macedons, got both the camp and the
kingdom, the which had been under Pyrrhus six years: but now was divided
between Pyrrhus and Lysimachus. Then fled Demetrius unto Thebes, where one
scoffingly applied unto him that verse of Euripides: he came unto the Dyrcean
springs, and Ismenus, his divine and godly form and shape being changed in
to a mortal. But Demetrius gathering together all his ships, whom the cruel
tempest, which about the same time had almost drowned and destroyed his whole
fleet, had left him: and also the remnants of his lost army, wearied a
little while with siege of the city of Athens, the which with fortune had
changed their fidelity: but at the length through the persuasion of Crator
the Philosopher, he brake up the siege, and having almost eleven thousand men
under his banner, wasted over into Asia to auert Caria and Lycia from the
dominion of Lysimachus.

And having gotten Sardis the chief city of Lydia, and other places of that
Province, he had well increased his army: when fearing the approach of
Agathocles, Lysimachus his son: he diuerted into Phrygia, thinking that if he
could get Armenia, that then the state of the Medes would easily be
disturbed. He marched in the Champain country, often skirmishing with
Agathocles, who followed him still at the hard heels, and Demetrius was victor
almost in every conflicte, but yet nevertheless was sore vexed with lack of
victuals, and also pasture and forage for his horses (as he that traveled
through countries, that were not his friends:) and to make up the mischief,
he lost a great part of his army in the passing over of the river of Lycus,
they missing the forde, and being drowned in the deapth. So that what by this
unfortunate chance, and also through famine, and pestilence: about eight
thousand of his soldiers being lost, he turned his course into Cilicia: where
he stayed the fury of his soldiers from spoiling of Tharsus, lest that he
should have incurred the displeasure of Seleucus, under whom Cilicia was:
where he hardly obtained of Seleucus for to winter, there Agathocles having
taken the streights, which he should pass. But Seleucus remained not long in
his good mind: but being persuaded by certain of his counselors, that he
did unwisely to foster in the mids of his Realm, the army of so martial,
and unquiet a Prince, came down with a strong army into Cilicia. Then
Demetrius, when he could obtain no friendeshippe of him by entreaty, and
prayers: like unto a wild beast, enclosed in a toil, with men, weapons, and
snares: turned his lenity into fury: and with souden violence sacked certain
Cities of Cilicia, and anon after taking heart of grace, fought with Seleucus,
and overthrowing his chariots, and putting to flight the rest of his army, he
obtained a notable victory, and opened the streightes of Cilicia, expelling
the garrisons of Seleucus in every place. And by this luckie success, was he
come into great hope of better fortune, when he fell into an unfortunate
sickness: wherewith he being long time afflicted, lost a great part of his
army, many reuolting unto the enemy, and starting, some this way, and some
that, as every man's soudein force carried him: a great part of whom
wandering they wist not where, and missing their way through ignorance of the
country, perished by diverse chances. But when he was recovered of his
sickness, he marched with those that had remained in their dutiful obedience,
within the sight of his enemy, having spoiled no small part of Cilicia. And
then passing over Amanus, he came wasting and spoiling unto Cyrrestes: where
thinking to have set upon Seleucus, (who now was at his back) in the night
time: he missed of his purpose, and also being foiled in fight, was forced to
fly back again amain unto the ports of Amanus, and there to hide himself,
and those few that he had about him, in the thick wooddes, and assayed to go
thorough the desert and blind ways unto Caunus, where he hoped to find a
fleet. But when that the streightes of the country were kept, and set with
armed men, and of his small train many hourly dropped away, he by the
adhortation of his friends, sent certain unto Seleucus to yield up unto
him his life, and afflicted state. Men report that Seleucus had commanded a
roial pauilion to be set up for him, and that he had minded to enterteine him
in all respects not as a prisoner, but as a guest, being in his most
flourishing state: yea and many noblemen thinking that he should in short time
have been in great favor and authority with Seleucus, rode forth for
duties sake to meet him. But in the mean space before he could come,
Seleucus being changed, thorough suspicions, put into his head, by his
counsel, he sent Pausanias with 1000. horse against him, who should take him,
and carry him into the Chersonesus of Syria, and there should diligently keep
him: it being a country of a small compass. Wherewithal Demetrius being
dismayed, although by Seleucus his commandment he was in all points entreated
like a king, and with singular honor, and courtesy, handeled of his keeper:
yet he sent one unto his son Antigonus to tell him, that he should take his
Father for a dead man, and never after give any credit to letter or seal of
his. Antigonus dolefully lamented at this heavy news, and incessantly
commended unto all Princes by letters the life and safety of his Father: yea
and offered unto Seleucus, that he and all that ever cruel fortune had left
him, should remain pledges with him: if that he would vouchesafe to set his
Father at liberty. But for all this earnest suit, Seleucus perseuered still in
keeping of Demetrius: who having always used from his childehode to hunt and
to ride much, and also to exercise his body with great travel, and labor:
now, as one weary of this present life, drowned himself in gourmandise and
drunkenness: and so died within three years after his captivity, being of
the age of lxiiij. years, and one that in all that long time, after that he
came to man's state, never remained three years in one state, before his
captivity: when doubtless for tranquillity and rest, if his proud heart
could have been contented therewithal, he did draw nearest unto the quiet
and restful order of the Gods, as Horace terms it.

The xxiij. Chapter. Of Julius Caesar's greatness, and also his great
mishappes, and troubles, and of a worthy saying of Charles the fifth.
Demetrius does Julius Caesar succeed, a very martial Gentleman, and also
fortunate in wars, and such an one as well deserved to be a GOD, after the
manner of the Roman Deification: for he had slain of his enemies, eleven
hundredth, and lxxxij. thousand, besides them that he had killed in the civil
wars, the which were doubtless a mighty number, of whom he was ashamed to
boaste, as he might also have been of the other, to be accounted so cruel an
enemy to mankind. But although fortune was freendly unto him, yet did she
often make him feel her fickleness. For in his youth he being accounted one
of the Marian faction, was deprived by Sylla of his office of flamen Dialis,
his wives dowry, and all his own lands: yea and moreover forced to hide
himself, from the tyrante, who sought his death, yea, and to change his
lodging every night, although he were very ill molested with a quartane: and
yet all this would not have saved his life, if that he had not often corrupted
with money, those yt were sent to search for him: until at the length, through
the earnest and incessaunt suite of the vestall virgins, and certain of his
friends, great favorers of Sylla, his pardon was hardly obtained: the tyrant
being so exasperated against him, that when he was overcome by the importunate
prayers of the^, who would have no nay, he brake out into this loud speech:
take him to you: who will one day be the destruction of the nobility, whom ye
so much favor. For in this one boy be there many Marij. But after he had
escaped this danger, within few years after fell into an other almost as
great, being taken by pirates, as he sailed to Rhodes, out of whose hands he
redeemed himself, when they knew him not, for 50. talents, that is 9375.
pounds. After this when he was Praetor, was he commanded for to cease to
execute his office, because he so stubbernly stood with Metellus the
troublesome tribune, who obstinately went about to set forth seditious laws
against the will of all his Colleges, yea and of all good men. But when that
Caesar notwithstanding this iniunction persisted still in hearing of matters,
and administering of things apperteining unto his office, the Senate sent
armed men to repress his insolency: for fear of whom he sent away his
sergeants, and casting off the robes of his office, privily stole home. And
upon the neck of this was he accused by Cato to be one of the conspiracy
with Catiline, the which was confessed by two of the same coniuration: but he
very well escaping this danger, was made Praetor of the farther Hispaine, where
he was driven to such poverty, that he shamefully begged money of the
Proconsul, and the Alies of the people of Rome in those parts, to pay his
debtes at home. At his return out of Hispaine got he the Consulshippe, and
by confirming of all those things which Pompey had done in these (the which
the Senate would not before assent unto) he won his good will: and then they
two, and Crassus conspired together to have the government of the whole common
wealth, and of all the men of war, having the greatest Provinces allotted unto
them, first for five years, and then for other five, Caesar having both Gallia
cisalpina, and also Comata with Illyrium: Pompey the Hispaines, and Crassus
Syria, this was the foundation of his Godhead: but the infirmities of his
humane frailty was the incontinencie of his wife, for the which he did put her
away: such a cruel corosiue unto some men, that it makes them for impatience
thereof to murder them selves: but more did the fear of due punishment for his
demeanor in his Consulship molest him: to escape the which, he began to raise
ye civil wars, and to invade his country: in the which wars in what
difficulties, and woes was he often wrapped? and first in Hispaine before
Ilerda, when that the river of Sicoris had overflowed all the country about,
and brake down the bridges built by him upon it: whereby not only many of his
men were intercepted by the enemy, but also his whole host for the space of
many days, was brought into extreme penury of all victuals, and almost
quite starued up. In so much it was bruted at Rome, that the civil wars were
happily ended, Caesar, and his army being quite tamed with sword, and famine.
Yet when that he had afterward become vanquisher in Hispaine, his trusty
friend Cicero was slain with all his whole power in Africa: and an other of his
Lieueftenants C. Antonius discomfited, and taken with his fleet by Sea upon ye
coast of Illyria: and he himself with his army brought into pincheing penury
before Dyrrachium: so yt a long time they sustained their starued bodies, with
only bread made of an herb called Lapsana: whereof came the proverb
afterward, Lapsana viuere, to live hardly. But yet here stayed not fortune her
frowning: for Pompey gave him such a foul overthrow in fight, that by Caesar's
own confession, if he had used the victory, he had that day ended the wars.
And so great was Caesar's foil, that he was forced to provide for his safety
by shameful dislodging, and flight. Neither was his danger less, when that he
persued his discomfited and fleeing enemy the great Pompey in to Egypt: where
he was soudenly quite contrary unto his expectation circumuented with the whole
power of that mighty and rich kingdom, he having not there above 800,
horsemen, and 3200. footmen: wherefore when yt his sword would not save him, he
procured his safety by fire, burning the kings palace, with that famous
library of the world of 700000. books. And although for breuities sake, I
omit his manifold perils in those wars, yet can I not pass over in silence:
when at a conflict by sea, between his navy and the Alexandrines, he standing
upon the bridge, could not by adhortation, nor threttes, stay the flight of his
men: he leaped off from the bridge to have lighted into one of his ships: but
was forced to leap short through the violence of his enemies, (who shot all of
them, thick and threefolde at him, being notorious for his purple mantle,) and
to swim 200. paces unto the next ship, among so many thousand shot of his
enemies, and also being clogged and oppressed with his wet clothes and he holding
up his left hand above ye water, yt he might keep dry certain libels, which
he held therein, and also with the drawing of his coat armor, after him with his
teeth, that the enemy should not get his spoil. But having fortunately tamed
the Egyptians, and also the king of Pontus, quieted al ye East, discomfited ye
Pompeians in Africa, with Iuba king of Mauritania, and returned victor to Rome,
where he triumphed four times within one month at the battle of Munda in
Hispaine against the two young Pompeyes, he was in such an agony of mind,
that when he could not make his soldiers to go forth to fight, neither by
adhortation and entreaty, nor yet by thundering threttes, he would have
murdered him self, and in that mad mood to die desperately: he gave the
charge himself alone upon the whole Pompeyan battelles, crying unto his
Soldiers: here shall be the end of my life, and of your wars. But then all
his army, either moved with their Generalles danger, or their own shame, did
courageously set forward, and vanquished their enemies. They do write that by
Caesar's only impression, ye Pompeyan battles gave back ten foot of ground,
and within a short space 100. shot lighted on him: the greatest part of whom,
he received on his target. Then straight after his return out of Hispaine, and
those godly honors given him at Rome, that I spoke of before, the shameful and
terrible disease of the falling sickness took him: whereby he was admonished
of his fall, who fell so often: and of his death, who seemed so often to be
dead. In this place I can not omit that golden saying of Charles the fifth,
who when certain of his familiars told him, that they came from a noble man,
that was so extreme sick, that he had given over the world, and thought that
he must needs die, answered: what, did he not know that before now? I thank
my God (quoth this good Emperor) that he has sent me store of diseases, the
which do daily admonish me of my mortality. But to return unto Caesar, I
would be ashamed to allege his boldness, and the disorderly growing of
hayres, as infortunities, and inco^modities: if yt they had not so much vexed
his vain mind, yt of all the honors that the impudent flattering Romans
heaped on him, he had rejoiced so much at none, as yt they had granted him to
wear continually on his head, a garland of bays, the which did cover his
deformity: and also yt he was so wayward in trimming of himself, that he
would not only be very curiously clipped, and shaven, but also would have
diverse hairs pulled out. But as the proverb says, pride must needs have a
fall: so he in the mids of his majesty, was slain in the Senate house with 23.
wounds, yea and in the Court of his enemy Pompey, to aggrauate the grief of
his doleful death: which was foretold unto him by many, and sundry
prodigies, and also the conspiracy was disclosed all unto him, which he
contemned, as one that was werie of life, seeing that he could not enjoy his
old wonted health, nor security from deadly conspiracies.

The xxiiij. Chapter. Of Marcus Antonius.
THE fourth in order of time is Marcus Antonius, an other Bacchus, a meet
potcompanion for the two Greek Gods, as he that being Magister Equitum, drank
so hard over night at Hippias his marriage, that the next day at an assembly
of the people, he ouerflowed all the stately benche with vomited wine, and
gobbets of fish. In his youth he was so unthrifty, and so given both to
suffer and do all uncleanness, that he brought him self in debt sexagies,
that is, six and forty thousand eight hundredth three score and fifteen
pound: wherefore his father did forbid him his house, the which forced him to
follow the wars in Syria and Egypt, under Gabinius. And afterward being made
Tribune of the commons, he stubbernely held Caesar's part against the Senate:
both for that he was of kin unto him by his mother, and also because he was
moved by him. For this pertinacie he was commanded to avoid the court or
senate house, or else to stand unto his adventures: whereupon he fled out of the
city, contrary unto the ancient Roman laws (the which did forbid the
tribune of the commo^s to lodge one night out of the city) and hasted unto
Caesar: who was glad to take this slender occasion of inuading his country,
because the Senate had violated the inviolable majesty of the Tribune. In the
which wars Caesar obteining the victory, advanced Antonius, who had never
before that time, come unto the honor of being Praetor, to the office of
master of the horsemen, the next dignity unto him self the Dictator: and the
very same year, contrary unto the ancient ordinances, made him Consul, in
the which year Caesar was slain: which did so amase Antonius, that he
casting away his Consularie robes and ensigns, hid him self until such time
as he heard that Marcus Lepidus, the master of the horsemen had taken the
forum or market place, with a great power of soldiers: and then came Antonius
abroad again as brag as a body louse, and he and Lepidus made this
atonement with the murderers of Caesar, that all should be well, and that
nothing before time done, either by the one or the other faction, should ever
be called into question, but al quite forgiven and forgotten. Whereby Antonius
grew into great favor with ye senate, and anon after, into far greater with
the people, for the duetifull funerals of Caesar, and his seditious Oration in
his praise, and hatred of his murderers: so that he obtained, as a popular
man, a guard of six thousand to defend him against the awaites of the Senate.
And then at pleasure he sold immunities to cities, and Provinces, he remitted
Tributes, he nominated Kings, and alies, he gave liberties and privileges, but
to no man any thing freely, and all these things he said, he did by Caesar's
Commentaries, the which being confirmed by the Senate, no man had but him
self. He also obtained to have Macedonie allotted for his Province with a
goodly army, with the which he besieged all Mutina, Decius Brutus the
lieftenant of Gallia Cisalpina, the which he against all right and order would
of self will and force have. Wherefore he was proclaimed enemy by the Senate,
and the two Consuls with Octauian. Caesar's heir (whose authority was very
great with his uncles soldiers) were sent against him: who gave him two
overthrows, and forced him to raise his siege, and brought him and his army
into great misery. For when they marched on the Alps to join with Lepidus:
they fell into such lack of victuals, that Antonius him self did eat the
bark of trees, and drank corrupt and foul stinking water, and rode in
miserable and filthy habit (his head and beard all untrimmed, and let to
grow long like unto a wild man) unto Lepidus his camp, who had a great
power, whom Antonius with his tears and wretched habit won to receive him:
when that his old friend Lepidus had commanded the trumpets to be blown,
that the soldiers should not hear the lamentable oration of poor Antonius,
least he might move them to compassion, as he did in very deed, with them
incontinently after joined Plancus and Pollio, with both their armies, and then
also Octauian being feared with the great power that the murderers of Caesar
had then in Asia and Greece. Whereof ensued that proud and cruel Triumuirate,
the which advanced Antonius unto the dignity of a God. But this brittle
bliss of his, was crased the next year with the siege of his brother, and
dear wife at Perusium, by Octauian, and they forced to yeald unto him. But who
can number up the manifold dangers and difficulties, that he sustained, when
he invaded the Parthians with 15. legions (such an army as before that time
the Romans never led,) the event whereof was nothing but dishonor and shame,
having lost above 20000. footmen, and 4000. horsemen: yea, and if he had not for
the space of a great number of days used singular wisdom, vigilancie,
pains, and courage, he had never brought one man back: and also if that a
Parthian had not friendly warned him to keep the hard hills, and not to come
down into the plain country, they had been slain every mothers son. One
night there was such an uproar in the camp, that Antonius had surely thought
the enemy had enclosed them, and that he and all the whole army, should have
perished with the sword of the einmie, who would grant them no rest neither
day nor night. Wherefore being in utter desperation, he swear one of his
libertes, that he should thrust his sword into him when so ever he would
command him: and then cut off his head, and convey it away, that he might
not be a laughing stock unto his enemies, as Crassus had bin, I do think
there was never God ever brought into such an agony. Not many years after
this brake out that fatal wars between Octauian and him, wherein he was
discomfited by sea, and besieged in Alexandria whether he fled. And to augment
his sorrow, he sailing out of the city with a great power took a hill, to
behold the fight between his navy and Octauians, saw his men friendly to
join with Octauians: and immediately the army also that he him self
conducted, revolted to Octauian, and he was forced fearfully to flee into the
city, being forsaken of all men. But hereof also grew a greater grief, for
he thought that all was wrought through the treason of his dearling Queen
Cleopatra: who therefore fearing the fury of Antonius, fled into the
sepulchers of the kings, and commanded the Perculleis to be let down, causing
also one to tell Antonius, that she had slain her self for fear of him. With
the which news Antonius returning out of his rage unto him self, cried out:
Oh Antonius, what do thou now expect? seeing that fortune has taken her
away, who only was left a cause why thou should desire life. And when he had
thus said, he went into his chamber, where renewing his complaint, he said: It
grieves me not (Cleopatra) that I shall lack thee, for I will be with thee
incontinently: but this spites me, that I, that am so great a captain, am
overcome in fortitude by a woman: and with that called unto his man Eros, whom
he had long time before prepared for that purpose, and said: come, syra, and
with assured thrust, open this breast of mine. But Eros turning the sword
toward his own body, fell down dead at his masters feet. The^ said
Antonius, Eros also does excellently well teach me what to do: and
therewithal thrusting him self through with his sword, dyed. Whereof when
Cleopatra heard, she also slew her self, and then Augustus entering the city,
murdered his two sons Antyllus, and Caesario: And the Senate and people of
Rome decreed, that all monuments and ornaments of Antonius in all places,
should be cast down, defaced, and put out: and that the day of the month
wherein he was borne, should be adjudged and accounted for an unlucky,
dismal, and nefast day, whereupon it should not be lawful for any judge to
sit: and finally, that no man of the stock and name of the Antonij, should for
ever afterward bear the forename of Marcus. So low be they brought that
exalt them selves, and they that do covet more honor then they deserve, in
the end do lose their due: and climing to be sacred, become execrable: and
verify the old proverb, that pride goes before, and shame comes after.

The xxv. Chapter. Of Caligula his monsterous doings, rare infelicities, and
shameful end, and the singular virtues of his father, and great love that all
men bare unto him.
ANd now are we come unto the three Roman Emperors, Caligula, Domitian, and
Commodus, men so like one unto an other in folly, lechery, cruelty, and all
ungraciousness: as they were unlike unto any other that bare the name of men.
Neither did this vain opinion of their godhead come into their mad minds by
reason of any notable conquestes, or victories achieved by either of them: but
only because they possessed the large Roman Empire, by succession of
inheritance. For, that I may begin with Caius Caligula, he never made
expedition, but one into Germany with 20000. or as other write, of 25000. men,
and by them was the name of Emperor seven times given him: as though he had so
often vanquished his enemies in a pitched field (for then only was the Roman
General, called by the name of Emperor) whereas in very deed, he never made
light skirmisth with any of them: for nothing at all did he there: but only
receive into obedience the son of the Bataui, who had fled from his father
with a small train, and revolted unto him. But then as though all the whole
Isle had been yealded up unto him: he wrote magnificent letters unto Rome,
often willing the bearers of them, that they should ride in their chariot into
the market place, yea, and unto ye court or Senate house, and not to deliver
their letters unto the Consuls, but in Mars his temple, and when there were
present a great number of Senators. And anon after, when he lacked matter of
warfare, he commanded that a few Germans that were in prison, should be
carried over ye Rhene, and there hidden, and then news to be brought unto him
with a mighty uproar, yt the enemy was at hand. The which being done
accordingly, he with certain of his friends, and a part of the horsemen of his
guard, rode into the next wood, where he did hang up ye poor prisoners their
garments or spoils, on the trees there, ye which were lopped and dressed like
unto Tropheyes, as though some notable victory had been obtained there: and
returned unto the camp about candle lighting, sharply reproving the^ of
fearfulness and cowardice, yt had not followed him: but those ye went forth
with him, and were partakers of his vain victory, did he honor with garlands of
a new fashion and name, as being set with suns, moons, and stars, and called
especial garlands. An other time he took certain hostages out of a school,
and sent them a little before, who^ he soudenly forsaking his supper, followed
with his horsemen, and brought them back in yrons, as fugitives: and then going
again to make an end of his supper, because that news by his own suborning,
was brought him, that the enemy was again in ye field: he willed his men to
set down to supper armed, adhorting them with that vulgar verse of Virgil,
Durate, and vosmet rebus seruate secu^dis. And whiles he was thus playing the
fool in Germany, he by a very grievous Edict bitterly blamed ye absent
Senate, and people, yt they would be at their riotous ba^kets, and merry on ye
Theaters, and take their solace in their pleasant manor houses, while that ye
emperor was wearied in ye wars, and objected unto so great dangers. Last of
all, as though he would fight some great battle, he araunged all his army in
array of battle, on the shore of the Ocean, and disposed his balistes and
other engines: and he him self going abroad, a galley rowed a little way into
the sea, and then came back again, and sitting upon an high throne, gave the
signal of battle, and commanded the trumpets to blow to the battle, al ye
whole army maruelling what a mischefe he meant to fight against no man.

But then soudenly he commanded them to gather up the shelles that lay upon
the shore, and fill their lappes and helmets with them, for they were the
very and true spoils of the Ocean, and due unto the Capitol and Palace. And
in sign of his great victory and conquest of the Ocean: he built up a very
high tower, and also gave unto his soldiers, as though they had won a
great victory, a hundredth denaries, that is, three pound two shillings and
six pence a man, and the^ as though he had passed all example of liberality,
he said unto the^: Go ye your ways joyful, go your ways rich. And then
turning all his study to the care of the triumph: besides the prisoners of the
Barbarians that fled unto him, he chose out also the tallest men in Gallia,
yea, and diverse of the Princes, and did put them by them self to set forth
the pomp of his trifling triumph, and forced them not only to make red their
heads (for the Germans had for the most part red heads) and to let them grow
long, but also to learn the Germans language, and to be called by Barbarian
names. He also commanded that the galleyes, in whom he had entered ye Ocean
sea, should for a great part of them be carried to Rome by land: but
especially all the shelles, for lack of kings, capteines, plate, money,
counterfeites of towns won, to be showed in his triumph: the which he wrote
unto orgents, they should prepare with a great magnificence, as ever any had
been, because he said they had right and power over all men's goods. But
although as you hear, he slew not one of his enemies, as he that only fought
with his own fancies: yet he administered not the Province without great
effusion of blood: for as says Dion, he lost a great part of his own army,
through murdering many of them man by man, and other by whole troops and
ranks. And one day, seeing a great number of men standing together, he
commanded them to be all slain: using this by word: from bald man to bald
man.

And before he departed out of ye Province, he thought to have slain all the
legions of the country, because that they mutining after the death of
Augustus, had besieged his father Germanicus their captain, and him self,
then being an infant. And being hardly revoked from so great a frenzy: he
could by no means be stayed, but that he would needs tithe them, slaying every
tenth man. Wherefore he calling them, unarmed to a concion or oration, environed
them about with weaponed men, and armed horsemen. But when that he saw that
many of the soldiers, suspecting the matter, did slide away to take their
weapons, if that any violence should be offered: this dastardly God ran away
out of the concion, and incontinently hasted to the city, turning al his
malice on the Senate: whom he openly threatened, that he would punish for the
rumors of so great dishonours spread of him: complaining also among other
things, that he was defrauded by them of his just, and due triumph: when as
in deed, he him self had a little before enjoined them, under pain of death,
that they should decree nothing concerning his honor. Lo now, ye have heard
the sum of his noble martial acts: and certes nothing else was there in
him, whereof he should be proud: but only his large Empire, and the felicity
to have the worthy Germanicus his Father: unto whom, says Suetonius, there
happened all the virtues, both of body and mind: and they also so great, as
it is manifest never chanced, unto any other man. A goodly personage, and a
beautiful, great strength, and courage, a wit far excelling in the
eloquence of both the Greek, and the Latin, and in all kind of learning in
both the tounges: singularly well was he beloved, and one that had a wonderful,
and very effectual endeavor, and way to get the favor of al men, and to win
their love: both at home, and also abroad very civil, and so courteous, that
he would go unto the free towns, and such as were in league with the Romans,
without his sergeantes: and wheresoever he understood, that famous men were
intumbed, he would keep their obsequies. The old, and dispersed relics of
the Romans that were slain in Germany with Varus, he first began to gather
up with his own hands, and to bring into one heap, and to bury them
together. And also so mild, and harmless was he unto his obtrectours,
backebiters, and enuiers, whatsoever they were, and wherefore soever they did
it, that he would not be angry no, not with Piso, who had disanulled all his
decrees, and ordinances, and a long time vexed his clientes, before that he
certainly knew, and had found, that he went about to work his death, by
poisonings, and solemn cursings: and neither then went he any farther: the^
according to the ancient manner of their forefathers, renounced his
friendship: that is, solemnly told him, that he would not take him for his
freende: and willed them of his house, to be revenged, if that any ill happened
unto him. He was also chaste of body, that it is recorded of him as a miracle,
in that lewd age, that he never knew woman besides his wife. Of ye which
virtues he reaped most abundant fruit, for he was singularly liked, and
loved of al men, and so favored of the people in all countries, that
whenever he came unto any great town, or departed from thence, such a
number of people did either go forth to meet him, or to bring him going,
that he was very oftentimes in danger of death, with the great thronge of the
loving people. But when he returned out of Germany, unto Rome, after he had
quieted the sedition, the which I spoke off even now: all the Pretorian
bands went forth to meet him, although that proclamation had been made,
that there should but two go: but of the people of Rome all sex, age, and
order ran forth against him, yea twenite miles. Yet greater, and surer
signs, of unutterable love toward him, did appear at, and after his death.

The day that he died, the Temples were battered with stones, the altars of the
Gods were overthrown: and some threw their household Gods into the street,
and did cast away the children, that their wives had lately brought forth: yea,
and they write that the Barbarians that had either wars between themselves,
or with the Romans, did as in a Domestical and common heaviness, consent
unto truce: and certain kings did shave their beardes, and their wives heads,
for to show as great a mourning, as might be. And also the Parthian, who
called him self, the king of kings, absteined from hunting, and keeping of
company: the which the Parthians call Megistanum, being like unto the
Iustitium among the Romans. But when at the first brute that was brought to
Rome of his sickness, the dismaide, and sorrowful city looked for the
messengers, that followed: and soudenly after the evening was shut, it had
been noised without any certain authors, that he was recovered, the people
ran hudling from all parts of the city, up into the Capitol, with lights
and sacrifices, and they had almost pulled off the doors of the temple, that
they should not any while stay the rejoicing people from perfourming of their
vows. Tyberius the Emperor, was waked out of his sleep, with the voices of
them that rejoiced, and sang in every place: Salua Roma, Salua Patria, saluus
est Germanicus, Rome is well, our Country is well, Germanicus is well.

But afterward when it was certainly known he was dead: the public mourning
could not be inhibited by any comfortes, nor proclamations: but lasted yea
also all the festival days of December: being the same among them, that the
twelve days be with us. After that this dearling of mankind, was traitorously
poisoned by Piso, (who at his return unto Rome was therefore near hand torn
into pieces, by the people, and put to death by ye Senate) but at the
instigation of his unkind uncle Tyberius: whom Augustus had made to adopte
Germanicus: ill requiting his loyalty toward him, who so obstinately refused
the Empire: that when the Legions in Germany, would needs force him to take
it, he would have killed him self, if they had not desisted from their
rebellious purpose: this young colte his son, was brought up with his mother,
who being banished, and his two brothers put to death, remained with his great
graundmother Liuia, widdowe of Augustus, after whose death, he went unto his
grandmother Antonia, with whom he remained until he was nineteen years of
age: at what time he was sent for, by Tyberius to come unto him, into his
slaughter house at Capreas: where he remained without any honor. There was he
assaulted, and undermined ten thousand ways, groped, provoked, ye and in a
manner forced to complain of the wrongs done unto his Father, and his
friends: but never could there be any hold taken of him, as though he had
quite forgotten the fall of his friends, and as though no ill had happened unto
any of them: but all those villainies, of whom he suffered innumerable, he
passed over with incredible dissimulation, and was so serviceable unto
Tyberius, and those that were near about him, that it was not without just
cause commonly spoken, that never was there a better servant, nor a worse
master. In this slavery continued he all the reign of Tyberius, whom he
succeeded: whereby it is greatly to be marueyled, how he, that had been so
long time one of the most wretched men of the world, could for so short a
fickle felicity, think him self soudenly translated into a God. But that he
was always guilty in conscience, of his own infirmities, his strange
spiteful envy toward all men, that excelled in honor, good fortune, and
finally, in any thing, did manifestly declare. For first he brake down all
the statuies of famous men, that were set up in the Court of the Capitol by
Augustus: he thought also to have destroyed quite all Homers works: and there
lacked little, but that he had taken out of all libraries, all the Images, and
works of Liuie, and Virgil: and also he often boasted, that he would burn all the books of the Law. Moreover he took from all the Noble men, the ancient
ensigns of their houses, from Torquatus, his cheine, from Cincinnatus, his
hair, from Pompey, the surname of the great. Yea, and Ptolomey, king of
Mauritania his cousin, whom he had sent for, received, and interteined very
honorably: because that at a public spectacle he had through the glistring
of his purple robe caused the people to gaze upon him: he soudenly struck him
on the face, with his fist. As often as he met with any beautiful personage,
or that had a goodly bushe of hair: he would incontinently deforme him, with
the shauing off the hinder part of his head. There was one Esius Proculus,
whose Father had been Primipile: this Proculus, for his tall, and big
stature, and beautiful, and good making thereof, was called Collosers: this
man's goodly personage did so spite the Emperor, that soudenly, as Proculus was
beholding of the plays: he commanded him to fight, first with a Thracian, and
then with an armed man, with a shield, soldier like: and being victor in
both conflictes, the envious wretch commanded him without all delay to be
bound, and clothed in old patched garments, to be carried throughout every
street of the city, and showed unto the women, (a villainy, of all other
most great: as though he had been a man, altogether effeminate) and then to
have his throat cut.

Finally, there was no man of so base a state, nor of so abject, and beggarly
calling, whose commodities he obtrected not: in so much, that when at a
public game, one Porius, a chariot man, had made his slave free, because he
had had good luck in running, that day: and the people commending well of the
master for so doing had given a great shoute: Caligula was brought into such
a choler, that he incontinently flang up, and would be gone, the which he
did with such haste, that treading upon his gown, he went tumbling down
the steps of the Theater, chasing, and crying out: that the Lord of nations,
the people of Rome, did for a very light a matter, give more honor, unto a
slave chariot man, then unto consecrated Princes, and unto him self, being
present.

Furthermore, the thinness of the hairs of his head, and his balde crown,
bereft him of bliss, seeing that he did take it for such a deformity, that to
look out at a window above him, whereby his baldenesse might be espied, (for
in Rome at those days men went bare headed,) or upon any occasion to name a
goat, was present death. Yet was there a greater breach made in his bliss, by
the death of his sister, and harlot Drusilla: for it made him almost stark
mad, in so much that he did let his beard, and hair grow long: and often
upon a souden, and that also in the night time, would he for no cause fling on
galloppe along all the Sea ceast of Italy, and over into Sicyl, where when he
had done the like, he would come back again, as fast upon the spur. He
proclaimed for her a Iustitium, during the which time, it was death for a man
to laughe, wash, or suppe, either with parents, wife, or children: and yet
was he also angry with them that made lamentation for her: because as he
said, she was of a gillet, become a Goddess: and to affirm this lie, he gave
unto two men Deries sestertium, that is, 7812.l. 10.s^. Who swear, that they
saw her ascending up into heaven. Moreover to put him in mind of his
mortality, he inioyed health, neither of body nor mind. For he was a child,
he was troubled with the falling sickness, and after he was grown to man's
state, he would otentimes be so taken, that he could neither go, stand, nor
stay upon himself. And that his wits were not well, he himself perceived, and
therefore would ever and anon, think to separate himself from company, and
purge his brain. But most was he vexed with lack of sleep, for he never
could take above three hours rest in a night, and neither them quietly, but in
great fear through diverse terrible dreams, and visions. And therefore a
great part of the night did he for tediousness of watching, and lying, use
now sitting in his bed, and then walking up and down in long galleries, ever
and anon to call, and look for day. Once in his short reign was he very
dangerously sick, in so much, that of a foolish flattery Publius Africanus
Potitius swear, that if that the Gods would vouchsafe of their woonted
goodness to grant life unto Caligula, ye then he would gladly leese his life
for him: and Secundus, a horseman of Rome, upon the same condition, vowed to
fight at a game of sword players: both which vows did Caligula, when he was
recovered make them to fulfill least they should be forsworn: worthily, though
ingratefully, forcing them to die, who would wickedly, though feignedly, wish
his life, that did daily take away life from so many good men. But Suetonius
writes, that he made the horseman to fight in his sight, and would not let him
go before he had vanquished: no nor then neither, but after great intercession:
but the other mad man, who made no great haste to perform that which he
had rashely sworn: he caused to be whipped, and clothed in a sacrificeng robe:
and then delivered him unto Boys, who still requesting of him, as they went,
the perfourmaunce of his vow, should drive him alonge throughout all the
Streets, until that at the length they brake his neck off from a rampire.

Moreover, this Godless man, that contemned all GODS, and as I have before
alleged out of Dion, would thunder against thunder: does Suetonius affirm,
would oftentimes be so afraid of a small thunder, and lightening, that he
would wink, and blindefolde him self: but if it were great, creep out of his
bed, and hide him under it. And also he was so feared in Sicyl, with the
smoke, and noise of the hill Aetna, that soudenly in the night he fled out of
the city of Messana. And also hearing that Germany had rebelled, he prepared
to run away from Rome, and rigged ships in a readiness, to carry him
thence, resting in this one only comfort, that he should have left unto him
the Provinces beyond the Sea, if that the Germans did take the tops of the
Alps: as in old time the Cymbri had done, or else the city, as had the
Seuones. He lived only twenty nine years, whereof he reigned but three
years, and ten months, and eight days, and those, in how great fear,
and hofulnesse, his continual putting of men to death, for treason against him,
and his curious searching, for Oracles, and prophesies, do declare: all ye
which yet could not save him, from being slain with his wife, and his
daughter, whose brains were dashed out, against the wall. His body, for fear
lest that some villainy should be done unto it, was privily conveyed away, and
being but half burnt, was covered over with a few turues: so that he that
would be honored for a God, whilst he lived: could not be buried like a
man, when he was dead.

The xxvi. Chapter, Of Domitian.
Neither were Domitians acts any thing greater, as one that had no delight in
arms, and in whose reign the Daces revolted, and oppressed Appius Sabinus
their Lieftenaunt, with his whole army: and anon after also Cornelius Fussus
captein of his guard (an office in those days of all other the greatest) and
sent thither, with a power, to reduce them unto their duty. Then Domitian
went against them him self, or more truly, made as though he had gone: for (as
Dion affirms) he never during all his reign governed army, or administered
wars, as he that was a man impatient of all bodily labor: for in the city
he would never go on foot, and in the field sildome ride on horse, but
always be carried in a lieter, and was also of a faint and fearful heart:
but he staying by the way out of danger, sent his capteines against them, who
fought with no greater felicity, then had their predecessors, and shamefully
lost a great part of their army: and yet this shameless God sent lying
letters unto Rome, that he had conquered and subdued them: whereupon there
were so many, and so honorable decrees made for him, that almost in all places
of the world that were under his dominion, statuies of gold and silver were set
up. But he might in deed have truly triumphed of flies, of whom he
doubtless flue innumerable. For at the beginning of his reign, he used to
have every day a secret hour to catch flies, and to thrust them through
with a long piece of iron made for the nonce: so that it was as merrily, as
wittily answered of Vibius Craspus, when one desiering to speak with Domitian,
asked him who was within with the Emperor: he answered, not so much as a fly:
for then he had been as busy, as if the whole Senate had been with him. He
also deserved a just triumph over wild beasts, of whom he would kill upon the
Theater an hundredth in a day with his bow, bestowing his arrows so
artificially, that they seemed to be horns growing out of their heads. For he
was so good an archer, that he would oftentimes cause a boy to stand a great
distance off, and hold up his hand abroad, and he would shoot between every
finger, and never hurt them. But seeing that not great conquestes, but only
riches left unto him, did make him to conceive so highly of him self: my
thinks he might well have been put in mind of his mortality, by calling to
memory his youth passed in great poverty and infamy, as he that had not one
piece of plate, and did shamefully prostitute his body: so that there were at
Rome that did often show, after he came to the Empire, his hand and seal for
a nights lodging. What shall I rehearse his great danger in the wars against
Vitellius, Competitor in the Empire with his father, when he and his uncle
Sabinus, being overcome in fight, fled into the Capitol: but his enemies
breaking into the temple, and setting it on fire, he lodged all that night
privily in great fear with the sextene: and in the morning being disguised in
the apparel of a priest of Isis, he passed the river among ye priests of that
vain superstition, unto the mother of one of his school fellows, who hid him
self so closely, that they which following his foot diligently searched for
him, could by no means find him. What torments may we think tore him, when
he understood the adultery of his dear wife Domitia, (by whom he had a
son, and had proclaimed her Augusta, or Empress) with Paris a common player,
whom she loved as openly, as she did fervently. Whereupon he did put her away,
but within short time after, being impatient of the divorce, took her again,
seeking to color his ignominy in so doing with a feigned tale, that the
people had desired him to do it. I do omit what grief his bald head brought
him, who would draw unto his own reproach, if that the like were objected unto
any other man, either in earnest or sport: and also his often infirmities,
through whom he became deformously spindle shanked. But in what continual
fear he led his life, his often murdering of many, under color of treason
against him (whereby he became hatesome to all men) makes manifest: but much
more, the ouercasting of the walls of his gallerie wherein he used to walk, with
a shining kind of marble: wherein as in a glass, he might see who was behind
him. Yet this strange kind of hofulnesse could not keep him from being
murdered by a conspiracy of his nearest friends, liberts, and wife (although
that he had long time before suspected, and feared the year, the day, yea, the
hour, and the kind of his death) when he had reigned fifteen years, a long and
a rare time for a tyrant, but a very short, for a man to think that he had
such assured trial of Fortune, that he should never feel her unfaithfulness,
but be advanced into the unchangeable felicity of the gods. His body was
carried out of the city in the common bear by the sextens, the which his nurse
burned at home at her own house, but afterward privily conveyed the ashes
thereof into the sepulcher of his house in their church. For if that the
Senate had known thereof, they would have withstoode it, as they which
decreed, that all statuies, and arckes set up in his honor, should be broken
down, and al titles scraped out, and all memory of him quite abolished for
ever.

The xxvi. Chapter. Of Commodus.
But what pen can display the continual hofulnesse of Commodus, a God
without Martial glory? how great a number of conspiracies were there made to
deliver the people of Rome from the bondage of this tirant? from how many good
men took he life away, to prolong his own hated years? It is left in memory,
that he left not any man alive that was in authority, either in his fathers,
or the beginning of his own reign, but Pompeyanus, Pertinax, and Victorius.
He became so fearful, that he durst let no body either clip his hair, or
shave his berd, but burnt them off him self with a flaming coal. And yet this
wariness could not save him from being poisoned by his minion Martia: and
being sick thereof, and laid upon his bed, from being strangled by Narcissus,
in the twelfe year of his reign, and one and thirty of his age. But the just
anger of the Senate, and people, became so hot against him after he was dead,
that they all cried out with one voice unto Pertinax his successor: Hear, O
Caesar, we desire thee, that all honors may be taken away from the enemy of
his country, that all honors may be taken away from the parici^e: we
request, O Caesar, that the enemy of the Gods, the sword player, the butcher
may be drawn along the channels of the city with an hook: Let him that was
more cruel then Domitian, and more filthy then Nero, be drawn along the
channels with an hook. He that murdered all sorts of men, let him be drawn
among the channels with an hook. He that spoiled the temples, let him be
drawn along the channels with an hook, and thrown into Tyber. But Pertinax,
who had caused his body to be privily buried in the night, desiered them,
seeing that his body was already buried, not to meddle with it: although they
cried out it was unjustly buried: and therefore it ought to be taken up again,
but the Emperor would not permit them to do any vilanie unto his body but to
break down al statuies, and monuments of him, and to abrogate al things
before decreed for his honor, and to abolish his name out of all places, as
well public as private. Thus the three Roman Emperors that would needs
unjustly be adored for Gods while they were alive: not only lost the honor of
being canonized for Gods after death (the which was common unto the rest of
their predecessors and successors) but also the due funerals of a noble man:
although I do read that Seuerus to anger the Senate (whom he hated) did
afterward canonize Commodus for a God, and commanded his birth day to be kept
holy.

The xxviij, Chapter. Of Cosdras king of Persia.
Now am I glad that I have passed these Roman monsters, and am come unto the
last of my counterfeit Gods Cosdras, the mighty monarche of Persia, whose
sight had fortune blinded with greater, flattery. For he lived until he was
aged, and had towardly sons, (both which things provident and loving nature
had denied unto those other Tygres, least that they should quite have destroyed
mankind) and also surpassed in Martial glory, all the kings that had reigned
in Persia before him. For he wanne from the Roman Empire Mesopotamia, Syria,
all the south side of Asia, all Egypt and Africa. But as it was soon won and
almost with continued course of victories: so that after he became proud, and
would not acknowledge that he received these victories of God: but would
needs be adored for a God: he lost them again in as short time, and Empire
and life withal: for Heraclius the Emperor of Constantinople, being broken
with so many and great foyles, supplyantly desired peace of him, although the
conditions were very dishonorable, and shameful: but when that proud Cosdras
utterly refused to make peace with any conditions, and wickedly vaunted, that
he would never spare the Christians, until that he had made them all to deny
him that was crucified, and adore the sun: then Heraclius rather impelled by
necessity, the pricked forward by prowess, prepared a power: and after many
holy supplications and general feasts held, did set forth against his
insolent enemy, who was then at Azotus, a city of Syria, in those days very
rich, whether Heraclius marched for to darreine battle with him. But this
dastardly God before that Heraclius could come thither, retired back into
Mesopotamia, almost in flying form, destroying every where the standing corn
that was now as good as ripe, that he might take from his enemy all faculty
of following him. Yet nevertheless, Heraclius persued him, who still fled
before him so fast, that Heraclius could not overtake him. Wherefore he wisely
left following of him, and turned all his force unto the wasting of the
country, with fire and sword. But when he understood that the Persian had left
two capteines with two great armies, who trusting to the advantage of the
hills, should stop his passage over the mounteines, he leaving a part of his
power to subdue the cities, and places, the which were behind untouched, hasted
him self with the strength of his army unto Taurus, the which being speedily
passed over, he fought with one of the Persian capteines, called Salbarus at
the river of Saro, whom he disco^fited in a bloody fight, and forced to flee
into Persis. The government of the remnants of whose army, augmented with a
strong supplement of fresh soldiers did Saias take, and fought a pitched field
with Heraclius, who still marched forward: the which fight continued from the
dawning of the day, until it was late, with great slaughter on both sides, but
at the length the Persians had ye better, when that a mighty shoure of rain,
mixed with wind, hail, and terrible thunder and lightning, was sent from heaven
into the faces of the Barbarians: the which taking from them the use both of
eyes, and ears, yea, and also depriving them of al their senses, they were
beaten down by the Christians, as thick as hops: so that of so mighty an
army, there escaped very few, but either they were flaine or taken. Yet after
this great discomfiture, Cosdras repaired his army, with all the power of his
empire, and created one Razanes general thereof: who fought with greater
endeavor then his predecessors, but with like event: for he him self with his
whole army was slain, after they had fought with equal fortune an whole day.
Then Cosdras being broken with those manifold discomfitures, fled over Tygris,
proclaming his younger son Medarses his consort in the kingdom. The which
reproach and injury caused the elder son Sirochus, a towardly young prince, to
join in league with Heraclius, with the conditions, that they should prosecute
the wars against Cosdras, and Medarses: and they finished, Sirochus should
restore unto Heraclius, all yt had been won from him, and his predecessors, and
to bound his kingdom with the river of Tygris. This league being confirmed,
certain horsemen were sent to pursue Medarses and his father who brought them
both back with their wives: and were by Syrachus cast into painful prison,
where not long after, they were both slain by his cruel commandment. Such
was the fearful fall of him, who in mockage of the Trinity, Zonoras.
had built him a sumptuous house in form like unto the heavens: and at the
right side thereof, had placed the cross, whereon Christ our Savior was
crucified, the which he had lately taken at Jerusalem, and on the left a
cock, and did set him self in the midst between them: saying, that he was
the Father of Heaven, that did sit in the middle between the son and the
holy Ghost. I have the more at large declared the particularities of Cosdras
his ruin, because that every degree and step thereunto, may rightly seem to
be of Gods special working, to the fear and terror of al those that shall
insolently rejoice at a deceitful gale of fickle fortune, as though that were
done by their own force and strength, which is either wrought by Gods own
arm, or else permitted by his long sufferaunce.

The xxix. Chapter. Of the insolent exulting of Vgoline Earl of Pise,
Frederick the second, and Henry the second, of their good fortune, and their
falls: and again, the moderation of mind of Epaminondas, Philip king of
Macedonie, Camillus Paulus, and Charles the fifth in their fortunate concourse
of victories, and why at Rome a bondsman did ride in the chariot with him that
triumphed.
Vgoline of Pise his felicity.
VGoline Girardescus, a citizen of Pise in Italy, chief of the faction of the
Guelphes, having partly expelled and partly subdued the Gibelines, came to that
power, that he administered at beck all things in that rich and mighty city,
and became lord thereof, and also of Lacoa: a man of great power for riches,
nobility, fame of his wisdom, and authority, and seemed unto himself and
unto others, for wife, children, and childrens children, and all other things
that be desired in man's life, to be a happy and blessed man: and reaping the
fruit of thinking on his felicity, was fraughtfull of joy, and confidence,
and took a delight to be still talking of it: insomuche that at a magnificent
feast which he held on his birthe day, where he had all his friends, and
kinsfolks: he extolled with words his favorable fortune, admiring, and
aduauncing it up to heaven, yea, he durst ask an entire freende of his,
called Marcus, what he thought to be lacking and away. Marcus, whither moved by
mature consideration of the fraieltie, and vnstabilitie of humane things, and
how deceitefull their show is, and with how swift a swinge they are carried
about on fortunes whirling wheel, or else carts, admonished from heaven,
answered nothing: but the wrath of God: which can not be long away from so
great prosperity: and it must needs come to pass: seeing so many fortunate
things are heaped together upon one man, who never yet felt the contrary
fortune, that he must one day be overwhelmed with some notable calamity: The
which prognostication fell out shortly after to be to true. For the power of
the Guelphes decaying, the Gibelines arose up in arms, and besieged, and
assaulted his house, and slew one of his sons, and another of his nephues,
that defended force from their parent. But at the length they taking prisoner
Vgoline with his two other sons, and three nephues, did shut them up in a
tower, the gates whereof they locked: and then threw the keys into the river
of Arno, that raune thereby. There the unhappy Father dying for hunger, saw
his dear pledges, dying, also starued in his lap: and when he crying out
requested his enemies to be contented to exact only humane punishment, they
would not suffer him to receive the sacred rites due unto Christians.

I find also recorded, Frederick the second.
that in the great discord between Frederick the second, Emperor of
Almaine, and Innocens the bishop of Rome, the city of Parma, that stood
stiff on the Popes part, did shut their gates against Frederick, as he passed
that way from Sicyl unto Burgonie. Wherewithal he being fore chafed, besieged
them with determination not to depart thence, before he had taken and razed it
flat to the ground: to deter al other from staying his course. This siege
held him an whole year and more. Before Parma in the place where he encamped,
had he laid out a plotte to build a new city on, and appointed places for
churches: and the high, and chief church he dedicated unto Saint Victor, for
a good abodement of happy success: and the other, both public and private
buildings began to go up sumptuously. This city called he Victoria. He
coined also money with the Image of Saint Victor, which he named Victoriates.
He did also set forth spectacles after the manner of the old Roman
Emperors, and such in deed as might compare with those ancient shows:
being gloriously adorned with Elephants, and a great number of such other
wild beasts: the which when the Romans flourished, and were Lords of the
world were known in Italy: but in those days were strange sightes unto the
Latin eyes. These strange beasts were sent him by the Sultanes of the
Orient, and the kings of Afrique, to whom he was a freende and confederate.
He also made magnificent games and plays, and brought forth and showed unto
the people, men of unknown tounges, and Countries, such as they never heard of
before, apparelled also in as strange attire: in this manner proudely
triumphing, and requesting the fruit of victory, (the which is the gift of
God,) before that he had overcome. Thus going about to match the magnificence
of the ancient Roman Emperors, but attempting it in a wrong time: he fell
into great lack of money.

Then the Victoriates, which were before of gold, now began to be made of
leather, with a very small, and thin Image of silver: making proclamation,
that they should be taken for fine gold: for his mint would so valewe and
take them. And to seal up the mischief, the Parmesans, and their alies
falling out of the City, wanne his camp, the new Victoria: and put the
Emperor unto a foul flight: and so the City of Victoria fell before it was
finished. Yea it was overthrown before it were reared up, and quite
destroyed before it was built: and with his Victoria his Empire also flewe
away, and not long after his life too, being scuffled in a sickness, when he
was likely to recover, by his base son Manfredo. Wherefore most truly said
the divine Poet Virgil.

Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae,
Nec seruare modum rebus plerunque secundis.
Man's mind uncertain is of Fate,
And what will after fall,
And mean to keep when fortune fawnes,
It knows not at all.
And worthy to be enrolled in the brazen book of fame is Epaminondas the
renowned Captain of the Thebanes, with whom their. Martial glory, The
modesty of Epaminondas.
both began and ended. For he the next day after he had given that famous
overthrow at Leuctris: whereby he brake all the strength of the invincible
Lacedaemonians: walked abroad all untrimmed, and sad, holding down his
head: whereas he used at other times to go bolte upright, with his body
anointed with sweet ointmentes, and with a merry countenance. But when his
friends marueiling at this unlooked for alteration asked him, if that any ill
chance or trouble had happened unto him: he answered none: but because that I
felt that I liked my self yesterday better then I ought: I do chastise to day
the intemperance of that joy: wast thou borne under the thick air of Boetia,
and therefore are thy countrymen infamed for doltes? marry I do not think, that
the fine and subtle air of Athens, did ever breed man comparable unto thee in
true wisdom, nor all the babbling Philosophers did ever show any such
perfect president of modesty. I would unto God that Henry the second late
king of France, had imprinted this Peerless pattern in his hautie heart:
Henry the French king.
and not have thought his felicity to be firm, the which, was in deed very
fickle, and britle. For he waxing proud of his unwonted great victories,
having recovered from the English men, the town of Buloigne, and Scotland: the
heir whereof he had obtained for his son, and gotten from the Empire, the
Duchy of Loreine, with the young Prince, and the three famous Emperial cities,
Metz, Tul, and Verdum, and raunged at pleasure in Germany, under the name of
recouerer of the liberty of Germany, giving the devise of a cappe between
two daggers, the which the conspiratours against Julius Caesar had long time
before used, and from thence had broken forth into the Duchy of Luxenburg,
taking there the strong towns of Iuois, and Danuilliers, and the castles of
Momedie, and Bullion, and an other town upon the Mase, and spoiled, and burnt
Hennault, taking Trelo, Aglay, and Cimaw, and had returned home to Paris
without any loss: and the same year also expelled the Emperors garrison out
of Srena in Italy, restoring their common wealth unto their ancient
liberty: and moreover, which deserved no less glory, had valiantly, and
fortunately defended the city of Metz against the Emperor, and his mighty
army, and provision: forcing him after that he had lost forty thousand men
with cold, and sickness, to break up the siege before he ever gave assault,
casting into the river great store of Martial furniture, and munition, that he
might the more easily, and commodiously reduce small remnantes of his huge
army sore weakened with many incommodities: and the next year being 1553. the
Constable had by policy, and ambushe overthrown in a skirmishe, the which
was almost equal unto a set battle, the Prince of Piemont, General to the
Emperor, taking many noblemen, and among them the Duke of Arscot: and
afterward he himself had spoiled and pillaged Artois, eftsoon provoking the
Emperials to battle, who knowing their weakness kept themselves in their
defensed camp near to Valencennes: his navy also being joined with the
Turkish fleet, had won from the Genouaies the greatest part of the Isle of
Corsica. And Anno 1554. Rochsur Ion had burnt and destroyed Artois, and the
Constable Hennalt, where he wanne again Trelo, Aglay, Cinnaw, and after the
Kings coming unto the camp, Bouine, Demcut, Mariburg, and Bincey, and before
Rentey, the which he besieged, with rare felicity, and valiaunce had with his
lances disordered, and scattered all the field over the troops of the
Rutters, with their pistolets, the which never was done either before, nor
since, vnlest it were by the self same man Frauncis Duke of Guise, at the
battle of Dreux, by ye report of Theuet. Neither was his fortune, any thing
inferior beyond the Alps, for the Brisac had won the strong station of
Hiberna, and Briel, and the great city of Cassacle, and Monte Caluo with so
much his greater joy, because that the Duke of Alua had departed from saint
Iago, the which being but a pelting hold he had besieged in vain three
weeks, with incredible loss of Martial furniture, and much greater of his
honor: leaving Vulpiano, the which he had delivered from siege, and relieved
the garrison, to be won by Dumal. The French king, I say being proud of so
prosperous a concourse of victories, when that his fruitful Queen had
brought him forth Anno 1556. two daughters at one burden: he named the one of
them Victoria, who within very short time after died, and with her all her
Fathers Martial victories. For An. 1557. besides the unfortunate journey of
Guise, into Italy, he lost a great battle before Saint Sintines where were
either slain, or taken the flower of all the Nobility and valiant capteines
of France: after the which insued the loss of the Town, wherein were taken
prisoners the Admiral, and diverse other of the nobility, and afterward also
the towns of Hawne and Chastell^t. And the next year 1558. he lost another
field besides Graueling, not inferior, for the number of them that were
slain unto the other, but nothing so many noble men were lost, and yet were
there taken Marshall Thermes the General, Denabault, Villebon, Sinarpoit, with
other, and almost all the capteines and Gentlemen of name that were there.
With the which two adverse battles, he that had thought in his heart to have
appointed Laws unto all christendom, being broken: was glad to get peace by
restoring all that he had of the kings of Hispaine, the Queens of England,
(or else to pay well for it,) of the Dukes of Sauoy, Florence, and Mantua, the
Bishop of Liege, and the Genowaies, and to withdraw his garrisons out of the
territory of Siena: and at the triumph kept for the espousals of his
daughter, whom he had given in marriage unto the king of Hispaine, as it were
for a pledge of the peace, he was slain at ye Tilt by the Count Montgomerie, in
the last course that he purposed to have run. The Queen, who had with great
fear dreamed the night before, that he was slain by fatal stroke of deadly
lance, and the grauer sort of his nobility in vain, dehorting him to leave
off in time that dangerous pastime: specially seeing that his arms were waxen
stiff with the unwonted and toilesome travail of three days running. Thus ye
see how God does pull down the mighty from their thrones, and does disperse
those that are proud, in the imagination of their own hearts: suffering no
man longer to enjoy the gladsome gale of good fortune, then he does humbly
acknowledge God to be the giver thereof: not glorying therein, but thinking
lowely of him self: as a player does not take to him any Princely pride,
because he bears some times the person of a Monarche, as he ye knows he
shall soon after lay it down. If that the French King himself had been
ignorant of all antiquities: me thinks his learned confessors, who had taken
on them the charge of his soul, might have told him, that when Philip king of
Macedonie heard that upon one day his servant Tetrippo, was victor at ye games
of all Greece held at Olympus, and his captain Parmenio had discomfited in
battle the Dardarences, Philip fearful of prosperity.
and his wife Olympias had brought him forth a son: lifted up his hands
unto heaven, and said: And O fortune for these so many, and so great good
happes, strike me with some light mishappe.

The wise Prince did not insolently exulte for this rare success of things,
but had the fawning of fortune in suspicion, whose nature he knew to be to
fleare upon them a little before with a flattering face of unwonted
prosperity of things, when she intended incontinently to destroy them: they
might also have rehearsed unto him out of Liuie, that when Paulus Aemilius had
taken prisoner Perseus the mighty king of Macedonie, who fell down at his
feet with abundant tears desiring him to take compassion on his afflicted
state: The worthy words of Aemilius unto the young Gentlemen.
after he had courteously comforted the king, he used this speech, unto the
Romans: ye see here presently before your eyes, a notable example of the
mutabilitie of man's state.

I speak this specially unto you, young men: and therefore it does not become
us to do any thing in our prosperity, violently and proudly against any man,
nor to give credit unto present fortune, seeing that it is uncertain what the
evening may bring. He shall be a man in deed, whose mind neither prosperity
shall with her brittle blast lift up, nor adversity break. And also yt when
he had buried the one of his sons five days before he triumphed of Perseus,
Paulus his Oration unto the people.
and the other three days after: he spoke among other, these grave words unto
the people of Rome at the burial of the younger. Nothing did I fear more, dear
country men, from the beginning of this most prosperous course of mine acts:
then some unthought of chance of insidious and false fortune: neither did my
fear for the public weal cease, before that the violent seas of her cruelly
raging had privately invaded me: the which thing I had oftentimes before
heartily desired of almighty God eftsoons praying, that if any cursed mishappe
did hang over the people of Rome for this felicity: that he would vouchesafe
to turn it al wholly upon me, and mine house. My two most sweet sons, whom
I had appointed to be mine heirs and successors: have I buried with almost
continuated funerals: so that now I seem to be delivered out of all danger,
and do put my self in good hope, that the fortune of the people of Rome will
abide still without all stain: seeing that she has inflicted hatred enoughe
on me, and mine, by these two incomparable incommodities, and losses. Who now
will marvel that Philip first brought the kingdom of the Macedons, to great
power and renoune, and that Aemylius overthrew and destroyed it, that does
consider how wary and circumspect they were against all privy awaites of
false Fortune. Furthermore, they should not have left untold, how that
Camillus, Camillus his fear of fortune.
when he had taken the mighty and rich city of Veij, and saw that the
spoil and pray was far greater then any man thought: with trickling tears
besought the Gods, that if the fortune of the people of Rome did seem to be
greater, then could be corrected without some great mishap: that what so ever
incommoditie did for that envy hang over the Roman name, that it might be
wholly turned upon his head: and then not long after Camillus the captain, was
banished by the unthankful people, and also the city of Rome, the conqueror
taken sacked, and burnt by the Galls. Morouer, they might have showed him, A
slave rides with the triumphing consul,
that it was the ancient usage of the Romans at their triumphs, that a
slave, a physician of envy, (says Pliny) should ride behind in the chariot
with the triumpher, least he should like him self to well (as writes Iuuenal:)
and holding over his head a great crown of gold, set with precious stones,
did often call to the triumphant to look behind him: and also by Zomoras his
report, A whip and a bell hanged at the triu^phant chariot.
a whip and a bell were hanged at his chariot, to admonish him that he might
for all that present proud pomp, fall into so great calamities, that he
might be scourged with a whip, and put to death: (for all that were executed at
Rome, did use to wear belles: least any man as they went to execution, might
defile him self, as they thought, by touching them.) But if that the negligent
friars had failed to admonish him of a thing, that did so greatly apperteine
unto his souls health, and also to his long felicity on the earth, whereof
some are far more careful, then for their everlasting bliss: yet might he
have been put in mind of his duty by that rare example of moderation of mind
in Charles the fifth, his perpetual enemy. Who neither when news was brought
him, that Frauncis, the mighty and flourishing king of France was taken
prisoner by his capteines, before Pauia in a bloody battle: where a great
part of the nobility of France were either slain or taken: neither when he
understood that his soldiers had sacked that proud city of Rome, the which
had in time past ruled and reviled the whole world, and that they besieged in
the castle of S. Angelo, the which could not for lack of victuals hold out,
yea, a few days: his bitter enemy Clemens the 7, bishop of that See, who was
not contented spitefully to have labored to set all the princes of
Christendom in his top, but also had earnestly, and incessantly solicitated
his subjects, and renouned capteines, and namely, the valiant Marquis of
Pescara, to revolt from him: at neither news I say, of such rare felicity did
he give either publicly or privately any sign of rejoicing, but only
commanded for the first, devout supplications unto God to be holden seven
days, and forty for the Pope, that he might escape the cruel hands of his
soldiers, without any bodily harm and misusage. I read also in Manlius his
common places, that the citizens of Antwerp long after presented him with a
very fair piece of Arras, wherein was set forth very sumptuously and lively,
ye battle of Pauie, where ye french king was taken prisoner by the Emperials.
There was also expressed the names of Frauncis the king of France, and of all
the noble men that were taken or slain at that battle. But when this modest
Emperor had viewed it, he refused to accept it, least he should seem to
vpbraide unto other their calamities and miseries. Whereof they that presented
it, being admonished, took home the arras with them, and caused the names to
be taken out, and then being brought again, he with hearty thanks received
it, and commended the work. This his singular moderation of mind, and
conquering of him self and insolency, the which very few of them that have
vanquished al other men, could ever attain unto, was far more famous then
the taking prisoners of the two mighty Princes, then the sacking of the city
that had been Lady of the world, and at this day also the greatest city of
Christendom, then the conquest of the kingdom of Tunes in Afrike, then the
subduing of the Germans, and the passing over beyond Albis, the which the
proud Romans, when they were in all their greatest roialtie were never able to
do: for this victory might he justly use his word, Plus vltra, passing not
only the bounds of Hercules, and the Romans, but also of cursed envy: ye which
after all earthly victories remains still invincible, and can not be subdued,
but by this sword of modesty and humility.

The xxx. Chapter. Of the unfortunate fall of many great conquerours and
founders of Empires.
AND now that I have declared the fearful fall of those, that I know not,
whether more wickedly, or foolishly, would be accounted Gods, and also of
them that proudly vaunted of their victories, without humble confession and
acknowledging that they received them from heaven: I prosecuting my purpose,
will show, that all those that have been famous for victories, and the fawning
of fortune have also had often admonitions of their fickle frailty, brittle
bliss, and tottering state.

Wherefore passing over in silence Cyrus the great, Cyrus the great.
ye founder of the Persian Empire, who was slain with his whole army of two
hundredth thousand by a weak woman, Michridates the great,
Tomyris Queen of the Massagets: and the great Mithridates Eupator, king of
Pontus, who after he had augmented his fathers kingdom, with the conquest of
two and twenty nations, and had won a great part of Greece, and the signorie
of the sea from Cilicia to Thracius Chersonesus, had kept wars forty years
with the Romans, and vanquished their capteines, Cassius, Murena, Cotta,
Fabius, Triarius: Sylla, restrained him within his fathers kingdom, Lucullus
so afflicted him, that for despair he murdered his two wives, and sisters,
and finally, Pompey quite euerted: who would not grant unto him humbly
desiring it, of his two and twenty kingdoms, not so much as the poor one of
Pontus, and for that also to pay a yearly tribute: wherefore after that four
of his sons were taken by Pompey, and the eldest revolted unto him, and also
one of his daughters taken, and the other two poisoned by him self, he
desperately caused a Barbarian to kill him, least he should have come alive
into the hands of the Romans, and to be carried in the triumph as a laughing
stock: and an other Mithridates the great, An other Mithridates the great.
king of the Parthians, who augmented the Empire, with the access of many
kingdoms, and oftentimes discomfited in battle the valiant Scythes: but when
he was in his greatest ruff, being returned out of Armenia, the Parthians
expelled him out of the kingdom, for his cruelty: and his own brother
invaded the empty siege, and taking him prisoner at Babylon, caused him
unnaturally to be slain in his sight: and Antiochus the great, Antiochus the
great.
king of Syria, who after great conquestes achieved in Syria, Asia, and
Greece, was overthrown in battle by the Romans, and forced to buy peace
with the loss of all his dominions on this side the mountain Taurus, and the
payment and the paymente of such a mighty mass of money, that not being
able to levy it of his own possessions, he attempted to rob the rich
temple of Jupiter Dyndemenus, or as says Strabo, of Belus, where he and all
his army were slain by a soudeine incursion of the inhabitauntes of the
country: and Pompey the Great Pompey the Great.
who more augmented the dominions and revenues of the Roman Empire then all
the capteines before and after him, was after the great overthrow given him
by Caesar, traitorously slain by the boy king Ptolomey and his geldinges: and
Mathewe the Great, Mathewe the Great.
Lord of Mylan, who among other his variable chances was expelled out of the
city, and constreyned twelve years to get living by fishinge: and being
restored was at the age of seventy years, forced to abandon the city of
Mylan, and to resign his Empire unto his son Galiazo, who had unnaturally,
not long before revolted from him: and dying of this anguishe, and grief, the
body of him, being excommunicated by the Pope, was buried in a privy and
vile place, his death being long time kept close, lest his carcass in the
adverse fortune of the wars, Sforza the Great.
might have been subject unto the reproaches and vilanies of the Popes cruel
Legate: and the great Sforza, who besides his overthrows in fight at Viterby,
at Crixta, at Aipua, and his being taken prisoner in fight at Casaleccio, and
also twice in captivity through treason, first by Pandulpho Alepo, the Queen
of Naples darlinge, and then kept four months in the new castle of
Naples, lookinge every day when his breath should be stopped by that
effeminate lecher: and after wards by James Earl of Marchia, who had married
the Queen, where he escaped as narrowly, and his many other great dangers:
was at the last drowned in the river of Lyris or Gariliano, by the unfortunate
founderinge of his horse: and the great Gonsalues, Gonsalues the great.
who only of all the famous warriors of our age (the which have yet excelled
for noble chiefteines) obtained the proud name of the great: this victorious
gentleman after yt he had conquered out of the hands of the French men the
rich kingdom of Naples for his Prince Ferdinando the king of Hispaine, was
by him ingratefully put from the gouernemente thereof, and almost also from his
life, for false suspicion of treason, and ever afterward kept from all honor
and office to lead a loathsome life far from the court and field at home,
as it were in an honest banishemente, and there for to see his eldest brothers
heir for a light occasion banished the court for ever: and to his greater
grief, his own native place, his nephues chief castle razed down to the
ground, notwithstanding his most suppliant suit, the which was also
furthered by the earnest prayers of the French kings honorable Ambassadors:
for the implacable Prince by all means sought to spite him, and to empaire his
Princely Port and riches as one whom he suspected to be to great: so that he
was aptly compared by a noble man of Hispaine unto a great ship in a shalowe
water, Cresus king of Lydia.
the which abides in continual fear to be lost by strikinge and sticking on
the flattes: and Cresus the mighty king of Lydia, whose inestimable riches
have ever since been a proverb throughout the world, berefte of all by Cyrus,
and forced to end his long life in bondage: and Philippe king of Macedonie,
Philippe king of Macedonie
the mightiest king of all Europe, says Diodorus, in his time, and who durst
for the largeness of his Empire (for he conquered Thessalia, Greece, and many
other countries adjoining unto him) reckon himself match unto the twelve
Gods, slain by his subject Pausanias at the sumptuous marriage of his
daughter unto the king of Epyrus, in the midst of his mirth, yea and of his
conquestes, when he had levied two hundredth thousand Greeks foot men, and
fifteen thousand horsemen, Antiochus Epiphanes.
besides the power of Macedonie, Thessaly and all his Barbarous dominions to
invade the Persian: and Antiochus king of Sy, ria surnamed the noble,
Milciades. Themistocles.
who was slain going about to spoil the temple of Diana at Helimais:
omitting also the two walls of Greece Milciades and Themistocles: of whom the
one destroyed the huge army of Darius, and the other of Xerxes, and mighty
Emperors of Persia, afterward died both in great misery, the one being
cast into prison by the unthankful people, and the other banished where he
poisoned himself: The two Scipiones.
and ye two lights of the Roman Empire the two Scipiones Africani of whom
the one was banished out of his country, the which he not only had conserved
from the rage of Hanibal, but also enlarged with the dominions of the
Hispaines, and all Asia on this side Taurus: but the younger after he had razed
Carthage and Numantia the two terrors of the Romans was one night shamefully
murdered at Rome in his bed, without any inquisition after made how he
came unto this unworthy end, to whom his country was almost as much bound
as unto their founder Romulus Romulus.
whom they cruelly tare in pieces: showing at the very first what reward all
their benefactours should look for of that unthankful and ungracious
people: passinge also over in silence Lucius Sylla who only of all men named
himself happy, because that he had oppressed the liberty of his country,
and proscribed and slain so many of his country men, was eaten to death
with lice: his body gnawing it self, and breeding his own punishemente: nor
Dionysius the elder, who of a mean man became Lord of the mighty state of
Syracusae, yea, and of the whole Islande of Sicyl: out of the which he
expelled the Carthaginians, and subdued many cities in Italy, and was grown
unto this power that he was able to bring sixscore thousand footmen, and
twelve thousand horsemen into the field, and four hundredth ships into the
sea: yet at length being broken with continual wars, was slain by his own
people: nor yet rehersinge the unfortunate fatal fall in fight of the three
gemmes of Greece, Lysander, Epaminondas, and Pelopidas, Lysander, Epaminondas,
Pelopidas, and Conon. Hanibal.
and the maniefolde foiles, and finally the banishment of the fourth and last
famous captain of Greece Conon: nor Hanibal the honor of Afrike banished his
country, and after diverse wandringes forced to poison himself, lest he
should have been a May game unto the yrefull Romans: nor Brennus Brennus.
king of the wanderinge Galls, the terror of Greece, who slew him self,
after that he saw his invincible army destroyed from heaven: nor Aurelianus,
Aurelianus.
who reduced into one the Roman Empire, being many years torn into pieces
by thirty tyrants, but was slain by his servant: nor Alboinus Alboinus.
the founder of the kingdom of the Lombardes in Italy, murdered by the
treason of his own wife. Now Enghist Enghiste.
who first brought into Britain the Saxons, and changed ye name of a part
thereof into England, slain with a great power in battle after that he had seen
his brother Horsa fallen by the like feate: nor the valiantest captain that
ever served Prince, Belisarius: Belisarius.
who triumphed eftsoons of the Persians, and reduced unto the Roman Empire
both Africa, and Italy which had been long time quietly possessed by the
Vandalles, and Goths: yet he, whom no man's might could mate, cursed envy
ouerthrewe, raised by a displeasure taken against his proud wife, by the
insolente Empress: who stirred the shameful indignation of her husband not
only to bereave him of his sight but also of his goods: so that he was forced
to beg his bread, who had triumphed over all parts of the world. Nor
minding to recite Orchanes Orchanes.
the second Prince of the Turks who after yt he had conquered Mysia,
Lycaonia, Phrygia, Caria, and the city of Prusa, and extended his Empire unto
the Hellesponte, and the Sea Euxine, was slain in a great overthrow given
him by the Tartars: nor his son Amurathes Amurathes.
slain by a slave of the Dispotes of Seruia, after that he had conquered a
great part of Thrace, the lower Mysia, the Triballes, and Besses, and
discomfited in a great battle the power of Seruia and Bulgaria: nor how his
son Bajazet, Bajazet.
after that he had subdued all Thrace except Pera, and Constantinople, the
which he besieged eyghte years, and doubtless had taken it, if that he
fearing the coming of Sigismunde the Emperor with a great power, and not
broken up the siege to give the Western Christians that famous foil at
Nicopolis, and afterward won Macedonia, Thessalia, Phocis and Attica: was
taken prisoner by Tamberlaine with the loss of two hundredth thousand Turks,
and made during all the rest of his lamentable life, a miserable block for
the proud victor to mount on horseback, and also was carried about with him
in an iron cage, to gnawe bones under the table among his dogs: nor how the
Martial prince of the Moscouies Swatoslawe, Swatoslawe.
after that he had subdued Bulgaria, and all the country even unto Thonawe,
discomfited the Emperors of Greece with their huge army, and forced the^ to
redeem the sack of Constantinople with a great weight of gold, was at the
length slain in an ambushe by Cures Prince of Pleczenig, and a maizer made of
his scull, about the which was engraven: by seekinge other men's he lost his
own: nor how the three Italian tyrants of our time, of whom two were Creti
sanguine Diuum, two Popes sons, the third a near Sib unto Pope Clemens the
seventh, who oppressing wrongfully the liberty of his country, advanced this
unthrifty bastard Alexander Di medici Alexander di medici.
unto the Duchy of Florence, where within few years for his tyranny and
lechery, he was hated of all men and slain by his cosen and familiar Laurence
Di medici: the which fate also befell for his semblable manners unto Peter
Luigi Peter Luigi.
created by his father Paul the third Duke of Placentia and Parma, but that
greater vilanies were done unto his dead body by the angry multitude: ye
third, but the first in order of age was, Caesar Borgia Caesar Borgia.
son unto Alexander the sixte, one that for cruel murderinge of noble men
passed the cursed memory of Tyberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Domitian,
Commodus, Seuerus, and all the rest of those Roman Monsters.

And first to lay a fit foundation for his ambitious buylding, he caused his
elder brother Frauncis Duke of Candia to be murdered in the city one night
after they had supped together merrily abroad, and threw his body into
Tyber: for no other cause, but for that his fathers mind was that Frauncis
should marry, and increase the name of ye Borgiae, the which he would make
honorable with large dominions, but Caesar, he had as it were banished into
the cloister of religion, disguising him with a red hatt, the which was
far inferior unto his royal heart and immesurable desire of earthly honors,
who bare in his ensign this word Aut Caesar aut nihil, an Emperor or
nothing: the which insatiable thirst of his, the Colonnese fearinge that he
would quench with their blood, abandoned all their dominions and lands, and
fled away following the Castor who some say bites off his own stones when he
is hardly persued: knowing, that for them only his death is sought: but the
Orsines allured with his liberal interteinemente to serve him in the wars,
were almost all murdered. Baptista the cardinal at Rome, Frauncis the Duke of
Grauina, and Paulo in the territory of Perugia, Liberto Prince of Firma, and
Vitelloccio Vitelli one of the Princes of Ciuita de Castello at Senogallia, the
which caused all the rest of the Vitelli to fly, and by their lives with the
loss of their liuinges.

And also the noble men of the house of Gaieta who possessed the town of
Sermoneta in Campagna di Roma, James Nicholas, and Bernardine being slain,
some one way and some an other, yealded their castles lands, and goods unto
Caesar. And also the Dukes of Camerino Caesar, Anibal, and Pyrrhus, were
expelled their dominions and strangled. Astor Manfredi Prince of Fauenza
yealdinge the town and himself upon promise of safety, was slain, and
cast into Tyber. Furthermore Pandulpho Malatesta, John Sforza, and Guido
Vbaldo, had rather by flight leave their dominions of Rimini, Pesaro, and
Vrbine, unto the inuading tyranne, then be murdered. And also James Appiano,
let him have the principality of Piombino.

But Catharine Sforza, who reigned at Forly and Imola, having lost by force her
dominions, and being taken prisoner was brought in triumph to Rome. But while
by this bloody way he encroched on all the principalities about him, he also
commanded ye prince of Beselio and base son unto Alfonse king of Naples,
yea and his sisters husband, to be slain in her chamber, yea and in her bed
being before wounded, in ye Court of ye church of Saint Peter, but so that it
was thought he would escape.

And by the same means he dispatched the younger Borgia, the Cardinal, because
he had seemed to favor the duke of Candia his brother.

he also sauagely slew as he came from supper, John Cerbellion, a man of great
nobility, both at home and also in the wars, because he had severely kept
the honesty of a gentlewoman of the house of Borgia. He did also put to death
James Santatrucio a noble man of Rome, the^ whom there was no man more friend
and familiar with Caesar: neither for any other cause but for that he was able
upon a soudeine to gather together a strong band of lusty fellows of ye
Orsine faction and make them courageously to attempt any exploite. But when
for this cursed and unquenchable desire of Empire, he and his father had
appointed to poison at a feast certain noble and rich princes: his man
mistaking the flagon, gave thereof unto the ungracious father, and worse son,
whereof the father, being old, died, but his blessed bird a lusty young
man, was by many medicines conserved to greater punishmente: for after the
death of Alexander, the Colonese and the Orsines that were left, returned
unto Rome. Then Caesar that he might not be ouermatched by haueing wars with
both the families, restored unto the Colonese all their possessions, on whom
in diverse places he had sumptuously buylt. Guido Defeltrie recovered Vrbine,
John Sforza Pesaro, except the castle Malatesta Riminie, but the castle was
still retained by Caesar, and the Baleones Perugia, through the help of the
Orsines, who also took Tuderto with the castle, and put to shameful death
the captain, and with like success at Viterby, Ameria, and all the cities
there aboutes, either they restored the Princes of their own faction, or else
strengthened them: and had also beesieged Caesar in Nepe, if he had not
fearfully fled into Rome, the which he obtained of the new Pope Pius, as
a safe refuge: but Pope Pius dying within twenty and seven days, the Orsines
also entered the city with a great power, whom the greatest part of the
citizens favored: and the Orsines requested that Caesar might according to
justice be put to death for his manifold murders, or else kept in sure ward
in the castle until that his cause were heard. But while the matter was
prolonged with outrageous altercations: Caesar being afraid stale away out of
his house in the Suburbs into the Popes palace: then his soldiers, who until
that time had valiantly guarded him, perceiving that their Capteines courage
quayled, and that he sought for hyding holes: fled also away, some to one
place and some unto another, leaving him guardlesse among the cruel companies
of his enemies, and forceing him, because he could otherwise stand in no
surety of his life, to desire as a great benefit, to be cast into the
castle of Saint Angelo until that a new Pope were created: the which being
Julius the second, would not set him at liberty, before that he had delivered
up all the Castles and towns that he had in the territory of Rome,
Romandiola, and the duchy of Spolieto. But not long after preparing at Naples
an expedition into Romandiola, he was at the Popes earnest suite imprisoned in
the new castle, and shortly after carried into Hispanie, where he brake
prison and fled unto the king of Navarre, whose near cousine he had
married: and there was slain in a skirmishe, with this event, that not being
known he was spoiled of all his armor and clothes, and left stark naked, and
so brought by one of his servants unto the city of Pompelona, where he had
sometimes been Bishop: a notable document of man's misery. But as I said
before, I passing over in silence all those great worldlinges, whom Fortune
at the last ouerthrewe, will examine the lives and infortunities only of
those, whom the world does account most fortunate, and search whether that
God did not often make them to feel his force, and to confess their own
frailty.

The xxxi. Chapter. The unlucky chances of Augustus.
AND first I will begin with him that thought so well of his own fortune,
that when he sent his nephue Caius into Armenia against the Par^thians, he
wished that the love and good will of Pompey, the hardiness and prowess of
Alexander, and the Fortune of him self might, accompany him.

Neither had he alone this opinion of his good Fortune, but it was also
generally received of all men, in so much that it was decreede and also kept
until the time of Justinian, that the people should cry at the creation of a
new Emperor: Augusto felicior, melior Traiano, God make thee more fortunate
then Augustus, and a better Prince then Traiane. In Augustus (says Pliny)
whom all men do call happy, if that all things in him be rightly esteemed,
shall great fickleness of Fortune be found. First, his repulse in the office of
the master of the horssemen unto his uncle Julius Caesar, and against his will
Lepidus preferred thereunto. The envy and hatred of all men: yea, and of the
posterity, for the proscribing of Cicero his aduauncer and college in the
Consulship: that he had to be his colleges in the Triumuirate, very naughty
men.

Neither was his portion equal: for Antonius had far the greater.

At the battle of Philippi, his sickness and discomfiture by Cassius, and
running away, and hiding of him self, being sick three days and hyding of
him self in a marrish three days, being sore sick. The cares yt he was
wrapped in after his return from Philppi to Rome: where going about to allot
lands throughout all Italy unto the soldiers: the ancient possessours,
with great exclamations and complaints repined thereat: wherein they had their
earnest favorer Lucius Antonius the Consul, and brother unto Antonius the
Triumuir, who would have the soldiers paid out of the goods of those that
were proscribed, and did also put them in hope of the spoil of rich Asia, the
which did make their teeth to water.

Octauian being thus besett on all sides with troubles, coueted to please both
the Senate and people, and also the soldiers: but in very deed he offended
them both: in so much that he had been almost slain by the soldiers, for
commanding at a play a common soldier to be taken up, that sat upon one
of the xiiii. greeces, where, by the law, no man might sit under the degree of
an horseman of Rome. Hereunto adds Pliny, the famine that was in Italy by
reason that Sextus Pompeyus and Domitius would suffer nothing to be brought
thither by Sea.

Then Lucius Antonius, and Fuluia, wife unto Marcus, fell out with Octauian,
and wrote vehement letters unto Antonius ye Triumuir against him, as though he
had attempted to murder his children: Lucius had seventeen legions and the
amity and aid of Ventidius, Asinius, Pollio, and Calenus, who had either of
the^ a great power: and on ye other side Octauian had ye il will of ye Senate,
and of al Italy, for his division of the lands among ye soldiers: the which
brought him into this agony and extremity, that debaseing him self, he
earnestly sued to have the old soldiers to sit in judgment and hear the
controversies between Antonius and him: and afterward, when for all his
laboring to have the matter taken up, the wars brake out, he was almost
intercepted at the siege of Perugia, by a band of sword players that sallied
out, while he was sacrificeing unto ye Gods. After this followed two
incomparable losses of two mighty fleetes by tempest in the Sicylian wars
against Sextus Pompeyus: and then another hyding of him self in a cave. And
also he being vanquished by fight on the Sea, his enemies so egerly pursued
him, that for fear he should be taken, he earnestly desired Proculeus to slay
him. Also Pompeyus capteines, Demochares, and Appolophanes soudenly oppressed
him: from whom he hardly escaped at the last with one only ship, and
afterward walking on foot from Locrie to Rhegium, he saw certain
brigantines of Pompeyus, dragging along the shore: then he thinking them to be
his own, went down unto the water side unto them, and was almost taken: and
forced to seek his safety by flying thorough blind paths, where he was
welneere slain by a bondsman of Aemylius, who thought that he had then good
occasion offered him, now he was alone, to revenge the death of his master
unjustly proscribed by Octauian and his fellows. In his Dalmatian wars was
he twice wounded, once in fight on the right knee with a stone, and at the
siege of a town on both his arms and legs with the fall of a bridge.

Twice also was he greatly endaungered by tempest, all the tacklinges of the
shipp, wherein he was, being broken all into pieces, and the rudder clean
stricken off.

And two great foiles had he in Germany, one under Lollius, the which was more
shameful, then hurtful: and the other under Varus, the which was almost
pernicious, three legions with the General, and the capteines, and all the aid
of the strangers being slain. When news was brought him of this great
overthrow, he commanded watch and ward to be kept in the city, that no
tumult should arise therein, and proroged unto the Presidents of the provinces,
ye time of their government: that the alies might be kept in their obedience by
men of experience, and them that the Provinces knew. He also vowed plays,
which were called the great, unto Jupiter Optimus Maximus, to turn the common
wealth into a better state, as it had been done before at Rome in the Cymbrian
and Sociall wars, when the city stood in great danger of sack and
destruction. For he was so dismayed, that for the space of many months after,
he letting the hairs of his head, and beard grow long, would ever and anon
cry out: Quintili Vare read legiones: Quintilius Varus render thy legions:
and that day did he ever afterward keep for an heavy and mournful day.
Pliny rehearses also for incommodities and infortunities, lack of money to
pay his soldiers their wages, and lack of able men to serve in the wars:
and therefore was he forced, contrary unto the ancient orders, to press
forth 20000. bondmen: a great pestilence in the city, and sundry defacinges
thereof by fire: a great famine and thirste throughout all Italy, often
dangerous mutinies of the soldiers: ye foul scorning and scoffing of the
people at his Majesty, the incomparable loss of his good and noble adopted
sons, the valiant Drusus, and Marcus Agrippa: and the towardly young
gentleman Marcus Marcellus, his sisters son, and Caius, and Julius his
daughters sons by Agrippa: but greater grief for the lewd disposition of
other of his children: his only natural child Iulia conspiring his death, and
openly playing the harlot: wherefore he banished her: but her infamous life was
such a shame unto him, that he brake the matter touching her punishment unto
the Senate by libell being absent: and a long time after absteyned from al
company: and oftentimes was he minded to put her to death, but continued
still so severe against her, that he could never be entreated to revoke her:
although that many great men made great suit for her, and also the whole people
of Rome, did oftentimes request it: but being at one time very importunate,
they so chafed him, that in his choler, he wished them all such wives, and such
daughters. The like rigor also did he use toward her daughter Iulia, who
followed her mothers steps, and gave commandment, that the child whereof she
was delivered after her condemnation, should be destroyed: and also left order
by his will, that neither of them should be buried in his Sepulcher. Moreover
her son Agrippa Posthumous, whom he had adopted, and ordained for his
successor in the Empire, did he for his vile and cruel nature disinherite,
and banish unto Surrentum. But afterward when he saw that for all this he would
not become more tractable, but every day more madder then other, he
transported him into an Island, where he was kept with a guard of soldiers:
and provided by a decree of the Senate, that he should be kept there during
his life: and at all mention made of him, or the two Iuliae, he would sigh
deeply, and break out into a Greek verse.

O would to God I had never wedde wife.
And without children had ended my life.
And used never otherwise to call them, then his three botches, and eating
cankers. Of diseases he had store, the dropsy, swelling sides, the impetige
thoroughout all his body, his left hippe, thigh, and leg so ill, that he
oftentimes halted, and was lame thereof: and also he sometimes felt the
forfinger of his right hand so weak, that being benumbed and contracted with
cold, he could scarce bring it for to write, yea with the help of a ring of
horn. He fell into many great and dangerous sicknesses, throughout all parts
of his life: but his greatest fit was immediately after he had conquered the
fierce Cantabri, at what time (says Pliny) the greatest part of death was
received into his body, his liver was quite marde with distillations, so that
he being brought into despair of recovery, entered of necessity into a
contrary, and doubtful kind of cure: because hot fomentations had done no
good, he was constrained to be cured by cold, thoroughe the advice of Musa his
Physician. Some other sicknesses had he that did take him every year, and
would return always at a certain time. For mostly he was sick about that
time of the year, that he was borne, and at the beginning of the Spring, his
sides would be swollen, and in Southern tempests he was troubled with the
Rheum, wherewithal his body being sore shaken and weakened, he could not
well endure either cold or heat. In the winter he was defended with four
coats, and a thick gown, and all the forepart of his shirt that covered the
bulk of his body was woollen: he woare also breches, and netherstockes, things
very rarely used in those days. But in the su^mer he would lie with his
chamber door open, yea, and oftentimes in open galeries, where spoutes of cold
water should continually run, and a man stood by him still fanning his face.
But the Sun was he not able to abide, no not in the winter: nor ever walked
abroad, yea at home, but in a great broad hall. Moreover he never traveled
but in a licter, and mostlie in the night, but so softly, and with so small
iournyes, that he would be two days in riding to Tibur, or Prenest, twelve
miles from the city. Besides all those dangerous diseases was his life often
assaulted with a great number of perilous conspiracies: first of young
Lepidus, then of Varro, Murena, Fannius, and Cepio, and anon after of Marcus
Egnatius, and then of Plautius Rufus, and Lucius Paulus: and besides all these
of Lucius Audasius, a verlet that had been condemned for forging of false
writings, and one impotent both by nature and years, and of Epicadus a
mungrell, having a Parthian to one of his parents, and last of all of
Telephus, a bondslaue and nome^clator unto a woman, to tell her the names of
men: for he was not free from the danger of men of ye most vilest condition.
This rascal roge had practiced to murder him and the Senate: because the
fool had surely thought and beleft, that ye Empire was allotted to him by the
loving Ladies of destiny. Moreover once was there taken near unto his
chamber, having deceived the watch and porters, a drudge of the Illyrian army
being armed with a woodknife. And besides these conspiracies rehearsed by
Suetonius, we read in other of one made by Cornelius Cinna, and his
complicies. Unto these infortunities Pliny adds the great suspicion that he
had of Fabius, and the disclosing of his secreates, and his last care, the
cogitations and counselles of his wife and her son Tiberius: who are thought
to have poisoned him with figs, fearing lest that if he lived longer, he
would have disherited Tyberius, or else have joined young Agrippa with him:
finally he died, leaving to be heir of his large Empire, not his own son,
but his enemies, Tyberius son to Domitius.

The xxxij. Chapter. Of Traiane.
TRAIANE that conquered the fierce Daces with their valiant king Decebalus,
that had foiled many Roman Capitaines, and also subdued the Armenians, and
Parthians, a great part of Arabia, and went so far Eastward with victorious
ensigns, as never did Roman, either before or since: and wrote unto the
Senate, that he had conquered such nations as they never heard off before, nor
could name: yet deserved not the name of an happy man. For straight after his
return out of Armenia and Parthia into Syria, was he in great danger of death
at Antioche by an earthquake: the which ouerthrewe and quite destroyed the
whole city, and infinite were the number of them that were slain with the
fall of the houses, and scarce one or two men escaped unslain or unhurt. And
so great was the Emperors army, and so great the resort of Ambassadors, and
other out from all nations unto him, that there was scarce any nation, or
city, that escaped scotfree from this detriment and massacre: that in very
deed all the whole world, and the nations that were under the Roman Empire
received thereby a mighty calamity. The Emperor himself was merueylously
saved, being taken out at a window by one of a strange stature, and far
passing man's measure. And afterward also, when he following Alexanders the
great his steps, advanced still further and further his co^quering Eagles,
sailing the redd sea: the Armenians and Parthians, whom he had before subdued,
revolted, sleaing the garrisons that he had placed among them, and also in
battle Maximus, whom he had sent with a power to reduce them unto their
duty: yea, and in the end the Parthians forced him to let them have a king of
their own nation, the which did make frustrate all his toil taken in the
East. Also the Jews that dwelt about Cyrene revolted, and taking arms, slew
of Romans and Greeks with more then barbarous cruelty, two hundredth and
twenty thousand: and doing the like also in Cyprus and Egypt, murdered two
hundredth and forty thousand. Hereunto will I add his great peril at the
siege of the city of the Agarenes, where the enemies directed all their shot
against him, killing every man that stood nere unto him. Then followed
fearful prodigies, terrible thunder, lightenings, whirlewinds, monstrous
hail: and that which of all other is most miraculous, as often as ever the
Romans assaulted, or encountered the enemy, they were forced by lightening
sent from heaven to retire. Then soudenly came there to remove the siege a
monstrous might of flies, the which plagued the Romans in their cupps and
dishes, leaving neither drink nor meat free from their filthy contamination
and corruption. The which forced the Emperor to break up the siege, and to
depart out of the country, and immediately after fell sick: and then the
Parthians deposed the king, that he had appointed them, and chose an other
according unto their ancient orders: to revenge the which dishonor Traiane
was not able, waxing every day worse and worse, and finally fell into a
dropsy, whereof he dyed, not leaving behind him a child to uphold his house
and name.

The xxxiij. Chapter. Of Seuerus Emperor of Rome.
SEVERUS that got the Roman Empire by sleaing of his three competitors, and
four bloody battles, and entered Parthia, taking Babylon, Seleucia, and
Ctesiphon, where the king narrowly escaped with the loss of his children,
wives, mother, treasure, and furniture of householde, and also made great
conquestes in Arabia, and Arobenica, and forced the kings of the Armenians and
Osrhoenes to submit themselves unto his mercy: felt also the tickle turning of
fortunes wheel. For that I may omit his youth, full of furies and crimes, and
often accusations, and how he was to his great shame, openly arreigned for
adultery: and the open bitcherie of his shameless latter wife Iulia, whom
he witting and knowing, did suffer more then either the majesty of an
Emperor, yea, or the honesty of a man could bear: was he not forced for
lack of victualles, and necessaries, and the great sickness in his camp,
speedily to forsake the countries and places that he had conquered in the
East, and to return home contented only with the spoil, the which he
dearly bought, with the loss of infinite of his soldiers lives.

Furthermore, he twice besieged the pelting town of Atrae in Arabia, and
twice was constrained to depart with great dishonor, and loss: his soldiers
being either so affrighted, or else so disobedient, that not one of the
Europian soldiers could be gotten to the assault, when that a great part of
the walls lay flat to the ground: moreover, when one of his Capitaines told
the Emperor, that he would undertake to win ye town with 550. Europians,
and the Emperor did bid him take them: the captain answered in the hearing
of all the army: But where shall I have them? Neither had his ambition, any
better success in Britain: For when that he would not receive the submission
of the rebels, but would needs tame them by the sword, that he might obtain
the glorious title of Britannicus, or conqueror of Britain: he reaped almost
no other fruit by marching with his victorious ensigns even unto ye furthest
part of the East, then ye loss of fifty thousand men thorough sickness, lack
of victuals, the inclemencie of the air, and diverse other chau^ces: finally
endamaging the Britains, who wisely still fledd before him into their safe
bogges and marrishes. Add hereunto how at the battle at Lions against
Albinus, who fought for the Empire, he was unhorsed and fled out of the field,
casting away his coat armor, that he might not be known: and hidd himself
in a marrishe. Spartianus says, that in this battle he fell into great
peril by the foundering of his horse, and then had such a blow with a pellet
of lead, that his army thincking that he had been slain, were about to
choose an other Emperor. Furthermore, what intolerable torments did the great
discord of his two sons bring unto him, when that the one never liked of any
thing that did please the other? and in all quarrels, controversies, games,
finally, in all things they were extreme adversaries one unto the other:
neither could their hateful hearts ever be reconciled, although that their
woeful father, fearing that their discord would be either the destruction of the
Empire or of his house, or both: sought al means to agree their dissenting
minds: putting also to death many yt were about the^, by whose flattery and
lewd counsel he thought them to be corrupted.

But in what continual fear he led his life, his immesurable murdering of
above forty Senators, and infinite mean men without arreigning of them,
does manifestly bewray. This Africane is truly said to have revenged in his
gown the cruel destruction of his country of Carthage by the Romans.
Whereof arose that saying of the Senate after his death, that it had been well
for the people of Rome: if that he had either never been borne, or else never
had died: the one being spoken for his cruelties, the other for his valiancie,
and good government. But among all other, put to death for suspicion of
treason, I cannot forget two: the one Plautianus, to whom he had as it were in
a manner imparted the Empire, yet lost his life upon a very unlikely
accusation, and only credited, because that the Emperor had dreamed that
Albinus some time his competitour, was alive: the other Apronianus, who was
condemned absent, because that one had heard his Noursse say, that she had
dreamed that he should be Emperor. So fearful was he, left his good child
Antoninus should be put from the Empire, who drew his swoorde to have thrust
his father in at the back, as he road with him: if that his servant that
road behind, had not cried out unto him to take heed of his son, who was
about to murder him. And finally, he dyed not of his old torment of the gout,
but as men thought, helped forward by his wicked son Antonine: and so was
held in an earthen pot, whom all the world had not holden, as he him self
said, a little before his death, when that he had commanded his sepulchrall
pott to be brought unto him.

The xxxiiij. Chapter. Of Constantine the great.
THE greatenesse of Constantine, who reduced into one Monarchy the distracted
parts of the Empire, and to the unspeakable profit of mankind, first
established by Emperial power the faith of Christ throughout the world, the
foul unworthy murdering of his own wife, Fausta, his son Crispus, and his
sisters son, and no small number of his friends, the ungodly restitution of
the archeheretike Arius, and the more wicked banishment of that pillar of the
church Athanasius, whom yet some hold, he revoked by testament: and if some
belie him not, his filthy disease of the dropsy, did much diminishe: whereof
he was by a byworde called Tracala, the first ten years of his reign a very
good and excellent Prince: the ten next, a thief and a murderer: but the ten
last, a pupil for his immoderate expenses. But as his Martial acts, but only
against his coparceners in the Empire Licinius, and Maxentius were not great:
so was his danger very great, when that his father in law Herculeius came
under color of friendshipp unto him, traitorously to have killed him: but it
being disclosed unto Constantine by his wife, cost her father his life. And no
less also was his fear, and hofulnesse how he might honorably administer
these perilous wars against Maxentius: the which he thought that of him
self he was unable to do, and therefore carefully studied day and night, what
Gods favor it were best for him to obtain by devout service, that was able to
advance his true worshippers unto all honor, and also keep them from
falling: Eusebius. in vita Constable.
at what time it pleased of his accustomed unutterable goodness, Christ the
true God to manifest and show him self unto him, and told him, that if he
would vanquish, he should serve under his banner and trophey of the cross.

The xxx^. Chapter. Of Justinian the Emperor.
Justinian recovered from the Vandales, Africa, and Italy, and Sicyle from the
Goths, all the which countries had been long possessed by these Barbarians,
and valiantly repressed within their fines with many disco^fitures, the unquiet
Persians, and all other Barbarians: so that he only of all the
Constantinopolitane Emperors deserves the name of a free Emperor, says
Agathius: yea, and not being contented with martial glory, wanne no less
honor by reducing the two thousand confuse tomes of the law into fifty
orderly books: yea, and furthermore by suppressing of all false sects
thoroughout the Empire, and establishing in all places the one and only true
and sound faith of Christ: and finally for his sumptuous buyldings of cities,
churches, palaces, burses, baines, and to be short, of all kinds of private
and public edifices he far surpassed the praises of all Princes, either
before or since him: yet deserves he not to be accounted among ye number of
the happy. For the Persian often foiled in fight his capteines, and as for him
self, he was never in the field, and often forced him to redeem peace with
money, yealding up of Castles and towns.

Yea, in one voyage the Persian overcame a great part of Syria, and all
Cilicia, wanne the cities of Surum, Berrhea, and Antioche, the mightiest city
of all ye East, except Alexandria, the which he wholly consumed with fire, except
the great church, and also constreined a great number of cities to redeem
their safety with great sums of money: as also Apamea, Edessa, and
Sergiopolis were delivered from his rage by miracle: and to augment the
unworthiness thereof, Justinian did not only not revenge this outrage, but
also procured his speedy return with fifty thousand gyldens presently paid,
and so many yearly to be paid for ever. Moreover, the year before this woeful
waste, the Hunes passing over the river of Hister, miserably spoiled, and burnt
a great part of Europe: and never did any nation so much hurt in those
parts: for they wasted all from the Ionian gulf, even unto the Suburbs of
Constantinople, and razed two very strong castles in Illyricum, and the city
Cassandrea, and returned home with infinite treasure, and sixescore thousand
prisoners, not one man once resisting them. And afterward returning again,
they wanne the Chersonesus, and passed by the straight of Abydos and Sestos
over into Asia: where when they had spoiled at pleasure, they returned home in
safety: after this, breaking out the third time into Illyria, they wanne by
assault the strong city of Thermopolis, and wasted all Greece except
Peloponesus, and then reduced their power home without impeachement or damage.

Furthermore in the latter end of his reign, they again with their wonted
cruelty, lechery, and impiety, wasted all Thrace even unto Melantis a
village within twelve miles of Constantinople, where they encamped them selves.
The which did not only make the common people to fly thick and three fold
out of the city for fear of siege: but also appauled the hearts of the
magistrates, and the Emperor him self, who having not above three hundredth
soldiers, commanded that all the ornaments of the Churches near aboutes, and
in all places from Blacerne unto Pontus Euxinus, and Bosphorus, should be
either brought into the city, or else transported over into Asia. And
although that his old approved captain Belisarius putting on again his long
left armor, (as one whose strength withering age had long before wasted)
discomfited them in fight, and caused them, having no great harm, to retire a
little back: yet could they not be expelled out of the country, but by a
great sum of Greek gold. And before this time had the Misians slain, with
his captain Sotyris with his army, and took the great treasure that he
carried to pay the army that served against the Persians, and to maintain
those wars. Moreover, the destruction of the two Sees of the Empire, did much
diminish his felicity.

Rome being taken by Totylas king of the Goths, and three parts of the walls
broken down, and all the houses, in the whole city burnt, and all the people
driven out of it, and no man suffered to inhabit there: but Constantinople was
set on fire in a rebellion of the people against the Emperor for his cruelty
and covetousness: the which fire consumed all the Churches, Palaces, baines,
court houses, market places, Burses, and all notable places and monuments that
were left after that cruel fire, that happened in the reign of Leo the first.
The rebels also did put the Emperor into such fear, that at their request,
he put away and banished two wise, and faithful Counselors, the captain of
the guarde, and that famous Lawyer Tribonianus his high chancellor, and yet
could not this appease their fury, but that they adorned with the Emperial
Diadem one Hypatius, a near cosen of Anastasius that was Emperor before
Justinians uncle: the which so dismayed Justinian, that he had s^ed out of the
city, if he had not been stoutly retained by his proud wife: who said that
she would endure to live one day in banishment, and without the name of
Empress: and flatly affirmed that she would doubtless dye there Empress.
These words of his wife, made him to prepare him self to tarry out the
storm, the which he overcame shortly after very fortunately, what through his
wise winning by money of the blewe faction: for this city, (as a great many of
other) was divided into the blewe and green factions, who were continually
enemies one unto the other, before that his tyranny had caused them to join
together to oppugn their common enemy: and also by the valiancie of
Belisarius, who sailing out of the palace (the porche whereof was burnt) slew
thirty thousand of the rebels, with their newly created Emperor, and his
brother: and had quite quieted the city, if that the Emperor had not
maintained the fury of the blewe faction against the green, letting them not
only to dispossess them of all that ever they had: but also not to permit any
man to receive them into their houses: wherefore they were forced to forsake
the city, and to stand in the high ways, and kill, rob, and spoil all men
that traveled.

But beside these manifold mischiefs, there happened also many earthquakes,
to put him in mind of his maker: twice was Constantinople sore shaken, but the
second time did far pass all that ever ye city before had felt, both for
the strange time of ye year, being in Winter, the long continuance, being
diverse days the overthrowing of a great number of houses and edifices, and
losing the joints of more: and the slaying of infinite people, among whom was
the Lord steward of the Emperors house, slain in his bed by the fall of a
fair carved stone: finally, the fall and fear were so great, that a good
while after the people became very religious, holding many solemn
supplications, often frequenting the churches, exercising many charitable
deeds, (and that great calamity had supplied unto them store of maimed and
impouerished men, upon whom to bestow them) yea, many quite abandoning
house, goods, and all earthly honor and pleasures, sought how wholly to serve
God. This earthquake did also take and destroy Berytus, a beautiful city of
Phoenicia, the whole Isle of Cos, and sundry cities of Aeolis and Ionia.

And another earthquake also was there, yt quite ouerthrewe all the walls and
building of Antioche, and slew above four thousand and eight hundredth people.
Moreover, a third shoke all Boetia and Achaia, and all along the Criseaen
gulf, and infinite other places: overthrowing the houses, and ouerwhelming men
in them, and among all other, laid along eight cities. Then also chanced
there as strange a pestilence, the which as it did pass all that are
committed to memory, for the long continuance thereof, being fifty years, so
may it well match with the woorst, for large dominion and mortality: as yt
which by Nycephorus his report, raged throughout all parts of the Roman
Empire, and left few men of that age untouched. This plague against the which
(as writes Procopius) who lived in that time (there could never remedy be
found) began in Egypt, and crept still forward into al countries, leaving, no,
not any obscure place untouched, nor never taking one person twice. The manner
of the disease was this.

As many as were taken therewithal, did think that some man had given them a
blow, whereupon they fell sick incontinently on a souden. This strange kind
of taking, made many at the first to seek, but in vain the cure of it by holy
words and prayers: for like unto men possessed with ill spirits, they knew
not their friends, neither would they give ear unto them: yet upon some did
it come in their sleep. They were incontinently taken with an ague, but yet so
that neither the old heat, nor color of their body was any thing altered,
no inflammation had they, but only a coughe, so that there seemed no danger.
But upon some the first day, on other the second, but on most the third
would^ there a botche break out, but upon diverse men in diverse places.

Some again would do nothing but sleep soundly, but more were wild mad,
and would often cry out, that some haled and assaulted them: wherewithal they
would run backward, breaking their necks down the stairs, and other did
run into rivers, to quench their thirst. Some dyed the first day, but most
many days after. Three months did this plague continue at Constantinople, at
the first killing but few, but afterward five thousand on a day, and also
more often ten thousand: in so much, that a great number of rich men, having
lost all their servants by this disease, dyed also them selves, rather through
lack of keeping, then by sickness, and then also remained unburied. Yet was
not this disease contagious, that one man did take it of an other, and also
this good quality it had, that it would take no man twice. And now in the
afflicted city were seen no Arts exercised, no shoppes open, and most for
fear, leaving their former life, did put on new manners, and wholly dedicated
them selves unto religion and godliness.

And also after a certain course of years, the same plague (which had never
clean ceased) began again rufully to rage: consuming almost al those that
the first had spared, and now very many would fall down stark dead very
soudenly at the first taking, and far more men died then women. And yet a
greater mishap chanced unto this unhappy Emperor: which was, that he had so
proud, so covetous, so cruel, so ungodly a woman to his wife: who made him,
who ruled the whole world, to be her vile slave at beck to commit all
outrages: first to banish from their Sees, two godly Bishops of Rome, because
they would not wickedly consent unto the unjust restitution of the Heretic
Anthemius, one deprived for his impiety of the Sea of Constantinople by a
general counsel held in that City in the presence of the Emperor himself:
the first of them (Syluerius) was shorn, and thrust into a Monastery, but
the latter (Vigilius) was whipped almost to death: and afterward having
escaped their cruel hands, was drawn out of the church by a rope fastened
about his neck along all the city of Constantinople, and cast into a paineful
prison, there to be pined away with water and bread, given him in small
quantity: and then afterward to satisfy her stately stomach against Belisamis
his proud wife, he against all right and honor, berefte him of his sight, who
was the light of his Martial glory.

But here stayed not his infortunitie, for in his latter days he him self
falling into that heresy, that Christ did take upon him an impassible body:
and being wilfully bent to have all men follow his wicked folly, most cruelly
persecuted the Catholics, banishing among other Entichius Bishop of
Constantinople, and was busied about the drawing of a precepte for the
bannishment of Anastasius Bishop of Antioche, or as then they called it, after
the reedification by Justinian, Theopolis, a man of all the Bishops of the
East far most famous for profound learning in divinity and also for
integrity of life, because that he would not subscribe unto his ungodly
gear: but he could not finish his wicked work, being stricken by the hand of
almighty God, whereof he died without issue of his body. But to wipe out that
indelible blotte of impiety, it is reported by his favorers, that he
commanded by his last will that Entichius should be restored, ye which thing as
it may make us charitably to judge that it saved his soul from the
intolerable torments of hell: so no doubt must we confess that the same
bitter remorse of conscience, and acknowledging of his ungodly dooinges, did
presently on earth much aggrauate his griefs.

The xxxvi. Chapter. Of Heraclius the Emperor.
AS Heraclius for his singular piety, great humiltie before God, suppliaunt
and often prayers, and assured confidence in Christ, obtained the rare honor
to recover from the Persian, Asia, Africa, and Egypt: so after that he fell
into the impiety of the wicked Monothlets and married his brothers daughter,
and to color his fault made the like lawful unto all men: Mahumet bereft him
of Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia with Jerusalem, Antioche, and Damascus: and also
displeased God abridged his days by a strange and most painful disease. For
his unchaste members were so conuulsed upward, that his unclean yard standing
continually stiff, did whenever he made water, defile his face, and
blasphemous mouth, vnlest that a broad boorde were tied above his nauel to
keep down the filthy spouting Urine.

The xxxvij. Chapter. Of Michael Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople.
MIchael Paleologus recovered from the Latins, or the christians of the west
church the French men, and Venetians, the Empire of Constantinople, and was a
Prince by the report of the Greek chronicles, inferior to none of his
predecessors in goodly personage, strength of body, Princely Majesty,
skilfulnes in arms, prudence, eloquence, valiaunce, and speediness in doing
of al exploits: and yet found he fortune a false flatterer, rather then a
faithful freende. For that I may omit his great dangers of death for
suspicion of treason, in the reign of John Ducas, and also afterward in the
time of Theodorus Lascaris: when for fear of death procured unto him by
spiteful envy, he fled unto the Turk that reigned at Cogin: in short time
after that he had wrongfully gotten the Empire, deposing the rightful young
prince, whose governor he was, and fortunatly recovered the city of
Constantinople, from the Latins, and all such countries of the Empire, as
they then held: was Alexius Caesar, his delight, his trusty freende, through
whose valiance he had taken Constantinople, and the rest of the Empire, and
therefore had heaped upon him so many and great honors as never were given
unto any private man: this his fortunate captain, was taken prisoner by the
Despote of Epirus, and Aetolia, having lost in battle his mighty army. Then
also began he to fall into fear of loosing the Empire: the which he had
wickedly won: and therefore to establish it, he contrary unto three oaths
(for so often was he sworn to be true) shamfully deprived ye true Emperor
young John Lascaris of his sight, whom he had before bereft of his Empire: for
the which detestable fact to abate his swelling pride, was he excommunicated
by Arsenius the Patriarche: and a great number of days stood before the
Church porche in suppliaunt manner, and habit, pitifully praying the hardened
Patriarch to restore him unto the communion of Christ's church: but al in vain
until that by craft he had caused a counsel to depose the Patriarch. And also
for the revenge of this cruel wrong done unto the young Emperor Constantine,
the Prince of the Bulgares, who had married his sister, made a lamentable rode
into the Empire: in the which he so spoiled all Thrace, so that in that whole
mighty Province there could for a time scarce be one husbandeman, or Ox
seen: he also slew, and took prisoners all the whole army of the Emperor,
returning out of Thessalie, not one man, horse, or cattle fleeing from his
fingers, except the Emperor him self, who escaped almost miraculously by
privy stealing away over the mounteines unto the Sea side. Where, as it were
by Gods providence, he happened upon two Latin galleis, who were sailing unto
Constantinople, but then were happily come a landed in that place, for fresh
water, a boorde one of whom he went, choosing rather to trust their doubtful
faith, then to fall into the hands of the bloody Bulgares. And after this
followed a shameful loss of a flourishing army under the conducte of his
brother: the which was discomfited by the Dispote of Thessalie with five
hundredth men, the Emperials being afraid of their own shadow. But afterward
a far more harmefull fear took him of invasion and loss of his Empire by
Charles the king of Naples: to prevent the which mischief, after that he had
by large gifts stirred up the king of Sicyl, and other of his neighbors
against him, at the length he was glad to sue for help unto the Bishop of
Rome, and contrary unto the laws of his country, to submit himself, and
his Empire unto his jurisdiction, granting three articles: the first that at
their divine service mention should be made of the Bishop of Rome among the
four Patriarchs: the second that it should be lawful for all men to appeal
in matters Ecclesiastical unto old Rome (for they used also to call
Constantinople Rome, but with this addition, new:) the which should be accepted
for the highest, and more absolute Court: the third, that in all spiritual
things the principality should be given unto it. By this cowardly submission,
as he escaped the thretened danger of the Neapolitan, so fell he into a far
greater peril of the displeased people, who did so abhor him for this
degenerate subjection, that he looked every day to be deposed or slain by
them: in the which hofull state he continued all his life's time: the peoples
indignation and hatred toward him being nothing by long process of time
appeased. And on ye other side ye Turk scourged him in Asia, miserably wasting
and burning his Doninions in those parts, and subdued all the Countries from
Mare Ponticum, and Galatia, even unto Mare Lycium, and the River of Eurimedon.
Furthermore I can not omit his great anguishe of heart, and the deep sighs
that he fette: when that he fell sick in his voyage against the unquiet
despote of Thessalia, at a village called Pachonius, the which place putting
him in mournful memory of his ungodly, and unjust bereauing the godly man
Pachonius of his sight: made him incontinently truly to despair of his
recovery. Neither was frowning fortunes spite satisfied with his doleful
death, but also she caused his only son, unto whom he had with rare
benignity imparted the Empire, while he lived himself, ingratefully to deny
him not only Emperial funerals, but also christian burial in sacred place: and
this only did childs duty extort of him, that he commanded him to be carried
forth privily in the night time out of the camp, and great store of earth to
be hurled upon him, that the wild beasts and birds should not tear into
pieces his Fathers, and the Emperors body. The cause of this discourteous
dealing with the blisselesse body of this noble Emperor, proceeded not of any
wicked stomache of the son against his father, (who was inferior unto no
child in piety toward his parent,) but because the country laws, and the
states of the Empire would not suffer him to be buried in any of their churches
who had, they said, wickedly revolted from ye true church unto the false and
malignant of Rome.

The xxxviij. Chapter. Of Charles the great.
CHarles the great did for princely personage, rare strength of body, valiant
courage, and martial prowess and glory, far pass any Christian Prince
that ever was, and also was inferior unto none in learning, wisdom, piety,
and all virtues: unto him came there Ambassadors out of all parts of the
world to desire either peace, or freendship: yea, out of Afrike, Persia, and
Greece: he had restored again into the west the Empire, which had been
transferred wholly into Thrace and Constantinople: and largely reigned over
Gallia, Germany, Italy, Hungary, and Slauonie: the puisance of whose arms
the Almaines, the Italians, the Lumbardes, the Hispaniardes the Moors, the
Bohemians, the Bauares, the Hunnes, the Slauoines, the Saracenes, the Greeks
did feel; of whom did he triumph. Moreover he reigned forty seven years,
and lived threescore and twelve, and had three valiant sons, and with rare
felicity loved also to have the trial of the valiancie of their sons, and
yet was he forced to feel the manifold incommodities of wretched man. First
the Colonie of Eresburg was won by the Saxons, and almost all the Garrison
slain that was placed there to bridle their irruptions, and the Provinces
adjoining wasted, and the sacred churches every where burnt. All the heavy
carriages of his army, as well his own private plate, and household stuff, as
of all the whole army were lost in his return out of Hispaine in his first
voyage thither. Guielo his high Constable was slain with all his power by the
Saxons: eight thousand horses were lost by contagion in an expedition against
the Hunnes. Two dangerous conspiracies were there made to murder him, the one
by certain noble men of the house of Austratia, the other by his own base
son Pipine, and his adherents. Then at one time were four heavy messages
brought him: that the commissioners that he had sent to take up soldiers in
Saxon to serve against the Hunnes, and also his old officers there, were
slain by the rebelling people, and that a power of the Abrodites, a fierce
nation in arms, coming to stay this tumult was slain with their King Vizen
by an ambushe: that his soldiers that kept the frontiers of Hispaine had a
great overthrow at the siege of Burselona, and finally that Gerolde
Liefetenant of Bauare was slain with a chosen band of five hundrethe horse by
the rebelling Hunnes. Moreover he could come no farther from his creation and
Coronation of Emperor at Rome, then Spoleto: but that an horrible earthquake
took him about the second hour of the night, to the great terror and
damage of Italy, France, and Germany. For some hills suncke into the
ground, in other places new mountains were raised up by prodigious casting
up of the earth, some towns were thrown down, other swallowed up with hideous
gulf, the swifte course of Noble rivers was driven back, the Sea in some
places ran backward and forsook the shore, but in other ouerflowed and
drowned all the country. The city of Rome was fowly deformed with ruins, and
the Church of Saint Peter almost quite destroyed. The times and seasons of
the year were also turned into their contraries: for the winter was warm, and
of the temperature of the spring: and upon Midsummer day was there a hoare
frost hard frosen, as if it had been at Christmas: and after this trembling of
the earth, and the threttes, as it were of pleasant Summer taken away, from the
world, did there a pestilent Autumn or harvest follow, to show unto this new
Emperor the power of the almighty Emperor, and that his advancement unto the
highest degree of earthly honor, should not make him forget the reverence and
service due unto the heavenly highenesse. Then four years before he died,
buried he almost with continuated funerals his two valiant sons, Pipine and
Charles, the one at Millan, the other in Bauier. And two years after this
domestical incomparable damage, followed the cutting off of the third battle
of his army at Ronceual at their return out of Hispaine: no place is more
famous for the discomfiture of the Frenchemen, nor more celebrated in books
and songs in all countries of christendom, namely for the death of his cosen
Rouland, and other the flowers of France: and that, which does heap the
harm, he was now so worn with withering age, that he was not able to stir
to seek the revenge thereof, but died in this dishonor.

The xxxix. Chapter. Of Charles the fifth.
CHarles the fifth, was ye mightiest Emperor since Charles the great, both for
his large dominions, and also Martial acts. His fortunate birth gave him ye
kingdoms of ye Hispaines, Mallorca, Minorca, Sardina, Sicyl, Naples, and of
the West Indies, and the rich and large dominions of base Germany, or the
low country: and his great towardliness, the Empire, but his valiaunce, the
Duches of Mylan and Placentia, with the rich and mighty kingdoms of Mexico
and Peru in the North and South parts of the West Indies, with many other
countries in those regions, and the kingdom of Tunes in Africa. He sacked the
proud Lady of the world Rome, he subdued the Flore^tines, and the Senese,
depriving them both of liberty, and brought the stately states of all Italy
to be at beck. He made the stout Almanes to stoop, and achieved an absolute
conquest of Germany, he recovered the Duchy of Geldres, and the Earldome of
Zulphen from the Duke of Cleave, and forced him suppliantly to sue for pardon
and peace. He often discomfited the french power, and made many honorable
voyages into France: and valiantly with great detriment repelled the Turk,
when with a huge power of seven hundredth thousand men, as it were with
monstrous gaping jaws, he thought to have devoured all Germany: yea, and with
rare felicity he took prisoners almost all the Christian princes, yt were or
had been his enemies. Frauncis the french king, Henry the king of Navarre,
Clemens the Pope, Ihon Frederick Prince electour of Saxon, Eruest Duke of
Brunswicke, and the lusty Lantgraue of Hessen, and William duke of Cleave came
in, and yealded them selves unto his mercy. And yet did this fondling of
fortune as it may yet seem, often feel her fickleness. For his Admiral that
brought him out of Hispaine into Italy, to be crowned Emperor at Bologna, was
in his return, taken with all his fleet by Turkishe pirates: then made he in
person a frustrate and fruitless expedition into Province, where he lost above
20000. men, and afterward a more unfortunate unto Angier in Africa: from
whence he departed, the city not won, losing by tempest a great part of his
navy, yea, within few hours 140 ships, and 15. galleys, and almost all his
ordinance, and Martial furniture and provision, and hardly susteyning the
incessant invasions of his fierce enemies, and more hardly the violent surges
of the raging sea, which now again drowned many, and threw thereon the
pernicious of the enemy: in so much, that it was the news in all places, that
the Emperor was drowned: and also during all the time of his aboade on the
land, it rayned continually, so that the soldiers could not rest their tired
bodies, on the wet and ouerflowed ground, but only a little refreshed their
decayed strength, by slumbering on their weapons: and also the ships; in whom
their victuals were, being lost by tempest, they were forced to kyl many of
their horses to sustain their starued bodies, and to cast the rest into the
sea at their departure, for lack of shipping. After this followed the great
discomfiture in battle, given unto his valiant captain, the Marquis of
Guasto, at Ceresoles in Piemont. And five years after, he had tamed the
Almanes, they through the reuolting of his capteines, Morice Duke of Saxon, and
Albert Marquis of Brandenburge, who then besieged Mayndenburg, and the help of
the French king Henry, not only recovered their liberty, and forced him to
set free John Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue, but also to save him self by
flying over the mountains of Tyroll by torche light. Immediately after this
dishonor, ensued the frustrate siege of Metz, won in this tumult from the
Empire by the French men: the which he brake up before he had ever assaulted
it, casting a wonderful mass of Martial furniture into the river, that he
might thereby more easily reduce his army, brought very weak by many
incommodities. The common opinion is, that he lost there above forty thousand
men, besides the incomparable detriment of excellent horses, and innumerable
other things: the acerbitie whereof did not so much vex his mind, as the
loss of his fame and estimation. So that the sorrow conceived for this most
grievous injury of spiteful fortune, did quite break his heart, which at
other times had been invincible, and specially seeing that the exployt was not
achieved, whereof he him self was precisely the only author and conductour.
Com. Ludo. Guiacciard.
Wherefore after this cruel chance, he for the most part lay hidden, and was
sick both in body and mind, and within three years after gave up all his
inheritaunces, conquestes, and purchases unto his son Philip, and the
government of the Empire unto his brother Ferdinando: and utterly lothing the
world, enclosed him self in an house of religion, where he dyed at the age of
fifty and eight years.

The xl. Chapter. Of Solomon king of the Israelites.
SOlomon passed for renoune of wisdom, riches, and largeness of dominions,
all the kings that ever reigned over the peculiar people of God. For he is
said to have extended his kingdom from Euphrates, to the Syrian, and the
Egyptian seas, and to have subdued by arms the Cananites that inhabited upon
and about mount Lybanus, who until that day had never been subject unto the
Israelites, but Solomon made them all bondmen: and from thence along time after
did the Israelites fetch all their slaves. He also built many great cities, as
Asotus, Magedon, Zazarum, and Palmyra, and walled all the towns in Israel
that were not before defensed: he kept continually forty thousand horses for
field chariots, (unless there be a fault in the number, for in the third of
the Kings are numbered but a hundredth and forty chariots) and 12000 horsemen.
He built him also a great fleet, the which he used to send unto Ophir for
gold and precious stones, and at one voyage they brought him four hundredth
and fifty talents of gold, and at an other, seven hundredth three score and
six. Yea, there was yearly brought unto Solomon, six hundredth three score
and six talents of gold (the which do amount, seeing that at the least
every one of their talents were seventy pounds, fourteen hundredth and six
and fifty thousand, eight hundredth seventy five pound of our money) besides
that which they that were appointed to gather up the kings revenues, customs,
and tributes, and the merchants, the legates of all countries, all the kings of
Arabia, yea, all the princes of the world did use to present him, which was with
precious stones, horses, spices, sweet odors, and what so ever was accounted
precious. So that not only all the vessels belonging unto his table were of
gold: he also had his statelye throne of Iuorie, adorned with many grieces
and Lions of gold: but silver was in no estimation in the city of Jerusalem,
where it was as common as stones, and the sumptuous Cedar, as wild Mulberie
trees that grew in every hedge: and the Israelites became so rich, that not one
of them did any bodily labor, but their necessity therein was altogether
wholly supplied by strangers, they only following arms.

But nothing did so much declare the great riches of the king, as the
sumptuous temple that he built of twenty cubits broad, and three score long,
an hundredth and twenty high, of white stone fair glistering, and Cedar, al
guylt with very fine gold both within and without, and his peerless palace
of the same stuff, and garnishing, and finally the rich furniture of the
temple, wherein were many tables of Gold, and silver, and namely the great
table whereupon the holy loaves were set was of clean gold, the rest
being not much unlike, neither in stuff, nor workemanshipp: on whom stood
twenty thousand cups and boles of gold, and forty thousand of silver,
ten thousand candlestickes of gold, and double as many of silver, eight
thousand dishes of gold to put in fine flower to offer at the altar, and
double as many of silver: and also threescore thousand standing cups of
gold, in whom they did incorporate the flower and oil: and double as many of
silver, ten thousand of gold of the measures called Hin, which contained of
our measure about two gallons and a quart, and double as many of silver:
twenty thousand ships of gold to carry incense into the temple, and
fifty thousand of the same metal to carrrie Franckincense from the great
altar unto the little: of trumpets two hundredth thousand, and four hundredth
thousand of musical instruments, the one and the other being of Electrum,
that is a metal where a fifte part of silver is mixed with gold: and two
hundredth thousand roabes of Bissine for the Levites. In this wealth and iolitie
led he his life a long time, far from any mishappy, or fear of foe, but in
continual peace and tranquillity: until his latter days, when that over great
felicity had made him to forgett God, and to fall to ydolatrie: as he him
self had feared long before that it would do: wherefore he had requested of
God, neither abundance nor scarcity, as both hurtful to Godliness. When he
had thus unthankfully revolted from him, who had made him to like so well of
him self: God sent him this mournful message by his Prophet, that because he
had broken covenant with him, he would also break and tear into pieces his
kingdom, and give it unto his servant: but not in his days, for his father
Dauides sake, but in his sons: to whom yet he would leave one Trybe, for the
love that he bare unto his graundfather David and the city of Jerusalem:
neither was the just wrath of God assuaged by this dradfull denunciation, the
which no doubt did thoroughly pierce the heart of sorrowful Solomon: but that
he also stirred him up enemies of vile persons incessantly to vex him: First
Adan an Idumean, who having escaped the hasty hands of David embrued with the
blood of all the males of Idumea, after he had long lurked in Egypt, returned
into Idumea to be a continual terror and trouble unto aged Solomon: then
Adadezer, who of a fugitive servant became a captain thief, and after king
of Damascus, and with his often ruthful roades and wastinges to disturb the
quiet state of hofull Solomon: but the rebellion of his own servant
Hieroboam, whom he had advanced from base birth to bear the honorable
office of Lord Steward of his household, more brake the dismaide king, who
had not been used unto such furious fittes o^ ^aging Fortune.

This Hieroboam being told by Ahias the Prophet that he should have ten of
the Tribes after the decease of Solomon, thought it too long to stay until
he was dead, but solicited the soldiers and people to revolt and deprive
Solomon of his royal dignity: but attempting it untimely, he was forced to
seek safety by flying into Egypt: but yet would not Solomon's fear conceived
of him cease, until that friendly death had rid him out of worldly troubles,
with whom his heavy heart was now wholly oppressed.

The xli. Chapter. Of Herodes king of Judea.
NOne of all the successors of Solomon did come so near unto his greatenesse,
as did Herodes, who yet for Martial glory, strength of body, and valiant
heart, did more resemble his father David. He being descended of the royal
blood, was the first stranger that reigned over the Jews, having the kingdom
given unto him by the Romans, when that the Parthians had expelled Hyrcanus,
carrying him away with them in yrones beeinge defourmed of his ears, and
placed there his enemy Antigonus, whom Herodes thorough the aid of the
Romans foylinge in many fightes, took prisoner in Jerusalem, and sent unto
the Romans to be murdered: he also augmented the bounds of ye kingdom,
through ye liberality of Augustus, with Sadara, Hippon Samaria, Gaza Anthedon,
Ioppe, Pyrgos, Stratonis, and afterward with the countries of Thracos,
Bathanea, and Auranitis, and his immesurable riches do his beautiful buyldings
blase. First he buylte the great and fair cities of Sebaste and Caesaria, at
which Caesaria he ouercomming nature with charges, made the goodliest haven of
the East, where before no man could sail all along that shore for the
fleeting quick sands: and although that all the whole place did withstand
his purpose, yet he did so strive with the difficulties thereof, that the
strength of the work did not give place unto the violence of the Sea, and the
beauty of the buyldinge was so great, as though no hard thing had hindered
the garnishing thereof. For all that great space that he had appointed for the
safe road of the ships, he piled or paued twenty fadome deep with stones,
every one of whom being fifty foot long, and ten broad, and many of them
greater: then enlarged he a wall into three hundredth foot, of the which one
hundredth was cast up before to repel the surges of the Sea, the rest lay
under the wall that enclosed round the haven, mounting with many very goodly
and beautiful towers: there were also many vaults or arches through whom
such things as were in the haven might be carried forth: and before the
vaultes a sumptuous galerie or walking place.

At the mouth of ye haven were set up three Colossi stayed up on both sides with
pillars, on the left hand of whom as a man came into the haven stood a tower,
but on the right two high stones, the which did pass the tower in greatness.
And unto the haven he adjoined great houses of white stone, and over right
against the haven, a temple unto Caesar, a singular piece of work, both for
beauty and greatness: and therein was there a Colossus of Caesar no less than
Jupiters at Olympia, by the which pattern it was made. He also built therein
a market place, or a town house, a Theater, and an Amphitheatre: and what
charge it was to build a Theater may appear by Pliny the younger, in his
epistle unto Traiane, where he writes that the Theater at Nicen had consumed
Centies sestertium, that is, threescore and eighteen thousand, one hundredth,
twenty five pounds, and yet was not finished, but imperfect. And doubtless
an Amphitheatre spent double the charges, as that which was, as who would say,
two theaters joined in one. Besides these cities, he built also Agrippium, and
Antipatris, and the sumptuous castles, the which might compare with towns of
Cyprus, Phaselis, and Herodion. He also new built the temple of Jerusalem,
making it as fair as ever was Solomon's: and adjoined unto it double as much
ground, as it had before, being enclosed with a wall, where he built stately
walking places, which the Romans called Porticus: whereunto he adjoined a
goodly castle.

He also built for him self a sumptuous palace, wherein were two chapels
dedicated unto Caesar, the which might for beauty and greatness, compare
with any temple of the world. Finally, in all fit places of his kingdom, did
he erecte goodly Churches, and other sumptuous monumentes in ye honor of
Augustus. Neither was he contented to beautify his own realm with goodly
buildings, but also in foreign cities he showed his magnificence, building
at Tripolis, Damascus, and Ptolomais, public baines, a kind of building in
that riotous age, of all other most costlye, both for the garnishing, and also
for the stately walks, gardenes, places of exercises, and other such like
things usually adjoined unto them. Byblus he walled about, at Berithus and
Tyrus he built burses, town houses, and temples, The charges of a conduite.
and at Sidon and Damascus Theaters: and at Laodicea a conduite, the which had
been no great princely work, if that they had been no more chargeable in
those countries, then they be in ours: but they being there brought upon
mighty arches of stones, galantly garnished, were of inestimable charges: in
so much yt Claudius Caesar, bestowed upon a conduite at Rome, Quingenties
quinquagies quinquies: of our money four hundredth and thirty three thousand,
five hundred l. and fifteen shillinges, the which as it is a great sum of
money to be bestowed upon a conduite: so does it draw nothing near unto the
sum of vij. millions, and eighte hundredth thousand pounds, set down by
William Thomas. But to return unto Herod, he also built baines, and
cesternes for water at Ascalon, with other edifices worthy to be wondered at
for their workemanshippe, and also their greatness. Moreover, of his
magnificent liberality in kingly gifts, the Rhodians, the Lycians, the
Samians, the Ionians, the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, the Nicopolitanes, the
Pergamenians were partakers. And besides these goods of Fortune, had God also
bountifully blessed him with ten sons, and five daughters, and with long
life to reign 37. years, and to see his sons sons, and daughters married,
he living until he was seventy years old. But yet this man upon whom
fortune had thus prodigally thrown her gifts: was often sore shaken with many
adverse tempests. For while he was a private man, but in deed ruled all the
kingdom of Jury under Hyrcanus, was he in danger of death, being accused by
an honorable Embassage of an hundredth Jews, before Antonius the Triumuir, for
oppressing of the realm, and subjects, and also (the which touched Antonius
more) that he had been his enemies Cassius lieftenaunt in Syria. But not long
after that he had fortunately escaped this doubtful peril, fell he into a
greater, when that the Parthian took Jerusalem with king Hyrcanus, and
placing there in his room Antigonus, forced Herodes his brother Phaselus, to
dashe out his own brains against a wall, that he might not come alive into
their bondage: and Herodes himself very hardly escaped their hands, and
fearfully fled unto Rome, where he was created king of Judea. The which he
had not long enjoyed, but that he was sent for to come before Antonius at
Seleucia, to be arreigned for the unworthy murder of his wives brother
Alexander the high priest: at what time he knowing the great hatred toward him
of Antonius his sweet heart Queen Cleopatra, who insatiably thirsted for his
kingdom: he was almost in utter despair of return. But not long after he
fell into greater peril of his state, through ayding of Antonius against
Octauian: wherefore after that Antonius was overcome, he sailed into Rhodes
unto Caesar, and there in private apparel without diadem, suppliantly desired
pardon of Caesar, the which being happily obtained, and his kingdom also by his
liberality augmented, he fell in his old age into many domestical dolours:
the beginning whereof, came thorough his wife Mariemne, one descended of the
ancient blood royal, whom he loved as immoderately, as she hated and abhorred
him both heartily and openly: vpbrayding him often with the cruel murdering of
her graundfather, and brother: but in the end he did wrongfully put her to
death, for sinister opinion of adultery betwixt her and his uncle Iosippus:
and then as immoderately bewailed and lamented her death, as before he had
rashly slain her.

This unworthy murder of their mother, did her two sons, whom Herodes had
appointed to be his successors in the kingdom, stomache: in so much that
they fled to Rome, and accused their father unto Augustus, who made an
atonement between ye wretched father, and his wicked sons: but it was not
long, but that Herodes accused them for treason against his person before
Archelaus king of Cappadocia, whose daughter the one of them had married: but
Archelaus again reconciled them: but the ill patched friendshipp brake out
again not long after to the destruction of the two innocent sons. After the
doleful death of his two dear sons Alexander, and Aristobulus, the woeful
father found out the treason of his son Antipater, whom he had nominated his
heir, and how he not only had caused him by suborning of false witnesses,
wrongfully to murder his two brothers Alexander, and Aristobulus: and
exasperated him also against two other of his brothers Archelaus and Philippe:
the poison was brought where with Antipater had gone about to poison him,
whereupon he obtained of the Emperor, that he might worthily be put to death.
This domestical calamity and continual treasons and murtherings of his sons,
did so afflict the aged father, that he led a loathsome life wrapped all in
wailefulnesse, taking no joy at all in his large Empire, great heaps of
treasure, and beautiful and pleasant buildinges. And this heaviness was
heaped by long continuance of many doleful diseases. He had no small ague, and
an intolerable itche thoroughout all his body, then was he also vexed with a
painful torment in his neck, and his feet were swollen with the dropsy:
and his belly as big as a barrel with wind, the which griefs were
augmented with a filthy putrefaction of his privy parts, the which bred
abundance of stinking worms. Moreover he was very short winded, sighing
often, and had al his lymmes contracted and cramped, the torments were so
intolerable, that he thought his friends did heynously injury him, when that
they did let him to end his woeful life by friendly stroke of fatal meat
knife. And then to double his torments, came this toy into his head, that all
the Jews and people would rejoice at his desired death: wherefore he
commanded that out of every village and town of the Judea, should the
gentlemen be brought into the castle, and be all slain when he should yield
up his cruel and ghastly ghost, that all the whole land, yea, and every
house might weep and lamente at his death against their wills.

The xl. Chapter. Of Mahumet.
MAhumet the first founder of the sect of the Mahumetanes, who possess now
far the greatest part of the world, of a beggars bratt and slave became
conqueror and king of all Syria, and Egypt, and by the consent of the most
of the best approved authors, of the whole Empire of Persia, and yet had he
also sour often mingled with his sweet: for when he first preached his
seditious superstition at Mecha, he was driven by arms out of the town with
his band of bondmen. Neither found he fortune more friendely at Medina
Thalnabi whether he fled: for the Jews taking arms against him, discomfited
him in many skirmishes, in one of whom they wounded him in the face, struck
out his fore teeth, and hurled him into a diche. And afterward also in his
first invasion of the Persian, was he foiled in fight, and forced to retire
home, where entering in society with the Sinites, that had lately for
reproachful words revolted from the Greeks, and returninge with them into
Persia, fortunately atchiued his exploite. But how pitifully he was tormented
with the terrible fallinge sickness, I think it unknown unto few. Moreover
very short was his reign: for six years after he began his conquestes,
he died, and in the fourteenth year of his age. But what cause did deprive
this furious fierbrand of mankind of his envied life, authors do not agree.

Some hold that he was poisoned by a Greek, other that he died mad. But the
common opinion in ye East (says Theuet) that he was sick thirty days of a
Pleuresie, in seven of whom he was distraught of his wits, but coming unto
him self a little before he died, he told his friends, that within three
days after his death, his body should be assumpted into heaven. The which
words did witness that he was stark mad still, as the euente did after
prove: for when his illuded sectaries had long time in vain expected his
assumption: at last they washing and embaulminge his stinking body, were
forced to bury it.

The xliii. Chapter. Of Hismaell the Sophie.
HIsmaell, who began in our age a new sect of Mahumetanes among the
Persians, whereof he and all his successors are called Sophies, as we should
say ye wise men: thorough the help of his folowers threw down from the
Imperial siege of Persia the ancient blood royal, and placed himself
therein, making also subject thereunto many other countries borderinge there
on: but Selim the Turk plucked this Pecockes tail, discomfiting and woundinge
him in a bloody battle fought in the boweles of his realm, the which he
himself had caused to be all woefully wasted, that his fierce enemies should
find nothing to sustain the necessities of them selves and their horses, and
also taking his camp replenished with inestimable riches, and finally
winninge the two chief cities of his realm Tauris, and Chois.

The xliiii. Chapter. Of the Cherife of Maroccho.
THE Sophie does put me in mind, although somewhat out of season, of one
Mulamethes, that began also in our days a new sect of Mahumetanes in Africa,
and with no less fortunate success then the Sophie had in Persia. This
Mulamethes being borne of base parentage in the village of Gahen, at the foot
of mount Atlas in Africa began about 1514 to be great esteemed of the
people, because he gave him self wholly to religion and the service of God,
which kind of men they do call Morabuth, that is an Hermit. He for his
singleness and austeritie of life, was singularly honored and reverenced of
the unskillful multitude, unto whom he preached the simplicity and purity
of the law without receiuinge of any gloss, or interpretation, but only the
bare Text.

And after he had by this means gotten him a great number of adherents in
Fesse and Maroccho, he would needs in Gods name go to preach the truth unto
the king of Caphilet, the which country lies nere unto the deserts of
Lybia. Where although he were not suffered to preach in any town, yet by
prating in the country he had gotten such a train, that they were above 60000
fighting men. And when at the last the foolish king would needs one day come
to hear one of his sermones: the Cherife (for so they now called Mulamethes,
which word signifies the priest) took him, being admonished by God as he
said so to do: to the which effect he rehearsed many fained dreams, and
visions, and did put the king to death: and seized upon his kingdom, and
continuing still in this traiterous trade, he within three years got to him
the kingdoms of Tremissen, Marroche, Dara, Taphilet, and Suse, and about
twenty five years after, the mighty kingdom of Fesse, the which does
usually by Iouius his report bring thirty thousand horsemen into the
field, and within the city of Fesse are five and twenty thousand houses.
But although Mulamethes was Prince of so many kingdoms, yet he retained still
his name of Cherife. Thus lived he in iolitie being a terror unto all the
Princes of Afrike, and namely unto Sala-raix Barbarossa his son king of
Algier: who being unable to resist him with force, used this policy to
dispatche him. He sent unto Marroche, where the Cherife made his usual abode,
one of his capteines a Turk, a very valiant man who with two hundredth valiant
Tu^kes for the most part al archubussiers should seek interteynmente of the
Cherife, alleging for cause of their departure from Algier the injurious
misusage of the king toward them: and that after that they had by these
means gotten interteinment they should endeavor to win everlasting life,
according to the promises of their law, by sleaing of so wicked a tyrante:
the which train did also fortunately take effect, for the Cherife, who was
heartily hated at Marroche, kept about him a great guarde of men of Taphilet,
Dara, and Suse: to whom he also adjoined these Turks whom his counsel did
greatly mistrust, consideringe the great hatred that the king of Algier bare
toward the Cherife, and also the carelessness for life of the Turks so that
they may pleasure their Prince. Whereof the Turks having intelligence, were
fully determined shortly to set al at six and seven: either to win the
horse or loose the saddle. Wherefore one day as they marched against a town
in Suse that had rebelled, and the Alarbes were sent forth for forage, and
none left in the camp but two hundredth of the Cherifes guarde and they: the
Turks entered the kings Pauilion, where then the counsel sat with him about
these Turkishe matters, and slew both the Cherife, and his counsel, and
spoiled the camp, wherein the guarde also joined with ^^em. This was the
unhappy end of the Cherife when he had reigned forty three years. But the
Turks that slew him being persued by the new king his son, were all
slain valiauntly fightinge.

The xlv. Chapter. Of Barbarossa king of Argier.
VVto the Cherife will I adioyne a nere neighbor of his, Hariaden commonly
called of his red bearde Barbiressa, who also in our age of a poor pirat
became a mighty prince, and scourge unto all the Christians borderinge on the
midlande Sea.

This mate with his brother Horruccio when they could not abide their beggerie at
home in Lesbos or Miteleno they sold all that ever they had to rigg forth a
fragate, and served under Camalis an archepirate. In whose service after they
had been enriched by taking many prises, and had gotten certain galleyes,
they becoming jolly capteines departed from their master, and did set up for
themselves going in rouing upon the coast of Afrike, where at their first
arrival they were enterteyned by the king of Argier, who was almost
oppressed with the armies of his brother: but the Pirates having valiantly
thorough their shot (the which the Africanes had then no use of) discomfited
the brother, soudenly also turned their force on their friend the king whom
they slew, and Lyornaio ye elder brother succeeded in the kingdom, where unto
he thorough his prowess adjoined the kingdom of Circello, and many other
places, and forced the Numidians or Alarbes a people that live altogether by
the wars, glad to enter in league with him.

But at the length inuadinge the king of Tremissen he was slain in fight by
the aid of the Hispaniardes, who cutting off his head did bear it on a pole
round about al Hispaines, to the great joy of the whole country.

Then Haruedene succeeded his brother in the kingdom: whose valiant demeanor
both against the Africanes by land, and the Christians by Sea, advanced him
to the office of high Admerall unto the Turk, whereby he became match unto
the Christians on the Sea, and far passed any Prince of Afrike for power by
land: then wanne he the mightiest kingdom of all Afrike, Tunes, where he had
not nesteled one year, but that Charles the Emperor thinking it smally for
his security to suffer his infestious foe to grow so great under his nose:
passed thither with a power, where he wan by assault the strong castle of
Goletta, whereby he got the haven, and all the whole navy of Barbarossa, then
discomfited he him in battle, wanne the city of Tunes, with the whole
kingdom: and finally forced Barbarossa fearfully to fly unto Bona: where he
had doubtless been either taken or slain, if that either Doria the Emperors
admerall had gonne thither him self with the strength of the fleet, or his
unskillful kinsman Adamo, whom he sent to do the exploite with sixteen
galeies ill appointed, had not trifled forth the time, not coming to Bona,
before that Barbarossa had weighed up sixteen galeies: the which he had
sounke in the haven, and having rigged them, had launched out of the
harborough, or else he had been forced to have fled unto Argier, a long
journey by land thorough the Alarbes, and Africanes, who beeinge his cruel
enemies would never have suffered him to have come to Argier long time after
to trouble and spoil the Christians.

The xlvi. Chapter. Of Tamerleyne the Tartar.
AMounge these roge kings, will I inrolle Tamerlaine the Tartar.

This man, whom Theuet calls Tamirrhan, and Tamerlanque: Sigismundus Liber
Themirasscke, and Chalcondilas, Temer, was son unto a poor man called
Sangalis, a Massaget, says Chalcondilas, but a Parthian affirms Theuet, borne
at Samerchanden, At ye first he was the heardeman of a town for horses, but
after ward conspireing together with other heardmen, he became a strong thief,
stealinge horses and other cattle. But climinge one night a wall to enter
into a stable, and being espied of the good man of the house, he was forced to
leap down from the wall, and brake his leg. Campofulgoso says that he
brake his thighe, whereof he had his name: for in his country language, Temer
is a thigh, and Lang is lame, or maimed, the which two words being put
together make Temerlang: but the Latins keeping the propriety of their own
tongue, corruptly call him Tamerlan.

But Sigismundus Lyber says that one whose sheep he was about to steal
brake his leg with a great stone: and because he bound the bones together
with a hoope of iron, he was called Themerassacke, of iron, and halting: for
Themer in the Tartarian tongue is iron, and Assacke halting. But whether he
had his name of the one thing, or the other: herein they do both agree, that
he could not when he came to be Lord of all the Orient, and a terror unto
ye whole world, step forth one foot, but that he felt his infirmity: nor
record his own name, but that he was put in mind of his infortunitie. But
after this mishappe, he waxing wiser, fortified a place where he and his might
have safe refuge, when that they were persued.

At length he being meruailously enriched by robbing of all men that travailed
within his walk: and also by stealing of all kind of cattle, he gathered
together a fair band of Soldiers, and associatinge him self with two
capteines called Chardares and Myrxes, did set upon a power of the enemies,
which spoiled the country, and gave them a great overthrow, the like
whereunto he also often times did afterward, whereby he became so famous, that
the king of the Massagetes made him captain general over his armies, the
which office he administered both valiantly and fortunately: and namely a little
before the kings death, having driven his enemies into the cities of Babylon
and Samarchen, and then the king dying, he married the Queen, and took
Samarchen, or Semerchanda, and enjoyed that mighty kingdom, and also Babylon:
yea, and then with continued course, conquered Hiberia, Albania, Persia, Media,
both Armeniaes, Mesopotamia, Syria, Damascus, Egypt, even unto Nilus, and
Capha upon the coast of the Euxine Sea, Cilicia, Asia the less where he
discomfited in battle Baiazett the Turk with ten hundredth thousand Turks,
neither was his own ordinary army any thing inferior in number.

But while he was busied in those parts about taking of the Turkishe towns:
heavy news was brought him, that one of his confederates a king of India,
called the king of Tzachataa, passing over the river Araxis, had subdued a
great part of the country thereaboutes, which were subject unto Tamerlane.

And among all other manifold detrimentes, had miserably defaced the city of
Cheria, and had taken Tamerlanes his treasure, and returned home: but yet so
that he still threatened, that he would be his confederate no longer.

This sorrowful message did put Tamerlane in great fear, least that the
king of India would return again, and sweep him out of all his dominions
at hoame, while he was busied abroad with foreign wars: and herewithall
the cursed condition also of human affairs, and man's tickle state, the
which does not suffer any man long to enjoy here on earth the blisful blast
of friendly Fortune, appalled his heart: wherefore he hasted homewarde: and
whereas before he iniuried al men, now did he not only put up cowardly the
Indian wrong, but also made great suit to recover his ancient friendship.

But after that Tamerlane had thus recovered his countries lost, and quieted
them, and buylt that renowned city of the world Samarchanden, in the village
where he was borne, which he beautified and enriched with the spoils of the
whole Orient, and had thoroughly peopled it: he prepared a voyage against the
Turks, and Christians: from the going forward wherewith he was stayed both
by a mighty Earthquake, and also two celestial signs and prodigies: the one,
of a man appearinge in the air, holdinge in his hand a Lau^^^: and the other,
of a blasinge Star, terrible for his greatenesse, the which stood directly
over the city by the space of fifteen days.

He consultinge with the Southsayers, and Astrologians, about these wounders,
was told by them, and namely, by one Bene-iaacam, a man of greatest authority
and credit among them, that they were tokens, either of his own death
shortly after to ensue, or else of the utter ruin and bringinge to naught of
his Empire.

But much more was he in short time after amazed by a vision that he had one
night, the which was the cause of his fatal sickness, and in the end, of
his death.

For he dreamed one night, that Baiazeth the Turk whom he had made to die
miserably in an iron cage, came unto him, or else the devil in his likeness,
with a countenance stern, and terrible to behold, and said unto him: now
it shall not be long (villain) but that thou shall worthilye be paid for thy
manifold outrages: and I too shall be revenged, for the werisome wrong that
thou did unto me, making me to die like unto a beast in mine own doung.

And when he had thus said, Tamerlane thought that Baiazeth did beat him
very grievously, and troade and trampled upon him with his feet, sore
brusing his belly and bowelles: in so much that the next morninge, when he
had thought to have risen, he remained still attainted with the apprehension
conceived in his sleep: the which did near quite bereue him of his wits:
and so rauinge al ways upon Baiazeth, dyed, leaving his large Empire unto
his two sons, begotten of diverse venters, who consuming them selves with
civil wars one upon another, left an easy way for all those princes and
countries, whom their father had spoiled, and conquered, to recover all that
which they had before lost.

The xliiii. Chapter. Of Mahumet the second, the great Turk.
MAhumet the second, the great seigniour of the Turks that wanne
Constantinople, Pera, Capha, and the Empire of Trapezonda, the kingdom of
Cilicia, or Caramania, and Bosna, and pierced Illyria or Slauonia, even unto
Forum Iulij, now Friali, where he discomfited the Venetians with the flower of
al Italy: began his reign with the murdering of two infants his brothers: so
fearful was he of fall, that neither their brotherly blood, nor impotent age,
could persuade the bofull man security. But anon after that he had won
Constantinople, the stately seat of the East Empire, and slain the Emperor
therein: before Belgrade, which he boasted that he would take within fifteen
days, whereas, as his father had like a cowarde in vain beesieged it seven
months, be was by a sallie out of the town daungerously hurt under the
pappe, his army discomfited, his camp taken with all his ordinance, martial
furniture, and carriages, and he him self glad to seek safety by the
benefit of a dark night: yea, so great was his overthrow, that it was
thought by men of wisdom and experience, that if the Hungarians had
prosecuted the victory, they might have driven him out of Constantinople. The
next morning when he was come unto himself, after the rage of his wound was
somewhat abated, and understood how great a foil he had taken, he would have
poisoned himself that he might not return home in so great dishonor, and
was hardly letten by his friends from doing thereof. He could never abide
after to hear or speak of this foul foil: and as often as he unwillingly
minded it, he would tear his beard, fetch deep sighs, and ghastly grind his
teeth: cruelly cursing that dismal day: the which he did all his life after
account for a black and unfortunate. But after this tempestuous storm, the
which had near destroyed him, a wished wind began blow again, and he
conquered the Empire of Trapezonda, the Isles of the Aegean sea or Archipelago,
Miteleno, and Bosna, the Peloponesus or Morea, the which the Venetians, and
two of the Paleologi possessed, brake down the strong wall, that ye Venetians
had builte in the Isthme of Corinthe, and got those towns which the Venetians
had in Morea, and by bloody assault Eubea, now Nigrepont. Having thus
fortunately subdued Constantinople, and all Greece, with the Islands
thereabouts: it was a great eye sore for him to see the royal Rhodes free from
his bondage: wherefore frowning fortune pricked him forth to assail it with
many a foul bloody foil, received both by sea and land: thus when force
failed, he sought to take it by treason, suborning many false knaves, who
under color of fugitives should betray it unto him: but when that neither this
foxes skin joined to his Lions, was long enough to reach the Rhodes, he
feigned great friendship, if that they would vouchsafe to pay him any trifle in
the name of tribute, yea, or present him with any gift: but when that nothing
would be granted unto the enemy of Christ: and he had vainly spent three
years in these toys: he fell again to force, inuading it with a mighty
fleet, and fourscore thousand men, but with no better success, then that
after he had lost 7000. soldiers at the landing, and two and three thousand
at every assault, of whom he made very many during his aboade there of three
months, he was forced to depart home with incredible loss of men and
munition, and much greater of his honor. But when his hautie heart could not
rest in this great dishonor, but prepared for the revenge thereof, and also to
conquer proud Italy, as he termed it: where his mighty army being landed
had taken Otronto: his purpose was prevented in the one, and the prosperous
course of his conquestes corrupted in the other, through his sondeine death,
when he had lived 58. years and reigned 31.

The xlvij. Chapter. Of Selime the first great Lord of the Turks.
SELIME, that came unto the Empire of the Turks by murdering of his father,
brothers, and brothers children, overthrew in battle the mighty Sophie in ye
midst of his realm, and took his chief cities of Chois, and Tauris, subdued
the Aladuli, that inhabit the mountain Taurus, conquered the Empire of
Egypt, that stretched on one side unto the desartes of Arabia, the streightes
of the redd sea, and to Aethiope, and on the other unto Cilicia, staying two
Soldanes: yet this man who was of rare felicity in all his attemptes, was
overthrown, and hurt in the battle that he sought against his father, and also
made such an hautie retire out of the Persian dominions, that it might very
well be termed a fearful flight, loosing a great number of his men, his
ordinance, and his carriages in the passing over of Euphrates, the Persians
hotly pursuing them. And when he had escaped the Sophie, he was no less
endammaged and endaungered by the Aladuli. And finally this fury of hell, that
threatened utter destruction to the Christian name, reigned not above seven
years, but died miserably of an eating Ulcer in his reins, which consumed so
much flesh in one night, that a man might turn his fist round in the hole:
yielding up his wicked spirit at the village of Chiurle, where he had
ungraciously before foughten against his father.

The xlviij. Chapter. Of Ferdinande the sixth king of Hispaine.
FERDINANDE the sixte king of Arragon, and Sicyl, that had by his wife the rich
kingdoms of Castill and Lions, and won by sword the kingdoms of Granata, that
had been in the hands of the Moors almost eight hundredth years, of Naples,
and Navarre, and an other world of rich countries in the West Indies: had a
great, and yet an harmless admonition, of man's tickle state, at the siege of
Granata.

For a Moore burning in desire of delivering his country out of peril, by a
desperate attempt of killing the king and Queen of Hispaine, came out of the
town into the Hispanish camp, feigning that he had brought conditions of
peace, and desiring to be admitted unto the kings and Queens presence: but
he was put by his purpose thoroughe a marvelous chance or rather by Gods
special provision: for a noble man of Hispaine, that lay in a goodly and rich
hall, sent for this Moore to come unto him: being very desirous to understand
what news the Moore brought. The noble man sat at that instant at dinner with
his wife: whom the Moore taking by their bravery, to be the king and the
Queen, assaulted them: sore wounding them both, but yet was stayed from
killing them by ye rescue of their servants. But afterward when that this
victorious king returned from the glorious conquest of the kingdom of Graneta,
and rode into Darselona in triumphant manner, with the great acclamations of the
people, ringing his renown: he had in the midst of that proud pomp almost
lost both life and kingdom. For one Canemas a Cathelane, who seemed to have
been long time molested with the mad melancholy, thincking to have killed
the king in his chiefest iolitie, gave him a great wound in the neck. Neither
could any other cause of doing this desperate fact be wrounge from him by all
kind of terrible torments, then that he hoped, if that Ferdinando had been
slain, to become king himself, being a very poor knave: the which thing, he
said had been told him oftentimes by an Angel. On so feeble, and fleeting a
foundation, do kingdoms stand, and on so tottering a stool do princes sit,
that sporting Fortune seems oftentimes to put them into ye hand of a madd man.
But nothing did more manifestly show unto him his brittle bliss, then the
reuolting of all the noble men of ye farther Hispaine, (except the duke of
Alua) unto Philip duke of Burgogie: who had married his eldest daughter and
heir, at his arriual in Hispaine, after the death of Queen Isabell, they
eftsoon, saying, that they would rather adore ye sun rising, then going
down. The grief of this shameful forsaking of him did so gripe the aged
princes heart, that not being able to endure the dishonor, to be a subject,
where he had long reigned: he left Hispaine, and sailed with his new wife
unto Naples, chosing rather to commit himself unto the doubtful faith of the
governor, and conqueror of that flourishing kingdom, whom ye report was
minded to revolt, and make himself king of Naples (the which he might easily
have done) then unto the open ill wills and rebellion of the unfaithful
Hispaniards. And doubtless he was in very great danger of being utterly
excluded out of his kingdoms of Castill and Lions, if yt God had not shortly
after taken out of the world his son in law, who was so alienated from him,
that when the courteous king laden with wearisome years, had taken a long
paineful journey to receive him at the water: the proud and uncivil duke would
not vouchsafe to show him any countenance. But after he had given him
scornefully a word or two, and them too in French, which the king understood
not, he flange away from him, and all the nobility with him.

The xlix. Chapter. Of William Conqueror.
But now after that we have romed long abroad in all foreign lands, let us
return home unto our own country, and take a view of such Princes as have by
dint of sword atteined the imperial crown thereof, or enlarged the dominions:
least we may be thought to be like unto the Lamiae in Poets: whom they do
feign to see very exactly when they are abroad, but to be stark blind at home.

William, bastard son unto Robert duke of Normandy, who left him his heir,
although by puissance he conquered this land, discomfited in battle ye king of
Denmark, forced the king of Scotland for fear to do him homage, and swear
him fealty: yet the often rebellions and secret treasons of the Englishmen
and Normans, the perfidiousnes of his own dear brother Odo, in whom he
reposed his greatest trust, ye wicked reuolting of his eldest son Robert unto
the French king, and with his aid his dangerous invasion of Normandy, his
arm thrust through in fight, and his vnhorsing by that unnatural child, and
his bowelles sore bruised, by a leap off his horse in his last voyage against
the French king, of the intolerable torments whereof he died, will not suffer
him to be enrolled among the happy. But nothing in my mind does more
manifestly bewray his infelicitie, then that he had not so much ground at his
death, as could cover his carcass without doing an other man wrong: and yt
which the beggar has without contradiction, was denied and forbidden this
mighty king. He had built S. Stephens Church at Cane in Normandy, (where he
would be buried) upon an other man's ground, and had not paid ye owner for it:
who being then a very poor man, yet nothing fearing the funeral pomp, and the
great number of nobles attending on the corpse, did thrust through the thickest
thronge of the solemn train, like unto a madd man, and got him to the Church
door, wherein he stood stoutly to withstand the bearing into the Church of
the kings body, crying out with a loud voice: He that in his life time
oppressed kingdoms by his furious force, has hitherto with fear also
oppressed me: but I that do survive him that has done me the wrong, will not
grant rest and peace unto him now he is dead. The place whereinto ye do
carry this dead man is mine, I claim that it is not lawful for any man to
lay a dead body in an other man's ground. But if yt the case do so stand, that
when as now at the length, through ye grace of good God, ye author of this so
unworthy a wrong is extinguished: yet force still does flourish, I do appeal
unto Rhollo the founder and father of this nation: who alone is of greater
power by ye laws which he ordained, then is any man's injury. And therewithal
I know not whether by hap, or man's fraud, there soudeinly was seen a great
fire, which raged on the Church, and the houses near adjoining: then every
body speedily running to quench the fire, left the kings corpse desolate all
alone: only Henry the kings youngest son could not be gotten from his
fathers body, who being feared with, as it were the manifest wrath of God,
presently paid the poor man for his ground, and discharged his fathers
injurious spirit. But these blisselesse bones of his, which so hardly obtained
entumbing, did afterward as unluckily again lose it in Anno Domini 1562. when
Chastillion conducting reliquias Danaum, atque immitis Achillis those that had
escaped at the battle at Dreax, took the city of Cane. For certain savage
soldiers, accompanied with four Capteynes, did beat down, and utterly
deface ye noble tumbe, and monument of that renowned conqueror, and victorious
king, and pulled out all his bones, which they spitefully threw away, when
that they could not find the treasure yt they falsely surmised had been laid
up there, as I have been certainly informed by Englishmen of very good
credit, and faithful favorers of the reformed: who saw this sorrowful
sight scarce without distilling tears. And also Theuet makes mention of this
matter in his universal Cosmographie, writing of Cane.

The l. Chapter. Of Henry the second.
HENRY the second had by his father, ye Earledomes of Aniow, Toures, and
Maine: by his mother the kingdom of England, and the duchy of Normandy, and
by his wife ye mighty duchy of Aquitane, and ye earldom of Poitow,
conquered the kingdom of Ireland, and took prisoner in battle the king of
Scotts: but this his glistering glory was foully darkened, by the shameful
submission of his crown unto the Roman See (as Platina their recorder does
report) or certes by binding himself unto unreasonable conditions, to abate
the envy of the murder of Thomas the archbishop of Canterbury, as our
Chronicles do record: and by the dangerous and wicked wars a long time kept
in Normandy, France, and England, with all his ungodly sons, Henry,
Richard, Gefferie and John, yea, and his own wife, and their mighty
confederats, the kings of France and Scotland, with a great number of the
English nobility, and after the death of his ungracious son Henry, by the
second reuolting of his son Richard unto the French king, who wan from him in
those wars a great part of the duchy of Normandy, and besieged him in the
city of Mauus, out of the which he fearfully fled, Polydore.
and left that city, which of all other he best loved, to be won with Toures by
his fierce enemies, for which he was cast into such a chafe, yt he openly said,
that he would for ever after, wholly withdraw his heart from God, seeing that
he had suffered his delight to be taken, and deformed with fire: but anon after
he came unto him self, and acknowledged his error, and wickedness: and
suppliantly sued unto the French king for peace, the which he could by no
means obtain. Wherefore despairing of the safety of his estate, he died
rather oppressed by this cruel concourse of calamities, then worn with
sickness.

The li. Chapter. Of Edward the third.
AS Fortune was unto Edward the third, a loving and cocklinge mother in his
youth, in giving him the famous victories at Sluse, Cressey, Poyters, and
Durham, with the taking prisoners of the French and Scottishe kings, and the
restoring of Peter king of Castill, and augmenting his dominions with the town
of Calaice, and the Earldom of Guisnes, and sending of him so many valiant
sons, and to so long life to have proof of their prowess: so was she no
less cruel stepdame unto him in his age: for the reuolting of the Earls of
Armeniacke, and Petiagors, which brought the loss of Ponthiew, Poitou,
Caoars, Limosin, Xantoigne, Perrigort, and finally almost, all Gascoigne,
except Baron and Bordeaux, and all Britain, unless it were Breast, and the
discomfiture and taking of John Earl of Penbruche, and his great Fleet,
coming to the rescuse of Rochell, the discourteous and disobedient denial of
subsidy by Parliament in that his great necessity, and the licentious
complaint against him in open Parliament for keeping of Alice Piers, and the
proud appointing of him Tutors, as though he had been a pupil, who in his
nonage was thought meet to hurl his father from the helm of ye common
wealth, and rule the rudder him self: and finally the untimely deaths of his
two valiant sons Leonell, and the only stay and staff whereon his worn
age did lean, and hold up it self, Prince Edward, the sorrow whereof quite
brake the heart of the woeful father, which was before sore wasted with age,
and the grief conceived for his unwonted froward Fortune.

And to make up the mischief, he left the realm to be ruled by an unthrifty
pupil, who could never learn less all the days of his life, then how he
should rule him self. This worthy Prince does prove that to be true, that
Paulus Aemilius notes in Charles the great: that Fortune does think it a
goodly thing to show unto men both her powers, in kings of long life: and that
those Capteines which are said never to have found Fortune but favorable in
great attemptes, lightely dyed young men: for so (says he) I do think it
has seemed good unto God, lest that humane things may seem to be able to
give true and sound felicity.

The lii. Chapter. Of Henry the fifth.
IN that perfect pattern of prowess Henry the fifth, I blame his unthrifty
youth, and his being committed to the kings benche by the Lord chief Justice
for his misdemeanour, (such a president, as I think is hardly to be found in
all the records of antiquities) his wounding at the battle of Shrewesburie,
the dangerous conspiracy to murder him made by the Earl of Cambridge, and
other in his first voyage into France: his great hofulnesse for Agincourt
field, and almost utter despair of escape: the disfomfiture in fight, and
also the death of his brother the duke of Clarence, and last of all, his own
untimely death, the which did not only corrupt all his former victories, and
lost the duchy of Guian, whereof his ancestors had been possessed ever
since Henry the second: but also did so wrappe the realm in such civil
discord that it is almost a miracle, that it was not quite destroyed for ever.
So that if we do duly consider the event, it had been much better for this
land that he had never been borne, then to have provoked the French men, and
not to have quite subdued and tamed them: and to have begotten to succeed him,
one so unfit to govern, although he were otherwise a Prince of singular piety
and godliness. But as for Henry the fourth, Edward the fourth, and Henry
the seventh, who got the crown by the swoorde, they kept it with so much, and
so great trouble, that I think no wise man would take up the crown, if it
lay upon a dounghill, to wear it in such continual perils and molestations:
as Antigonus did use to say.

The Conclusion.
THEN seeinge that the miseries of mankind are so many, and so great: and
with so manifold and grievous calamities, have all they been oppressed, whom
fickle Fortune has seemed most to favor: what may they promise unto them
selves, that do think that they are now carried with the most blisfull blast
of worldly felicity? Let them like wise men persuade themselves that they are
made of the same lamentable lump, that other men are, and also as much subject
unto sondeine sorrows as they that have been before them. Wherefore, let them
think moderately of them selves, let them make account of the guylefull gifts
of false Fortune, as though they should be incontinently taken from them: let
them not proudly despise the wretched, whom lowering lot has laid low:
seeing that the unstableness of their own tottering state may shortly cast
them into the same sincke of shame as they do think it: finally, let them
attribute all honor and glory unto God, the only author and also conseruer
of their brittle bliss: whom let them serve most lowly, if that they desire
to continue aloft in the ruling of other.

FINIS.
A Table showing what is contained in every Chapter of this book.
The first Chapter, Of the essence, unchangeableness, singleness, and
almightinesse of God. The second Chapter. Of the wonderful pride of Psapho,
Menecrates, Alexander, Co^modus, Caligula, Domitian, and Cosdras, who would be
adored for Gods: of a witty decree of the Lacedaemonians touching Alexanders
deification: how Philippe of Macedonie dolted Menecrates: and also to repress
his own pride gave in commandment unto one to tell him every morning that he
should remember that he was a man. Of a free speech of a botcher unto
Caligula, and of a worthy saying of Antigonus. The third Chapter. Whereof false
Gods had their first ground, and the causes that moved diverse nations to
account men for Gods after death, and also some while they lived: as Demetrius,
Julius Caesar, Pycta, Lysander, Simon Magus, and Appollonius and of the
extreme madness of the Egyptians in chosing of their Gods. Of the impudent
flattery used by the Ambassadors of Palermo unto the Bishop of Rome: and of
the people unto Herodes Agrippa: and the grievous punishment of God for his
accepting thereof. Of the great reverence that the Persians gave unto their
kings: and of the rare love that the Galls, and the Aethiopians bare unto
their Princes: two worthy sayings of Antigonus, and Canute. The fourth
chapter. Of the manifold miseries of man. The fifth chapter. The immoderate
mourning of man: and examples of men, that have died of sorrow conceived for
the decay of Gods glory, Countries calamity, and infortunitie of parents,
children, brethren, wives, masters, and friends. The sixth chapter. Of the
great riot of man in apparel, and particularly of the excess therein of a
Cardinals harlot, of Poppea, of the soldiers of Antiochus, of Caligula,
Heliogabalus, Charles Duke of Bourgongne, of the Marquis of Astorga, Agrippina,
Lollia Paulina, of the ancient Romans, Greeks, and Alexandrines, of the
great prices of a pearl, and a precious stone. And also how man does alter
the natural constitution, and ornaments of his body, of Poppea her bath, and
of a Patriarche and Cardinal that made themselves to look pale. The seventh
chapter. Of the unreasonable riot of man in buildinges, and namely of the
Romans, Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Lucullus, Clodius: of the rare riot in
household stuff of the Romans Greeks, and Asians, and specially in their
counterfeites both painted, and wrought in metal, with the incredible prices
of diverse of them, in curiously wrought plate, hangings, beds bedsteds,
chaires, stools, tables, with the excessive prices of many of them. Of the
great riot in plate of Antonius, Bassus, Sopus, Heliogabalus, the libertes of
Claudius, a Cardinal, and again the sparenesse therein of the ancient Romans,
of Scipio Africanus, and his brother, and of Aelius Catus: and what silver was
found in Carthage, when it was sacked: and of a costly piece of Arras bought by
Leo the tenth. The eighth chapter. Of the great riot of the Romans in their
feasts, with the incredible prices of their Acates: of the intemperanc^e
therein, of Timocreon, Crispinus, Vitellius, Nero, Heliogabalus, Lucius Verus,
two Antiochi, Marcus Antonius, Cleopatra, of Aesopus a player and his son
Clodius, Lucullus, Galeazo a Venetian, two Cardinals, and Muleasses king of
Tunis: and again the frugalitie in diet of the ancient Romans, of Augustus,
Pertinax, Iulianus, and Alexander Seuerus: also the daily proportion of diet
for householde of the kings of Persia, and of Alexander the great. The great
prices of precious ointmentes, and the riotous use of them in ancient time:
and how that Plotius and Muleasses were disclosed unto their enemies by their
sweet odors. The manifold sorts of wines, and the alterings of water found out
by riot, and the rare devises to make men have an appetite to eat and drink
superfluously. The great incommodities of excess in diet: the great death in
the Duchy of Wittenberg by immoderate drinkinge of wine, and at the game of
drinking set forth by Alexander the great. The wonderful grosenesse of
Nicomachus, Ptolomey, Alexander, Dionysius, and Sanctius, of the rate virtue of
an herb to make a man lean, the ravenous nature of the beast Rosomacha, and
of certain strange sheep, and swine. The ninth chapter. Of the riotous
magnificence of the Pyramides, Labyrinthes, Obelisces, of the Babylonian
garden, of the vain costly ships of Ptolomey, Hiero, Sesostres, Caligula,
the wonderful purposelesse bridges of Caligula, and Traian, of the sumptuous
Theater of Scaurus, of the incredible charges bestowed by the ancient Romans
in plays, games, and triumphs. The tenth Chapter. What intolerable troubles
riot does bring unto man: how it caused Catiline, Marcus Antonius, Curio, and
Caesar to reise up civil wars: and of a dumb show of Heraclitus that
nothing does more cause rebellion. The shameless shifts of Julius Caesar,
Caligula, Nero, and Domitian to maintein their riotous expenses, and of Cheopes
to finishe his Py^^mis: how Apitius murdered himself because he was not able
to bear the charges of his wonted riot. The eleventh Chapter. The unutterable
torments of love: the inordinate lust of man, both before, after, and against
nature. Of an harlotte that said she never remembered her self maid: how
Solomon and Achaz, begat their heirs at the age of eleven years: of a Camel
that killed his keeper for deceiving him in horsing his damme: of a man in
Germany in our days that begat upon his mother a child, the which he
afterward married: of an horse that killed himself after he perceived that he
had served his dam: of diverse men that burned in the lecherous love of them
whom they never saw. Of diverse that raged in lust upon senseless statuies.
The twelfth Chapter. Of the torments of ambition: which are also confirmed by
the examples of Themistocles, Alexander, Julius Caesar, Mancinus, and an
Indian. Of the wonderful sums of money given by the Romans to obtain the
honor to bear office: and of the manner of the choosing of their Magistrates.
The thirteenth Chapter. Of the painful troubles procured unto man by his
insatiable covetousness. The fourteenth Chapter. Of the great care and
hofufulnes ingrafted by nature in man for his burial: the rites as well ancient
as modern of almost al nations, and sects used at burials: with mention of
diverse costly tumbes. The xv. Chapter. Of the confuse and causeless fear of
man, and particularly of the Romans thri^e of Augustus, of the Greeks thrice,
of the confederates called the common wealth before Paris: of the Emperials in
our days at Villa Francha: of Pysander, of one that died by seeing of
Hercules, of Artemons mad fearfulness, of Saint Vallier Duke of
Valentinois: how Cassander was affrighted at the sight of Alexanders Image,
and other such vain fears. The xvi. Chapter. Of the furious wrath of man,
and specially of Walter Earl of Breme, and Matthias king of Hungary, The
xvij. Chapter. Of the care and hofulnesse that religion and superstition
bredeth in man. Of the intolerable sorrow for sin, of David, Marie
Magdalene, Fabiola, Edgar, the griping griefs of a guilty conscience, and the
vain imaginations of the Melancholic. The xviij. Chapter. Of the great
hofulnesse to prolong their lives, of Jews the eleventh, Charles the seventh,
Dionysius, Commodus, and Aristippus. The xix. Chapter. Of the shortness and
uncertainty of man's life, and by how many casualties it is cut off, and of
sundry strange kinds of souden deaths. The xx. Chapter. That not great
riches and large Empire do make a man happy: the which Socrates proved by an
excellent induction: whereunto is annexed a golden s^ntence of Agesilaus. The
xxi. Chapter. A discourse of the brittle bliss of Alexander the great. The
xxij. Chapter. The infelicitie and doleful end of Demetrius, yea, his variable
life and acts. The xxiij. Chapter. The greatness and also great mishaps and
troubles of Julius Caesar, and a worthy saying of Charles the fifth. The xxiiij.
Chapter. Of the variable events of Marcus Antonius. The xxv. Chapter. Of
Caligula his monstrous doings, intolerable enuies, rare infelicities, and
shameful end: but the singular virtues of his father, and great love that all
men bare unto him. The xxvi. Chapter. Of Domitians doings. The xxvij. Chapter.
Of the casualties of Commodus. The xxviij. Chapter. Of the rare conquestes and
losses of Cosdras king of Persia. The xxix. Chapter. Of the insolent exulting
of Vgoline Earl of Pisa, Frederick the second, and Henry the second, for
then good fortune: but their farall falls, and again, the moderation of mind
in their victories of Epaminondas, Philip of Macedome, Camyllus, Paulus
Aemylius, Charles the fifte: and why at Rome a bondsman did ride in the chariot
whereat did hang a bell and a whip, with him that triumphed. The xxx. Chapter.
Of the unfortunate fall of many great conquerours and founders of Empires. The
xxxi. Chapter. Of the greatness and also unlucky chances of Augustus. The
xxxij. Chapter. Of Traiane. The xxxiij. Chapter. Of Seuerus. The xxxiiij.
Chapter. Of Constantine the great. The xxxv. Chapter. Of Justinian. The xxxvi.
Chapter. Of Heraclius. The xxxvij. chapter. Of Michael Paleologus. The xxxviij.
chapter. Of Charles the great. The xxxix. chapter. Of Charles the fifth. The xl.
chapter. Of Solomon. The xli, chapter. Of Herodes king of Judea. The xlij.
chapter. Of Mahomet. The xliij. chapter. Of Hismael the Sophie. The xliiij.
chapter. Of the Cherife of Maroccho. The xlv. chapter. Of Barbarossa king of
Algier. The xlvi. chapter. Of Tamberleine the Tartar. The xlvij. chapter. Of
Selime the first great Lord of the Turks. The xlviij. chapter. Of Ferdinand
the sixth king of the Hispaines. The xlix. chapter. Of William Conqueror. The
l. chapter. Of Henry the second king of England. The li. chapter. Of Edward
the third king of England. The lij. chapter. Of Henry the fifth, king of
England. The conclusion.
The Errata.
Fol. page line. Fault. Correction. 1 1 20 singleness of God singleness God 4
1 21 of bountiful nature with the gifts of bounti. etc. 5 1 17 Camelion
pardis Cameliopardis 10 1 3 you now 10 1 12 the them 11 2 22 poemes Paeanes 12
2 16 people People 12 2 32 Triumpher Triumuir 15 1 3 furmament frumentie 15 2 32
tenor terror 17 2 19 gracious grievous 22 1 10 100000. 1000000. 27 2 17
Myrrha Murrha 40 2 22 made make 57 1 32 burn bury 59 1 14 silver Siler 100 1
28 these the East 100 2 6 demeanor misdemeanour 100 2 20 Cicero Curio 103 2 12
salting sallying 104 2 7 25000. 250000. 85 1 14 mire mere 88 2 21 abject
object 101 2 18 boldness baldness 102 1 19 moved monyed 104 2 14 of the
Bataui of the king of the Bataui 115 1 3 especial espiall 115 2 16 orgents his
agents 112 1 25 the these 113 1 12 carts certes 113 1 15 answered nothing:
answered: nothing etc. 114 1 12 scuffled stiffled 155 2 11 Sentines S. Quintins
116 2 22 seas feese 119 1 14 liueing his living 120 1 28 named having named 120
2 22 now nor 126 1 34 hall hat 128 2 14 finally smally 140 2 12 where whereas
142 2 19 brought brought forth 137 2 11 Angier Argier

Other escapes of less weight and small importance, I refer (gentle Reader)
to thine own correction, in thy private reading.


