THE TRVE MANNER of Electing of Popes.

Written by a French Gentleman, resident in Rome at this last Election.

Faithfully translated according to the French Copy.

With a List of all the Cardinals therein assisting and others.

AT LONDON, Printed by Val. S. for Nathaniell Butter. 1605.

To my Lord the Duke of Vandosme
MY most honorable Lord, the late departure of our L. P. Clement the 8. has
administered unto me a subject and opportunity during the vacancie, to search
out more particularly all points about the election of Popes, and the forms of
proceeding therein, as well ancient as modern, iudgeing it a very inconvenient
matter, that we should be so addicted to the investigation of the least strange
antiquities, as some do, employing their whole study herein, and to be
ignorant of that which occurreth in our own times, and in other things which
touch and more nearly concern us. I made therefore a little memoratiue, with
intent only that it should have been for mine own particular use, that upon
any default of my memory hereafter, I might have had recourse to the same: But
my duty, (for the honor you vouchsafe me, in being inquisitiue after my
studies, and having a care of the same) obliging me to give you advise herein,
you did not only desire to see it, as you have always an incredible affection
to understand, and be acquainted with all honest and commendable matters, with a
spirit and courage which surmounteth your years: but further having seen the
same, you thought it expedient, that it should be published and imprinted: It
being not altogether impertinent to my relations of Rome, which before I
presented to you, reduced as they saiy, within the length of a little foot;
according to the proportion of my age of fourteen years. It shall be
therefore you, my good Lord, to whom they that read this Treatise, and take
any contentment therein, must give thanks; even as on the contrary, they that
out of a proud humor, disdain and contemn whatsoever is not done by
themselves, shall have something to say against you, and not against me, that
does but only obey and observe your will and pleasure, as I ought to do;
having no other reference herein, but to demonstrate by all means possible,
that I am,

My Lord, Your thrice humble and most obedient servant, Hierome Bignon.

A brief Treatise touching the Election of the Pope.
CHAP. I. Diverse manners, wherein heretofore they have proceeded to the Election
of the Popes.
THe manner of creating and choosing the Popes at Rome, has bin diverse,
according to the diversity of times.

Some will needs affirm, that at the beginning he that was present Pope,
designed and ordained his successor: and that Saint Peter after this manner
established Saint Clement, to govern and rule the Church after him. But that
so resting without an other example, and not being followed afterward, one can
make no rule nor order of it, the same having taken no effect: because Saint
Clement succeeded not Saint Peter, but Linus, and after him Cletus: and Saint
Clement was but the third after Saint Peter: We likewise find it written, that
Linus and Cletus were also chosen by Saint Peter; not for successors, nor to be
intentive on prayer and preaching, neither to have pontifical jurisdiction,
but only for aid and assistaunce in external and temporal matters. And
that Saint Clement would not embrace this establishment, so much in modesty,
as by divine inspiration, for fear lest the example of such a nomination
should be drawn to a custom in succeeding times, and that thereby the power
and authority of the Church might be diminished in choosing or instituting of
a Pastor: As also by the Canon of the Apostles 76. And by the Counsel of
Antioch, Chap. 23. it is not lawful for a Bishop, being at the point of death,
to choose and appoint in his place a successor. By which, it may be gathered,
that this custom was usurped by some Bishops, of whom there are diverse
examples. Certain it is, that after Saint Clement, all the Popes were made and
created by the voice and suffragation of the Clergy and Christian people of
the City of Rome, and by the Bishops of other Provinces that then were
there. The which was observed till the schism that fell out between Damasus
and Vrsicinus, about the year of our Lord, 369.

For Damasus being then chosen Pope, by one part of the people and Clergy, and
Vrsicinus by another, and both of them supported by their favorites: they both
were desirous to hold and maintain this dignity, which caused great factions
and sedition, and went so far, that they came to handblowes: So that one day,
there was an hundred seven and thirty dead bodies left in a Church; for which
cause, the Emperor afterward interposed his authority, in case of any such
scisme hereafter ordaining him, whom he would have to be Pope. And in this sort
was Damascene established by the authority of the Emperor Vaelentinian. And
not long after, there occurred the like division, between Eulalius and
Bonifacius, and great sedition was raised within the City of Rome upon this
occasion, and Symmachus the Governor not being able to appease or set down
any order for the same, in the end by the mere authority and power
Imperial of the Emperor Honorius, Boniface was made Pope. This dignity
having been before, as it were sequestered for the time, by the Emperor, and
committed to the Bishop of Spoleti, that then was during the feast of Easter.
And so there grew then division between Symachus and Laurentius: the which
king Theodorick, making known, in an assembly held at Rauenna, he confirmed
Symachus.

And afterward the cause of scisme ceasing, to prevent the tumult and
disorder that might grow thereupon, the Emperor was always wont in such
elections to be present. And it came to this point, that an election of the
Pope, made by the people and Clergy, was not auayleable, except it were
ratified and confirmed by the Emperor: in that he elected, durst not proceed
to his consecration, without the Princes will and consent, unto whom, for the
right, and prerogative of confirmation, a certain sum of money was given.

This manner of proceeding continued, while the days of the Emperor
Constantine, the 3: who being moved by the good and holy life of Pope
Benedict, 2. which was in the year, 686. he sent unto him a constitution, by
which it was ordained and decreed, that whosoever afterward should be chosen,
by the clergy and people of Rome, he was incontinently to be reputed for the
true Vicar of Jesus Christ, without attending therein the authority of the
Emperor of Constantinople, or of the Exacque of Italy, resident in Ravenna.

Afterward in the year 773. Pope Hadrian the first, in the counsel of
Lateran, wherein there was 153. Bishops assembled in the Church of Saint Savior
in Rome, with their advise and consent, gave the power of electing and choosing
pope to Charlemaine King of France, who was afterward made Emperor, for
driving the Lombards out of Italy: But this continued no long time, because
after that the Emperor Loys the debonaire Son to Charlemaine, released this
royal prerogative, in the days of pope Paschall the first, and remysed unto
the Clergy, and people of Rome, the full and free power of creating and
electing of Popes, which continued and took place, for a long time after. But
pope, Leo S. having bin maintained in the seat with arms, by the Emperor
Otho the 1. in recompense of his benefit, and being offended with the in
constancy and mutability of the people, he transferred all the authority of
creating and making popes, unto the person of the Emperor Otho the 1. about
the year, 963.

Othos successors used this authority and privilege til the time of the
Emperor Henry the 4. under whom pope Gregory the 7. called before Hildebrand:
who was chosen in the year 1073. surrendered the same prerogative again, unto
the clergy, and people of Rome, and presently after, pope Paschall 2. having
remised it into the hands of the Emperor, Henry 5. he incontinently after
revoked the same again.

In the year 1509. Pope Nicholas 2. in the counsel of Latran. 4. made a
Decree touching the election of Popes, importing thus much: that first the
Cardinal Bishops would treat amongst themselves of the election, conferring
afterward with the other Cardinals about the same, and so the election by
them made, to be approved and consented unto by all the people, and clergy
of Rome, using these words: Vt Cardinalis Episcopi diligentissime simul de
electione tractantes, mox Christi clericos Cardinales adhibeant: sicque
reliquus clerus, and populus ad consensum nouae electionis accedat: And yet for
all this, the Emperors would not afterward give up this their right, and
pretention, as we have before declared. And then by little and little this
prerogative came to the hands of so many Cardinals only, as well those that
were Bishops, as others, that were Priests and Deacons.

At last, Gregory 1^, in the Counsel of Lions, in the year 1274. instituted
the manner of the Popes election, by the Cardinals: which were all to be
shut and enclosed in one place, called the Conclaue, in the town where the
precede^t pope should depar: so that no body might go in, nor come out, or
confer, by letters, messengers, or otherwise, with the same Cardinals,
while they had created a Pope, to whom they brought, and delivered their
ordinary refection at a window: And if in the space of three days sithence
their entrance, they had not agreed upon an election, it is said, that for
five days after, they were to have but only one dishe at dinner, or supper:
And after this, if they yet continued longer without making an election, they
were to have nothing given them, but bread, wine, and water, while they had
chosen a Pope: After the decease of the pope, they were to defer their
session for 10. days, to expect, and attend for the absent Cardinals, before
they entered into the Conclaue: Although notwithstanding, entrance was not
forbidden the^, so they came afterward, the matter being yet entire, and not
treated of. The same was confirmed by Pope Clement the 5: who by his
constitution forbad that such a form should not be corrected, changed, nor
altered by the Cardinals in Sede Vacant, and that nothing might be added or
taken from it, in any sort whatsoever: But by a Bull of Pope Clement the 6.
there was some moderation, as well for the form of the Conclaue, wherein they
were permitted to make separations, and to furnish celles for each Cardinal,
with tapistries only, as for the meat they were to have brought them. It
remains therefore, that we a little more particularly touch the form, and
order, which is used at this day, in such an election, and all that which
palseth, and is performed in the Conclaue.

CHAP. II. Of the form, and order, which they use and proceed in at this
present, to the election of a Pope.
PResently after the Pope is departed, yea and even when they see, or that they
have advertisement from the Physicians that he is at the last cast, the
Cardinals which are then in Rome, assemble together in the privy Consistory,
to consult for the government of the town, and to provide for the affairs of
the vacancie: and then the seat being vacant, they are apparelled in Coquests
Rochettes, and Mozzettes without Copes, in sign of Jurisdiction, the people of
the town all in arms, guarde at the gates of the City, the Cardinals
Palaces, and in other quarters.

The day after the Cardinals reassemble together in the same place, for the
like effect, and to determine of such affairs as then occur, as also to
provide, for the preparation and adopting of that which is necessary for the
holding of Conclaue.

Afterward they carry the corpse of the deceased Pope ordinarily into S.
Peter's Church, except the departed pope, made choice of his sepultur in some
other place. Thereto all the Cardinals presentially assist, which are at the
assembly: the dead body is reuested with Pontifical ornaments, and laid upon a
bedstead in the Church, or some chapel of the same, where the people come and
kiss his feet.

In the days following, the Cardinals solemnize the Popes obsequies: and
there is a convention in the vestrie of Saint Peter's, wherein the Princes
Ambassadors do use to enter, making their remonstrations, and motions touching
the Election to be performed. During the vacancie, the great Chamberlain
gouerns Rome. But so there is no expedition nor dispatch of any thing admitted
in the Apostolical Chancerie, while there be a new Pope. And in brief, as
soon as the Pope has yielded up his breath, the Vice-cha^celer takes the
Bulls or Seals, causes the^ publicly to be broken, rased out, and that side
to be taken away of them, whereon the deceased Popes name was written, so that
they cannot be sealed withal. And the other side whereon are graven the heads
of Saint Peter and Paul, they wrap within a linen cloth, which he lays up
in some casket, with his seal, and commits them into the hands of the
Chamberlain. Whose office, together, with that of the Penitentiaries,
continues during the vacancy: And if they should chance to die, the
Cardinals might discharge the same, for the time only of such a Vacancie.

Nine days after the Popes death, they celebrate the Mass of the Holy Ghost,
and being finished with singing the Hymn, Veni sancte Spiritus, they enter
into the Conclaue.

The Conclaue at Rome, is in a place joining to Saint Peter's Church, within
the Popes Palace, in Sixtus his Chapel, as big as a great Church, where is
portraied the last Judgment, and it was the excellent worke-manship of Michael
Angelo: which chapel they set forth after the manner of a Domitorie in
Convents, but that there are many great allies, and some more less, and
narrower, and with the order of celles, or little cabinets, wherein the
Cardinals lie. To the which Conclaue, the chapel of Pauline, and the great
Royal Hall abutt, and are adjoining, being as it were a part of the same. The
gates, lower windows, and all accesses, are so mured, and closed up, that one
cannot talk, or communicate with any of those within.

When they are entered into the Conclaue, they assemble together in the chapel
Pauline, where they consult of all things which concerns the government of the
Conclaue, and the same day, they take the oaths of the Officers, deputed for
the guard of the Conclaue, as well of those without, as of them within.

At the beginning, after they are entered, the Co^claue remains open, for some
little time, and then Princes Ambassadors use to go in, and make their
recommendations, and solicitations in favor of him, or them, whom they know
to be best liked, and affected by their Princes.

After this, the Conclaue is shut, and then no man may any more go in, nor
communicate in any sort, with any one without, neither by letters, messengers,
nor otherwise: nor likewise go out, till there be a new Pope created, except
some Cardinal chance to arrive, who always during the Conclaue, may have
free entrance.

And yet this is to be observed, that all Cardinals are not privileged to
enter in, except they be Bishops, Priests, or Deaco^s, at the least, for
Cardinals Subdeacons, have no voice therein, nor are admitted any entrance: And
yet we find that the Cardinal of Austria, being but a Subdeacon, entered into
the Conclaue of Sextus 5. by reason of a warrant or brief that he had from
Gregory. 13. by means of which, it was granted him, and the which he showed
and presented, when they would have denied his entrance.

Every day the necessary provision is brought them, which they give them in at
a window, or by the wicket of the gate, before which there is treble guard,
whereof the nearest to the gate, consistes of the Prelates that are in Rome, who
look that none may communicate with those that are enclosed in the Conclaue,
and for this cause, they search the Vessels and platters, to see whether
there be not any letters hidden in the same.

Every Cardinal within the conclaue, can have no more, but two men to serve
him, whom they call Conclauistes.

The conclaue being closed, the day following the Deane of the Cardinals after
the celebrating of Mass, administreth the holy Communion to all the
Cardinals.

After this the Conclauistes assemble together, in the Chapel Pauline, before
the master of the Ceremonies, who takes notice of them, and sees whether they
do not execute their appointed number.

Also at the beginning the master of the ceremonies reads the Bull of Pius 4.
wherein it is expressed, that the Cardinals entering into the Conclaue, should
be sworn.

Every day in Paul's Chapel, one of the Cardinals celebrates the Mass of
the Holy Ghost, and so they proceed to the election of the Pope: which for the
most part also is performed after two manners, one by Scrutinie, and the other
by Adoration.

The scrutenie is held after this sort: every Cardinal writes within a
certain billet of paper, his voice and choice, and at the end of Mass, he
puts it into the great challice of Gold, which stands upon the Altar: Then
all the billets are powered forth upon a little table, which for this purpose is
set before the Altar: There are three of the Cardinals, which in the sight,
and presence of all the rest, unfold these little rulles, or billets,
pronouncing aloude his name, who has subscribed to every of them, and the
Cardinals write and set down in a sheet of paper, the number of the voices
which every one has, to know who has most.

Where by the way we must note, that to choose, and create a Pope, there must
co^curre two thirds of all the Cardinals voices in the co^claue by the
constitution of Pope Alexander, 3. set down in the Chap. Licet de vita^da de
electione, in the Decretals: For if in such a scrutenie, there is not any one,
with who^ the two thirds accur; at the same instant they cast all the billets
into the fire, and by this means the affair is referred over to some other
time, when they make and recommence an other scrutenie in the same form: the
which, by reason of this, uses to be repeated and reiterated many times, while
these two thirds occur in one person. The which falls out very seldom, by
way of scrutenie: so as they are urged to have recourse to adoration.
Notwithstanding, the want of voices in scrutenie is sometimes supplied by the
Accessi, so called: which is, when those that gave their suffragation and voice
by billet to some other, they now give it to him whom they see to have most
voices, and sing these words; Accedo ad Cardinalem talem: from whence that
word of Accessi came. And to the end that no fraud may be committed herein, he
that gives his voice by such Accession, says; Let them look on my billet,
which has on the top such a devise: And that by this, on may know that he
had nominated an other: And this is for fear, least it should happen, that he
which had given his voice by billet to one, might give it again by this form
of Access to an other: which would be two voices in one man's person, instead
of one.

The billets they use, are made after his fashion: The Cardinal that gives his
voice, takes a leaf of paper, folded into diverse plightes, and upon the last
he writes his own name: and in the two first, he causes the Cardinals name
to whom he will give his voice to be written by his Conclauise, in this manner:
Ego Eligo in summum pontisicem Reuerendiss. Dominum meum Cardinalem. N.
Afterward they choose the billet at both ends: upon which they also set some
devise at the Cardinals pleasure, that without unfolding the same, it may be
known, by the external devise.

There is yet an other kind of scrutenie, which they call open, or apertis
vocibus, which is, when the Cardinals being assembled together, declare aloude
him, whom they choose.

The other manner, which is Adoration: is, when the Cardinals being assembled
together in the Chapel, turn toward him, whom they desire to be made Pope,
doing reverence unto him, and bending the knees very low, and when they see
that the two thirds are gone to this manner of Adoration, The Cardinal thus
adored, is made Pope.

And though this manner of Election, be referred to that which is called by the
ancients, and in the cannon law, per inspirationem, and that they say, it is
the way of the holy Ghost, which was, when all with one voice without any
treaty, or precedent scruteny, and without any formalitie, concur, as it
were by divine inspiration, to say, that such a one must be made Pope, it
being thus equally designed by every one.

Notwithstanding this form of Adoration is not esteemed by many, so lawful,
and available as scrutenie: because by means of contentions, and
partialities, there may be some fraud or violence committed therein, in that
the weaker side may be drawn to Adoration by the example of those more
mighty, and those fearful, induced by them more resolute. And oftentimes it
happens, that those who would have consented to the Election of some one, by
free voice, seeing this general and violent concurrance in Adoration, they
suffer themselves to be carried away with the violence of this stream. That by
this they may demonstrate, how they have a part in such an Election, and they
will not be the last herein, for fear of displeasing and incurring his
displeasure who should be chosen.

All this is performed in Paul's Chapel, in the ordained place, for the Popes
Election. There was heretofore a third manner of the Popes Election, by form of
comprimise: and this was, when all the Cardinals upon some amongst them, to
whom they wholly referred themselves, for the choosing and Electing of him, whom
they should judge most capable: but this fashion, though it be one of the three
manners of Election approved of in the Chap: Quia propter, de Electione, in the
Decretalls, is more used at Rome: whereof some give this reason, because this
power of nominating a Pope after the death of Alexander the 5. being given to
Baltasar Cossa, then Cardinal of S. Eustachio, he made himself Pope, saying:
Ego sum papa. And he was called John, the 23.

CHAP. III. What is observed, when the Elestion is performed, and after.
When the two thirds of the voices concur in one person, be it by scrutenie
secret, or open, by means of Access, or by way of Adoration, he out of doubt
is truly Pope. Notwithstanding the other Cardinals also, use to give their
consent thereunto. And then the chief Cardinal Bishop, all the other being
set, pronounces, and declares in the name of all the College, that he
chooses such an one for Pope. And dema^deth of him how he is affected, and
willing to undertake the same, which he having declared, and accepting of the
Election, all rise up to gratify him: and at the same instant, putting on his
Rochet, they cause him to sit down in a prepared seat, which is placed before
the table, near the Altar, they give him the fishers ring, and cause him to
deliver and make known, by what name he will be called.

This form of changing name, was brought in, received and used, since the time
of Pope John the 12. who was chosen in the year, 155: he being before called
Octauian: yet diverse ascribe this institution to Pope Sergius, 2. who was in
the year, 844.

Having therefore declared what name he will take upon him, he uses to subscribe
to the constitutions, which had been agreed upon, and sworn unto, by all the
Cardinals, before the election, and to sign certain supplications, and
requests.

In the mean while, the chiefest of the Cardinal Deacons, opening a little
window, from whence the people which attend, may see, and be seen, he shows
forth a Cross, pronouncing these words, with a loud voice; Annuncio vobis
gandiu^ magnu^: Papam habemus. Reuere^diss. Cardinalis E^ore^tinus electus est
in summu^ Pontifice^, and elegit sibi nomen, Leo 2.

This being done, he is disvested of his common garments, which belong to the
clearks of the Ceremonies, and revested with all the habits Pontifical, and
causing him to sit upon the Altar, all the Cardinals a row do him
reverence, in kissing his feet, hands, and mouth.

During this intercourse of Ceremony, all the gates of the Conclaue are
opened, the bars, and walls which closed and mured the passages, gates, and
windows, are broken down, and overthrown: and the Soldiers entering
confusedly, as it were by force, take and pill whatsoever they meet withal in
their way. And this is the reason, that when any one is declared Pope, the
Conclauistes do all they can, to ramasse, and lay close up, and get together,
all the best things that belong to their Cardinal: And in in like manner the
people use to rush into his house that is chosen, and to pillage the same.

At the same time, the new Pope is carried into Saint Peter's Church, followed
with the Channons and Singing men of the same Church, which sing; Ecce
Sacerdos Magnus?

And after he has prostrated himself on the earth, and made his prayer, he
is placed upon the great and high Pontifical Chair, where, Te Deum laudamus
is said: There again before the holy assembly, and multitude of people, which
come thither in great preasse, he is adored by the Cardinals, Bishops,
Prelates, and others. And then he gives general Absolution, and his
Benediction to every one, with much Solemnity, and Ceremonies; which grant
full Indulgence: and incontinently after he is carried into Saint Peter's
Palace, highly reverenced by every one, and whereof he receives such
contentment, as every one may easily judge.

Some days after, with great Pomp, and Magnificence, the new Pope is solemnly
Crowned, in an eminent place, which is before the Porche of Saint Peter's, upon
a scaffolde, richly adorned and set forth, and there is put upon his head, the
Hara, or triple Crown, called Regnum.

Sigisbert, and Aimoinus write, that this crown being enriched with many
precious stones, and other beautiful ornaments, and being sent to Clouis King
of France, by the Emperor Anastace, Clouis sent it again, for a present and
gift, to the Church of Saint Peter's in Rome.

This Crown is set on the Popes head, by the chiefest of the Cardinal
Deacons, to whom this office is appropriate, and then many other notable
Ceremonies are performed: and amongst others, some putting fire to towe, cries
out aloude: Pater sancte, sic transit gloria Mundi; Omnis caro saevum, and
omnis gloria eius sicut flos agri. From thence he goes on Procession to Saint
John Laterans, accompanied with all the Cardinals, and Prelates which are in
Rome, with all his Officers, and with many others, Lords and Gentlemen, and
this Procession is on horseback, after the manner of a magnificent entry,
with great Pomp and Solemnity: the Order, Form, and Magnificence whereof,
would be to long here to represent. At the end of this Procession, the Pope
uses to feast all the Cardinals.

There is an other thing about Consecration, which is performed, when the
chosen Pope, had not before been consecrated Bishop, in which case there are
also many other Solemnities used, about this Consecration.

The election of Pope Leo the 11. placed at this present in the Cathedral
seat.
With a list of such Cardinals as were there, and assisted at this solemnity,
and of all the rest that have place in Rome Conclaue.
POpe Clement the 8. called before Hippolitus Aldobrandin, Cardinal of Saint
Pancrace, and great Penetentiarie, was after the decease of Innocent the ninth
chosen Pope, the thirty day of January, 1592. He held the seat for the space
of thirteen years, one Month, and five days. A father very memorable, and
recommendable for his great piety, devotion, and charity, with other high and
rare virtues, as also for his singular prudence in the management of affairs:
He departed the third day of March about ten a clock at night.

After his decease, all ceremonies and solemnities requisite in such a case, as
well for his burial, as others, were observed, with many assemblies, and
congregations in the usual places.

The Conclaue was so prepared, that there was no Celles in Sixtus the fourth
his Chapel, as before there was wont to be: but all the Celles and
Chambrets were addressed and prepared in the greatest part of Saint Peter's
Palace: That is to say, in the first, second, and third hall, within the hall
of the Consistory, Leonine, and Gregorian, and in the most of the chambers of
the Palace.

The Cardinals entered into the Conclaue, the fourteenth of the same Month of
March, and there was of them to the number of threescore and one. The
Scrutenie was diverse times set on foot, and many Cardinals propounded. And
amongst others, my Lord Cardinal Baronius, who at the beginning had thirty
voices, and in the days following, they amounted to the number of seven or
eight and thirty, which was not yet a sufficient number to make the two
thirds: although it was a thing which he no ways contended after, but on the
contrary estranged himself from it as much as might be, doing whatsoever he
could to hinder this proceeding. There was also some others propounded, against
whom, exclusions and oppositions were made: But the first day of April, when
they came to mention my Lord Cardinal of Florence, there was presently such a
concurrence, and consent on all parts, that without making any scruple or doubt
in the matter, they being in Paul's Chapel, the place ordained for such
elections every one ran to adoration, and it was begun by my Lord Cardinal of
Ioyeuse.

And at so great a promptitude, alacrity, and harmony of all wills, that we
need not to doubt but it was a very divine inspiration: even they themselves,
who (as was supposed) would have been some obstacle, and that had attempted
and made show of some such matter, concurring therein with their full consent,
because there was no body, that would either hear or adheere unto them. And
thus the same day, being the first of April, about seven a clock in the
dawning, my Lord Cardinal of Florence, or de Medices, was chosen Pope, and
took upon him the name of Leo the eleventh.

SInce the publishing of this Relation, news is come by diverse letters of the
death of this Leo: and of an other Election in hand: who (as it is supposed)
was made away by poison: but because there is yet no undoubted certainty of
the same, I would be loath to publish any private aduertisements, or to set
that for infallible truth, which is only grounded upon surmises: wherefore it
will be better to attend some further advertisement, when I will be ready
(courteous Reader) to acquaint thee withal. In the mean while be satisfied
with this which has been delivered by an eye witness.

FINIS.
A List of the Cardinals assistants: and those absent are marked with a star.
1 Du Perron a Frenchman, Bishop of Eureux. 2 Tarugi a Florentine, aged 81.
years. 3 Sfoudrato, Nephew to Pope Gregory the 14. 4 Platto, a Milanese, 56.
years of age. 5 Scrasino Oliuario. 6 Bianchetto, a Bolognese of 52. years. 7
Bishop of Cracouia.* 8 Visconte, a Milanese of 58. years. 9 Sannesio. 10
Aquauiua, a Neapolitane of 52. years. 11 Montalto, Nephew to Pope Sixte the
fifth, of 38. years. 12 Sauli a Geneuoise, of 66. years. 13 Charles Emanuel
Pio of Sauoy. 14 Roias.* 15 Ginusio.* 16 S. Clement, borne at Montferrat, of
58. years. 17 Gueuarre. 18 Buffalo. 19 Bellarmine, a Tuskan and Jesuit of 64.
years. 20 Lorraine.* 21 Mantica of Friali, of 64. years. 22 Baronius, a
Neapolitane of 66. years. 23 Come, Deane of the Cardinals Bishops of Hostia,
borne in Come, a Town of Lonibardit, of 78. years. 24 Madrusso, Bishop of
Trante. 25 Camerin, of the Dukedom of Spolette, a town under the Papate of
64. years. 26 Pallotta, borne in Montalte in Italy. 27 Sourdis, a Frenchman,
of 34. years. 28 Monopoli. 29 Beuilaqua Ferrarois, of 38. years. 30 Gallo,
borne in the Marq: of Ancone, a Town under the Pope, of 32. years. 31 Verone,
a Venetian of 76. years. 32 S. Cesaree, Nephew to Aldobrandin. 33 Conti,
Bishop of Ancone. 34 S. George, about 50. years of age. 35 Diatristano, a
Bohemian, of 38. years. 36 Delfino, Bishop of Vincence. 37 D'Oria. 38 Tosco,
of 66. years. 39 Aldobrandin, a Florentine, Nephew to Pope Clement the 8. last
deceased, about the age of 34. years. 40 Sforsa, a Roman, of 48. years. 41
Borghese of Siene, of 58. years. 42 Borromee, a Milanese, of 42. years. 43
Valente. 44 Monte, of 57. years. 45 SSti, fourth Nephew to Pope Innocent the
9. of 38. years. 46 Ioyeuse, of the renowned family of the Ioyeuses, and
Protector of the French affairs. 47 Pinello, a Genowaise, of 66. years. 48
Fernese, a Roman. 49 Spinello. 50 Sapata.* 51 Arigona, a Milanese of 63.
years. 52 Agucchio. 53 Deti, kinsman to the last Pope deceased by the mothers
side. 54 Est, a Ferrarese of 38. years. 55 Justinian, a Genowaise, of 58.
years. 56 Giury, a Frenchman, of 56. years. 57 Bandini, a Florentine of 52.
years. 58 Florence, or De Medices, a Florentine of 69. years, or thereabout.
59 Auila, a Spaniard, Protector for Spain. 60 Perreti. 61 S. Marcel, a
Genowaise of 62. years. 62 Montelpero, borne in the Marquisate of Ancone,
General of the Augustines, of 60. years. 63 Gondy.* 64 Cesis, a Roman, of 48.
years. 65 Parauicino, a Roman, by original a Grison, the Almaine Protector,
of 58. years. 66 Tauerna. 67 Pamfilio. 68 Ascoli, born in Corregio in
Lombardie, of 66. years. 69 Colonne, a Roman.
FINIS.

