A DISCOVRSE occasioned upon the late defeat, given to the Arch-rebels, Tyrone
and Odonnell, by the right Honorable the Lord Mountioy, Lord Deputy of
Ireland, the 24. of December, 1601. being Christmas Eaue:

And the yielding up of Kinsale shortly after by Don John to his Lordshippe:

By RAPH BYRCHENSHA Esquire, Controller General of the musters in Ireland.

Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? Seen and allowed.



LONDON Printed for M. L. and are to be sold in Saint Dunstans Church-yarde.
1602.

To the Right Honorable L. Charles Blunt, Baron of Mountioy, Captain of the
Castles and Forts of Porchmouth, L. Deputy of Ireland, and knight of the most
Honorable order of the Garter.
BY your Lordships and the rest of the Councels Letters at Kinsale, bearing
date the 27. of December. last, 1601. directed to the right H. the Lord
Chauncelour, and the rest of the privy Council here your Lordshippe advertised
your happy and blessed success (by Gods most gracious providence) obtained
over the Arch-rebels Tyrone, Oddonell, and the rest of the rebels and Spanish
inuadours, upon Christmas Eaue, being the 24. of December: which most famous
victory and great hand of the Almighty, I had advertisement the sixth of this
present, that 14. Priests of the rebels were dispersed abroad, to persuade and
incense the vulgar and common sort, that the rebels and Spaniards received no
such loss or damage as your Lordships said Letter delivered: nor as the common
brute most confidently conceived and knew to be: by which practice they meant
the more sou^dly to hold in and continue their faction. Whereupon I thought it
both reasonable, and discourse agreeing to the nature of truth, to make known
to the world, that the rebels loss and damage was not less then your
Lordships said Letter mentioned, but in higher measure and greater prejudice to
the^ then that Letter expressed: whereby the world may see the falsehood and
deceit of these beastly Priests, and the drift of these rebels and traitors
to draw unconstant men and wavering subjects to their cursed purposes: I
confess I have very coldly and barely handled this subject, and rather dimmed
and diminished the worth and dignity thereof, then beautified and adorned the
same with matter or method: wherein I humbly beseech your Lordshippes pardon,
as also in my boldness in presuming upon so nice an argument. But pearls and
precious stones require no ornaments to set them forth: neither does the
original cause of my writing, need or ask any flourish my self or any other
mortal man can make in the same, being a work directed and purposed by the
power and strength of Iehoua, the great God of heaven and earth: and effected
and performed by your Lordships valor and worthiness, being Gods instrument
appointed for the accomplishment thereof: which are matters more then
sufficient in themselves to reco^mend the cause to the world. And so in all
humble manner I will leave my poor labor to your Lordships Honorable liking
and favorable censure, and your Lordships person to be protected under the
blessed wings of the Almighty. From my house in Dublin the 30. of January. 1601.

Your Lordships most humble in all duty and service, Raph Birchensha

To the Reader, whether counterfeit or dissembling Papists: open or public
Recusants: or what kind of Papists soever.
BEcause the Subject, whereupon I chiefly have framed this discourse, aims
only to lay open the merciful hand of God lately showed to the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and performed by her loyal and faithful Subject the L.
MOVNTIOYE, L. Deputy of this Land, against the insolent, traitorous, and
rebellious usurpation of Tyrone, Odonnell, and all other open and discovered
rebels: And that among other his colored and shadowed courses for his
rebellion, this principally was one: namely, to reform religion, and for his
and their conscience sake. Whose religion (if he have any at all, as I assure
my self he has none) is but mere Athisme, and himself a damned slave in
hell, without hearty repentance and speedy conversion. And for that the religion
whereof he makes outward show and profession, is according to the Romish*
Church, taught, delivered, and brought hither into this Realm of Ireland from
the shambles and slaughterhouse of souls, I mean the Church of Rome: and
maintained, defended, and earnestly urged by Antichrist the Pope of Rome, that
man of sin: and by his fugitives, runnagates, and traitorous male-contented
subjects of all Princes in Christendom flocking still thither: I mean his
Seminaries, Jesuits, Priests, and Friars: Who closely creep and steal into
this Land in disguised and counterfeited manner: and by whom infinite souls of
men have been and are seduced and drawn away from the true worship of God,
and obedience of his will, to follow tradition, superstition, and man's
invention, to the great danger of their souls, without speedy amendment. In
regard whereof, it may please you with patience and in brotherly love and
affection: which every faithful and true Christian ought to have, the one with
the other, but with a single eye and well disposed heart, consider of these
special points ensuing: by which the Church of Rome is made so glorious, and
which heads are also so stiffly and stoutly maintained and taught by that side:
and then to judge and censure whither the Church of Rome be the true spouse of
Christ or no: or whether on the contrary, it be not the false Church, and the
apparent sink and synagogue of Satan.

Act. 8. 1.
a great persecution against it, insomuch as they were all dispearsed and
scattered? And let them tell me, where, or how the Church was visible when
Christ was smitten, and all the rest was scattered and Matthew. 12. 17.
hid, and concealed themselves. Does not S. John in his Revelation Revel. 12.
6. 7.
testify expressly, That the Church of Christ, signified there by a woman, fled
into a desert or wilderness, where she had a place prepared for her of God,
and where she could not for a certain season be found of the persecutors?
Where was the Church in the time of Elias the Prophet? When he said, They have
forsaken thy covenant, 1 Kings. 19. etc.
they have destroyed thine Altar, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I
am left alone. Again, it is written in the 2. of 2. Kings. 16.
Kings the 16. that under the reign of Achas, there was taken a pattern of
the Altar of the Idolaters of Damascus, and Vrias the High Priest removed the
Altar of the Lord. Whereby it appears that the Priesthood was corrupted, the
Altar removed, and consequently the sacrifice ceased. Now I trust there is no
Papist so impudent to say, that either the true Church was in the Scribes and
Pharisees, or in the time of Achas, Manasses, and many other Kings of Israel,
so visible and populous as they would have it: but that the Church of Christ
were in that small number, wheresoever dispersed.

Secondly, the Church of Rome holds that ignorance is the mother of devotion:
but Christ says ignorance is the mother of error: saying, You err not knowing
the Scriptures: and Christ bids the Matthew. 22. 29. Ioh. 5. 39. Coloss. 3.
16. Acts. ^7.
people to search the Scripture. Paul commanded that the word of God should
dwell plentiously in the people, whereby they might teach themselves: and the
Berenas examined the Scriptures.

Paul says: He that 1. Cor. 14.
speaks in a strange tongue; speaks not unto men, but unto God, for no man
hears him, howbeit in the spirit he speaks secret things. He that speaks
in a strange language edifieth himself. I would that you all spoke strange
languages, but rather that you prophesied. For greater is he that prophecieth,
then he that speaks diverse tongues, except he expound it, that the Church may
receive edification. And now brethren, if I come unto you speaking diverse
tongues, what shall it profit you, etc. Moreover, things without life which
give a sound, whether it be a Harp or a Pipe, except they make a distinction
in the sound, how shall it be known what is piped or harped? So likewise ye
by the tongue, except you utter words which have signification, how shall it be
understood what is spoken, for you shall speak in the air.

This day shall thou be with me in Luke 16. Luke. 23. 43.
Paradise. Christ says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my
words and believes him that sent me, has eternal life, Ioh. 5. 25. Phil. 1.
2. 3.
and comes not into condemnation, but passes from death to life. Saint Paul
says, I covet to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Again, For we know, that
when this earthly tabernacle of ours is dissolved, we have a building of God
not made with hands, but 2. Cor. 5. 1. Revel. 14. 13.
eternal in the heavens. Again, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
from henceforth they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.
And Saint Peter tells the Saints and children 1. Pet. 1. 9.
of God, and assures them of it, That the end of their faith is the salvation
of their souls.

Adam man has free will: Whereas God says, After that time that the Genesis 6.
imaginations of men's hearts are only evil every day. Christ says, Iere. 7.
No man can come unto me, except the father draw him. Again, Romans 3. 10.
Convert thou me and I shall be converted. Also, There is not one Heb. 11. 6.
that does good, no not one. Again, Without faith it is impossible Romans 14. 23.
to please God: And again, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: Ioh. 15. 1, 2.
Also, Except men be ingrafted into him, they can bring forth no fruits:
besides many places to like effect.

Drink ye all of this cup. Paul Matthew. 26. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 23. 28.
1. Corinthians 11. 23. 28. says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.

This is my body, which they will have to be expounded literally: but why then
do they not expound the other words of Christ literally also concerning the
cup? For the text says in the 27. and 28. verses, that He took the cup and
said, This is my blood: I am sure they will not say that the cup was the blood
of Christ, (as the words be,) but they will grant a figure in those words:
namely, that by the cup is meant the wine in it: if then they will admit a
figure in this, why may there not be a figure in the other: namely, This is my
body, should be understood thus: This bread is a figure of my body, (which was
broken for you.) Circumcision was called the Lords covenant, when indeed it was
not the covenant: So likewise the Paschall Lamb is called the Passover, when
indeed it was but a sign of the Passover. Christ says, Do this in
remembrance of me. And Saint Paul says plainly and expressly, 1. Cor. 11. 26.
28. that the communicants do eat bread: and therefore it remains bread
after the words of consecration. For if it were transubstantiated into the body
of Christ, then were there no bread to eat, but the body of Christ is the
thing that should be eaten: but none does eat the very body of Christ. For if
every communicant did eat the very body of Christ naturally, carnally, and
really (as they grossly suppose,) Christ should have a number of bodies, which
is palpably absurd and monstrous to think. Besides, if Christ gave his body to
be eaten really by his Disciples, at the time of the institution of this
Sacrament, what was it that did hang upon the cross on the morrow. Moreover,
S. Peter says, Acts 3. 21, that as touching the body of Christ, The heavens
must contain him to the end of the world.

God deposes the mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low degree.
It is God that testifies of Luke. 1. Dan. 2. 20. and 4. 14. and 21. 2. Cor.
10. 4. Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 1.
himself; By me Kings reign, and Princes have dominion. Paul confesses
plainly, that the weapons of their warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God, that is spiritual. And it is manifest by the practice of the
Apostles and all their precepts, (commanding all Christians to obey their
rulers, their Kings and Princes, yea though they were persecutors:) and the
Apostles never had any such authority committed to them. Christ himself says,
his kingdom was not of Ioh. 18. 36. Ioh. 6. 15. Math. 22. 21.
this world: and Christ himself refused to be made a King: Christ himself
also paid tribute unto Caesar, and commanded others to give the same, and all
other duties of subjection and obedience to Caesar. And Christ has expressly
forbidden his Apostles, and in them all the Ministers of his Gospel, all such
dominion and civil jurisdiction, saying thus unto them: The Kings of the
nations reign over Mat. 20. 25. 26 Mar. 10. 42. 43.
them, and they that be great among them bear rule or dominion, but it shall
not be so with you.

Mar. 2. 7. Job. 14. 4. Esaias. 45. 11.
sins but God. Job says, Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness,
there is not one. And Esaias says, speaking, in the person of God: I even I am
he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember
thy sins. And Paul confidently affirms, when he says, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge Romans 8. 33. 34.
of Gods chosen: it is God that justifies, who shall condemn: it is Christ
which is dead, yea* or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right
hand of God, and makes request also for us. Again, The Lord is slow to anger,
and of great mercy, and forgiving Number. 14. 18. Exodus 34. 7.
iniquity: And in Exodus 34. God speaking in his own person, said: that he
reserueth mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin:
besides infinite places to like purpose.

Tenthly, the Church of Rome does teach that the Scriptures contain not all
things necessary to salvation: but their unwritten traditions 10
must (as they say) be all received with equal and like authority, for so
has the Council of Trent determined. But S. John says, that These things are
written that ye may believe, and that in believing ye may have life eternal:
And S. Paul says, that The Scriptures are profitable to reprove, to teach and
correct, to instruct 2. Tim. 3. 15.
and perfect the man of God: and further, that The Scriptures are able to make
men wise unto salvation: and God himself does say, Ye shall put nothing to
the word which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4.
neither take ought therefrom: Again, Whatsoever I command Deuteronomy. 12.
you, that take heed you do, put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom.
And S. John in his Revelation says, that If any man shall Revel. 22.
add to this thing, God shall add unto him the plagues which are written in
this book, and shall take away his part out of the book of life. I might yet
add further touching the offices of Christ. for that the Church of Rome will
yield that the office of Christ consists in these three points: namely that
he is both a Prophet, a Priest, and a King: which in words they will
acknowledge, but in deeds and verity they do not. For how miserably and
wickedly the Church of Rome has mangled and defaced the revealed will of this
sacred Prophet, their unwritten traditions, popish canons, and their own
devises makes too apparent. Touching his Priesthood, which consists in two
things, namely, the offering up of himself once, for a full, perfect, and
sufficient sacrifice: and his intercession to his Father, which remains to
the worlds end, is so pitifully defrauded, abused, and dishonored by them, as
no pen with any modesty can set down: as by their Purgatory pickepurse,
their propitiatory masses for the quick and the dead, the blasphemous titles
attributed to the Virgin Mary: namely, they call her the Queen of heaven, the
gate of Paradise, their life and sweetness, the treasure of grace, the refuge of
sinners, and the mediatrix of men: and not only to her, but to saints departed
they entreat with like intercession, and hold them their mediators. Touching
how they deal with Christ in his rule and government, the Pope he will reign
in men's consciences, and he will be tituled with Holy, universal mother Church
which cannot err, Holy father the Pope: Bishop universal: Prince of Priests*
Supreme head of the Church: Vicar of Christ: and The admiration of the world,
etc. Touching his jurisdiction, he chale^geth to himself both the swords: that
is, both the keys of the spirituality: and the Scepter of the laity, not
only subduing all Bishops under him, advancing himsefe above kings and
Emperors, causing some of them to lie under his feet, some to hold the
stirrup: kings to lead his horse by the bridle: some to kiss his feet: placing
and displacing all degrees of people: pretending power and authority to inuest
Bishops, to give benefices, to spoil Churches, to give authority to bind and
lose: to call general Councels: to set up religions, to canonize Saints, to
take appeals, to bind consciences, to make laws, to dispense with the law and
word of God, to deliver from purgatory, and to command Angels, etc. Whereby
appears, as he presumes to go beyond Christ in this world, so would he if he
knew how also expulse him from heaven. And now gentle Reader, in equal
balance, single eye, and honest heart* censure whether the Church of Rome be
the spouse of Christ or no: and whether the word of God allow and warrant his
doings. I cannot stand longer to enlarge of his doctrine (which is most
injurious to Christ and his Church: nor lay down his life, which is most
detestable to all men that has any spark of the true knowledge of Gods word:)
but abruptly hasten to an end, because you may perceive I have but in brief
past over the particulars: for to discourse of these points would ask large
volumes, not doubting but all indifferent men, may hereby behold upon what
rock these Arch-rebels build their rebellion: if it be true as they say, that
it is undertaken in regard of religion and their conscience: also that all men,
of what condition soever, who has been and is lead still on to da^ce after the
pipe of priests, Jesuits, and Seminaries, who outwardly carry a show of
godliness, but inwardly are ravening and devouring Wolves, may see what ground
and warrant they find in Gods word, to approve and allow their actions and
lives, indefending, maintaining, and setting forth the kingdom of their
master Antichrist the Pope, the devils sworn champion: whose creeping in
corners, whose oyled mouths, whose outward holiness, whose monstrous
hypocrisy, whose masses, whose dirges, whose beads, whose crucifixes, whose
prayers, whose vows, whose whippings, whose crosses, Agnus deis, and
persuasions, has but hitherto brought forth rebellion, disobedience to
Prince, breach of Laws and government, burning, wasting, spoiling, robbing,
and in general almost an utter ruin and waste of Ireland. Therefore in the
fear of God, now come from them, and while it is yet day walk as it becomes
the Children of light, turn from these seducers, their cursed doctrine and
superstitious ceremonies, and embrace the pure milk of Gods most blessed word,
and willingly, readily, and thankefully come to hear the same preached and
taught, which will be the perfect path for to lead you, the strong stern to
guide you, the lantern to light you, and the mean by the mercy of God to save
your souls. For which every faithful Christian does daily pray.

Yours in the Lord, if you be the Lords. Ralph Birchensha.

A DISCOVRSE OCCASIONED UPON THE LATE DEFEAT GIVEN to the Arch-rebels TYRONE
and ODONNEL, by the right Honorable the Lord MOVNTIOY, L. Deputy of Ireland.
And the yielding of the Spaniards to his Lordship.
WOnder to men, worlds glory, mighty Lord,
Earths monarch, Prince of thrones and powers all,
Peerlesse for praise, famous in factes and deeds,
Guider of Angels, aid of mortal men:
Whose little finger swayes both sea and land,
And turns the globe of heaven with his hand.
To gloomie earth all dark and void of form,
His blessed breath did give a happy shape:
His only word made Sun, the Moon and Stars,
And at his will, beasts, fish, and foul took life:
Nothing there was, or is, or that shall be,
But his strong hand does guide and rule we see.
When Lucifer great Prince of hell had fallen,
And mad in malice, wrought man's overthrow,
Iehouas hand the instrument did frame,
To vanquish Satan through the woman's seed:
Sweet Christ: Christ Jesus was the only mean,
That bruised his head, his heel, and kingdom clean.
Great was the judgment this immortal God,
Unto the first age for their sins did show:
Most fearful floods from heaven windows fell,
That fifteen cubits mounted bouethe earth:
All drowned were, from death not one could part,
But eight, which were enclosed in the Arc.
When Amrophell, Aroch, and Tydall kings,
With Chedor, Laomer king of Elam too,
Made bloody war against Bera Sodom king,
And other Peers that ruled Gomorah then:
In that same valley which men Siddim call,
King Bera and his Peers were vanquished all.
These fierce inuaders having conquest got,
In triumph bears the spoil and prey away:
But lo, behold, the Lord did raise up strength,
Old Abraham, who with three hundred men,
Fought with these kings, and made them fly amain,
And so brought back their wives and goods again.
When cursed Pharaoh would not give consent,
The Israelites from Egypt should depart,
Though God by Moses mighty wonders wrought,
To cause him yield and give them leave to pass:
Yet stubbornly proud Pharaoh would assay,
To cross Gods will and bring them to decay.
But lo behold, when Isreal's hope was gone,
And saw no mean to escape or life to save,
And bloody Pharaoh bent to take revenge*
Then would the Lord make known he was a God:
At his command the sea was made dry land,
To save his people from inuaders hand.
But bloody Pharaoh would not yet relent,
Although he saw a miracle so strange,
But boldly ventred with his horse and foot,
Supposing that that way was made for him:
But when in midst thereof his forces came,
The seas made way, and fiercely on them ran.
When Korah, Dathan, and bold Abiram,
Rigdvp the furrows of rebelling hearts,
And had two hundred fifty captains stout,
To join with them against Moses Gods chief friend:
Lo what insued, God hating rebels all,
The ground does open, they therein do fall.
When Arad, Syhon, Og, three mighty Kings,
Opposde themselves against Moses in like case:
And ramd their gates, and shut up all the ways,
And with fierce fight the Israelites did charge:
Yet God who always for his people stands,
In battle gave these Kings to Moses hands.
When Eui, Reken, Zur, Hur, and Reba,
Five potent Kings of Medianits they were,
Attempting boldly Phinehas to charge,
And rankt their forces against the Lords elect:
But God that never fails to aid the right,
Gave these five Kings to him in the same fight.
When Moses had nigh space of forty years,
Through wilderness, hills, dales, and mountains wide,
Gods people guided toward Canaan land,
Moses departed, Joshua took the charge:
And first of all his valor for to show,
He gave attempt to stately Ierycho.
But what the Lord appoints must needs be done.
For whom God fights, they sure are to prevail.
Man's arm and strength is but too weak a stay,
Small is the means by which God winnes the field:
The voice of trumpets shouting therewithal,
Made stony walls, and iron gates to fall.
When great Goliath pressed to plague Gods Church,
Whose height a cubit fully did contain,
Of brass his helmet cunningly was made,
His brigandine five thousand shickels weighed:
His spear and shield were all of pure brass,
His spear in bigness VVeauers beams did pass.
Then high Jehovah little David brought,
All naked in compare of his strong foe,
Who in the sight of all the standers by,
Into his forehead sent so sound a stroke,
As down the monster fell upon the earth,
And David there deprived him of his breath.
Far more then these Gods register does yield,
That shows his love and aid to mortal men,
That has regard unto his laws and heast,
And for his right will wrestle with the proud:
For God regards ne horse, nor spear, nor shield,
For without means he makes the stout to yield.
Most wicked then are Irish rebels breed,
Whose lawless lives weaues on their web of woe,
Whose wicked facts Moab and Ammon pass,
Far worse then heathen Pagans of the earth,
The only monsters that the world contains,
And cursed crew whom all good men refraines.
Rebels to God, despisers of his laws,
Traitors to Christ, depriuers of his right,
Refusing still the gifts of holy Ghost:
Breakers of peace, reiecters of the truth,
Contemners of Gods word and holy writ,
That guides men's lives the perfect path to hit.
Rebels to Prince, rebels to native home,
Traitors to Prince, traitors to countries due,
Supplanters of all rule and government,
Infringing laws, the waste of Commonweal:
The brood of wolves, the elder sons of Cain,
The impes of hell, and very marks of shame.
Champions of hell, borne with bloody hand,
Haters of truth, sworn slaves to rape and spoil,
Authors of mischief: all on murder set,
Masking with faces like strong plates of brass:
Furies of hell, shaking their dog-eard locks,
Like damned slaves sprung from most cursed stocks.
Breakers of wedlock, wantons in their lives,
Most bred up bastards from their very birth:
Lovers of theft, living by theeuing trade,
Idle in life, like beasts fed in the stall:
False lying mates, deceitful and unjust,
Whom God nor man, nor devil cannot trust.
Idolators, superstitious men,
False worshippers, sworn slaves unto the Pope,
Trusting to dreams and fained prophecies,
Obseruers of old writs that have no ground:
More ignorant then beasts are in their kind,
Willing to lose what chief they ought to find.
Open mainitainers of all runnagates,
As peevish priests and filthy begging Friars,
Sold Seminaries to the Romish Church,
False traitors to their sovereign Prince and Queen:
Vilde loathsome locusts crawld from yond the seas,
Whose stinking breaths ingenders sore disease.
That this is true, view Irelands present state,
Which whilome sat in fair and rich attire,
Which whilome flowed in plenty of the earth,
But now grown naked, feeble, weak and bare:
Who lately held sweet peace both near and far,
But now in every place at deadly jar.
View now their houses wasted as they lie,
View now their fields all barren round about,
View now their meadows ouergrowne with weeds,
View their high ways untrodden as they are:
All honest trades are ceased very nie,
And plague on plague you perfectly may spy.
The old men wander like as men forlorn,
And women faint for want of some relief;
Young children starve and pine for bread we see,
Most of the poor resemble death in show:
In stinking holes and vilde unseemly place,
Are Cells for such in this their doleful case.
View well their bogs furd all with bloody hew,
View well their fastnes of the self same stamp,
View well their hedges sprinkled all with red,
View well their brooks how bloody they do look:
The blood that Ireland sheds from day to day,
For vengeance cries to God without delay.
What is the cause this land in such terms stands?
But only that the people fell from God,
And brake Gods Sabboths with a mighty hand,
Forsook the Preachers of his blessed word:
Apostates the most of them have played,
And will not turn for ought that may be said.
Seminary priests and lying Friars,
First swear them, that Gods word they shall not hear,
And teach them their oath unto their Prince
May lawfully be broken when they will:
And swears them, that devoutly they shall keep,
What so the Pope of Rome and themselves like.
These are the grounds from whence all mischief spring,
These are the causes that rebellion is:
These are the reasons Spaniards invade,
This is the matter no amendment comes:
For why, the devil now is busy still,
To draw all men to choose what best he will.
O famous Queen, who holds this land by right,
Whose care has been and is, to cure their sore:
What loving favors has her Grace bestowd,
On mighty men, and subjects of this land?
Whose wise foresights in time might stop full well,
The streams from whence these mischiefs so do swel.
But well her Highness has from time to time,
Observed still this nations wandering thoughts,
And seen into their natures and their lives,
Who like young colts and heifers love to fling,
That without bits, and bridles, and strong hand,
Will not be held in peace or rest to stand.
The better therefore to instruct their lives,
As loving fathers use unto their sons,
To keep them in a liking of good laws,
And to provide them tutors of good life:
So did her Grace from time to time elect,
Grave and wise men this land for to direct.
Sussex was one worthy of such a charge,
Sidney another held of good account,
Fitz Williams had the like authority,
Lord Gray did also rule by like command:
Parret was chosen to the selfsame place,
And Russell held the sword another space.
Lord Burrowes had the sovereign seat also,
Essex was placed in the chair of state:
Besides all these Lord Justices bare sway,
And unto them grave Counselors were joined:
By whose advice and government was thought,
Unto good life that Ireland would be brought.
Besides the charge for these same chosen men,
What sums of gold and silver has been spent?
What maste of victuals forth of England come?
What store of powder and munition?
What English blood in Ireland has been shed,
Since first these Rebels grew unto a head?
Besides all this, what Irish ever was,
Upon complaint unto his sovereign Queen,
Of wrongs, of loss, of injury sustaind,
But in good measure he has justice found?
Justice and mercy, bounty, love and all,
Her princely breast has in this land let fall.
Then come all Irish borne of honest birth,
In equal balance lay thy present cause:
Did ever subjects dealt withal as these,
In such ungrateful sort reward their Prince?
No, no, its hard like president to find,
Subjects to Prince were never so unkind.
In lieu of all that has been said before,
Which were sufficient motives to prevail,
In any heart where fear of God did rest:
What hope is yet in this rebellious man?
No hope at all, for why his peacocks plume
Is spread abroad the land for to consume.
This ravening kite, this carren crow by kind,
These seven long winters with his bloody hands
Have wasted, spoild, and robbed from friend and foe,
And filled up holes, and dens, and caves therewith:
In trust that men and means the way would work,
To make him king by others harm and hurt.
And not content mischief at home to warpe,
In foreign parts like rancor he did plot,
To join with him he drew the Spaniards in,
For men, for money, and what else he could:
Supposing by that means about to bring,
To dispossess the Queen and make him king.
More firm to purchase his aspiring thoughts,
In private corners all about the land,
In secret manner he had drawn to him,
All hollow hearts and those of Popish mark:
This monster thus his poison forth had blown,
And hoped at last to reap what he had sown.
But the proud Hamon when he thought all sure,
Was farthest off his purpose and intent:
God sits on high, and sees men's acts on earth,
And topsie turuie throws the wicked down:
All ages tells, experience proves it plain,
In most extremes God raises help again.
To buckle with this Archrebell Tyrone,
God moved the Queen and Nobles of her land,
To mount to state Mountioy faithful Peer,
That by his hight might Tyrone trample down:
And by the Sunbeams spreading from his crest,
The Rebels heart tear from his traitors breast.
And blessed beams, since first they gave their light,
How has the streams which fair Mountioy spreads,
Dazzled the eyes of Tyrone and his train,
And dimbd their sight like men that's blindfold led?
For often we see dark clouds and foggie mist,
When Sun once shines, it drives them where it list.
Witness the Moyrie where Mountioy lay,
In fogs, in winds, in storms and pouring rain:
Not for a night, a day, a week, or month,
But more then fifty days and winter nights:
When tents, when cabbins, cells, and shelters all,
By whirling winds and storms were forced to fall.
Close by his side this subtle Serpent lay,
And all the rabble of his rebel slaves,
Like leering foxes in their hateful dens,
All furnished well for to maintain their broile:
But when as once Mountioy came in sight,
The snailes drew in their heads and durst not fight.
There did Mountioy tire this Tyrone well;
There did his beams his darkest trench make shine,
There did Mountioy train him to the field;
There was Tyrone beat from his strongest hold,
And in the end a cowards part did play,
For like false Rebels there they stole away.
But like himself Mountioy mounted yet,
And with the brightness of his flying beams,
Found out the Rebel and his damned crew,
Who in Armah were close and slily laid:
For why the Moyrie had so curbd the cur,
That he and whelps were glad to run so fur.
There did these snakes roll round their tails a while,
Yet at the last were forced to cast their skins,
Like coward cocks that thinks their dunghils best,
Durst not abide Armah, where they were in:
For why Mountioy hurld bullets in so fast,
As to Blackwater they were forced at last.
There in their fastnes closely they were laid,
Like hogs in sties, or dogs in kinnels vile,
Like privy thieves that best loves darksome night,
And hates the Sun for fear of being seen:
So they in bogs and bushes secret lay,
To kill and murder all that past that way.
But still Mountioy sent forth his brightsome beams,
To let these vipers know he was not far,
And speedily Blackwater over went,
In spite of Tyrone and his boggie crew:
Moyrie, Mountnorris, and Blackwater fort,
Shows our Mountioy holds Tyrone but a sport.
And well it seems he found his comb near cut,
Which made him send post upon post in speed,
His priests and Friars flocked fast to Spain,
Well laden all with packs and sacks of lies:
His blessed father now the Pope must help,
Or else is like to lose his chiefest whelpe.
And as in fine it proved to be true,
His plots and letters took impression there,
His holy father thought it now high time,
To help his grandchild to dark Mountioyes light:
And for his aid the Pope did so prevail,
As Don John landed shortly at Kinsale.
There did he seat and trench himself full fast,
And mand such Castles as he found stood nigh,
Four thousand strong he found himself to be,
And made no doubt but to obtain the game:
For look what art or policy could do,
To make all sure Don John did shifts pursue.
Nothing was wanting but the Rebels aid,
Which when they heard that Don John was so nigh,
Their fainting heart began to come again,
And with strong vows protests straight to come:
And with such speed as Rebels well could make,
To aid the Spaniard they do undertake.
Odonnell with three thousand horse and foot,
Set forward first, like furies come from hell,
Tyrone the traitor hasted with his strength,
Most ugly slaves like to the former sort,
Well furnished, as is their beastly guise,
With arms and victuals to obtain the prize.
But happy Mountioy having heard these news,
Drew down his forces toward Kinsale straight,
And nigh Don John began for to approach,
To know the cause and business he had there:
And as the beast that is pind up in the stye,
He keeps Don John that out he could not fly.
There did he camp stoutly with all his force,
There made he trenches fit for soldiers use,
There made he mounts to batter down the walls,
There made he forts for to offend the foe:
There from such Castles that the Spaniard held,
By force of arms perforce he was expeld.
Here who had seen for more then fifteen weeks,
The lying of our army at Kinsale,
In open air, no shelter for relief,
Beaten still with wind, hail, snow, rain, and frost,
With thunderclaps and fearful flames of fire,
Their fairest footing was but dirt and mire.
In all which time rank Rebels held aloof,
Beating their brains and plotting all they could,
Choking the air with their infectious breath,
Fearing the beams would burn from Mountioy cames
For often before they trial good had made,
To meet them boldly Mountioy was not fraid.
At last a remnant sent from out of Spain,
Who winds and seas kept houering up and down,
Arrived where Tyrone might aid them well,
In number full a thousand fighting men:
Whereby the Rebels better courage took,
Being then in strength six thousand horse and foot.
Oh, who had seen these black bands come from Spain.
With Antichrist their masters banner spread,
Stoutly advanced, spreading in the air,
Richly set out with Christ's five bleeding wounds:
And quartred with supposed Peter's keys,
With other tricks which might well babies please.
What deadly curses were there thundered out,
Against those that to this standerd bear disdain?
How deep to Limbo were all good men thrown?
Book, bell, and candle cursed them all to hell:
Their Agnus deis, Crucifix, and Beads,
Were roundly dealt by those this black guard leads.
But who had seen how Tyrone and the rest,
Had shared the booty fore the field was won,
And with black pens did dawbe their bloody books,
Of those whose heads in triumph they would bear;
Would muse to hear, and wonder at the slave,
That should to Prince and country such spite have.
Now began the devil laugh and smile a pace,
To see his imps bent to their cursed wills:
For now it was concluded without let,
The Spaniards should relieved present be:
And to that end a messenger was sent,
To tell Don John their purpose and intent.
On Christmas eve hard at the break of day,
Appointed was that they would certain come;
And while on one side they would freshly charge,
Don John by force should issue from the town:
By which attempt they thought by force and might,
To win the field and dark Mountioyes light.
But our great God whose seat is heavens throne,
And for his footstool has the massy earth,
Who rules and guides the hearts of mortal men,
Without whose will a silly bird falls not:
Who lets men plot and hammer what they will,
Yet as he please it is effected still.
He held proud Pharaoh from his cursed will;
He curbed Korah, Dathan, and the rest;
He hanged five Kings that Isreal's peace disturbed;
Oreb and Zeb he threw down to the ground:
He caused Hamon try the gibbet furst,
And stout Goliahs forehead to be burst.
He never leaves those that put trust in him;
His works are great, his mercy far exceeds;
He still rewards all men as they deserve;
He pulls down proud men, and sets up the weak:
Tyrons false heart the Lord full well has seen,
And will defend a true and lawful Queen.
For all the secret working of these imps,
He soon can bring their counsels unto naught;
He finds the means Mountioy shall prevent,
Their purposes and enterprises all:
And in his hand holds fast the turning wheel,
That lifts some up, some backward makes to reele.
As well appears by this which does ensue:
For Mountioy having knowledge of their plot,
Drew forth not past one thousand of his foot,
Three hundred horse was all he took along:
And easily he led them on the way,
With purpose full to keep the Rebels play.
Quickly he might the enemies behold,
All marshalled with drums and colors spread,
Guided by Leaders of their best command,
In battles placed, with wings laid for the time:
With Lions looks they made a staring stand,
With good advice to take the fight in hand.
Now does Mountioyes beams begin to spread,
His presence dims these Rebels sights forthwith,
And gallantly his horse does give the charge,
And draws his foot to offer them the like:
They charge again, Mountioyes horse then fly out,
And rushed in amidst the strongest rout.
Iehoua now gave courage to our men,
And in the Rebels strike a slavish fear:
For in a minuit of a time, they began
To break their ranks and throw their arms away:
And well was he that best could run or ride,
To try their valor none durst there abide.
They being broke, God so did strength Mountioy,
And blessed the labor of his worthy men,
That they with speed pursued the Rebel slaves,
And in a moment had twelve hundred killed:
Nine Colors won, and many captives taken,
Two thousand arms they lost unto their shame.
In their pursuit the rivers played their part,
And rising up against such wicked imps,
Their mounting waves did sink them to the deep,
As most unworthy to enjoy the land:
Happy was he could shun that bloody day,
And stoutest man that made most haste away.
There might you see a just revenge for blood,
Blood cries for blood, for in each dike and gap,
They groueling lay besprinkled all with blood:
One leglesse lay, another wants his arm:
Some all to cut and mangled back and face,
That streams of blood were shed in every place.
There might you see from East, West, North and South,
The Ravens, Crows, and fowls in flocks to come:
There might you see from every den and bush,
The greedy wolves and ravening beasts make haste:
As welcome guests unto so fat a feast,
They cheered themselves as well the most as least.
Besides all this, above seven hundred men,
Were wounded sore and hurt in grievous wise;
There might you hear them howling with loud cries;
There might you see them stamp and stare apace;
There might you see them languish and make moan,
Yet little help or succor to them shown.
Thus by Gods help Mountioy was the mean,
To daunt the pride of those Arch-rebels all;
And that same pit which they for others made,
Their cursed feet lay caught in the same gin.
And as this fell, so Lord let be thy will,
When next they meet like hap send Rebels still.
Thus are these men who underhand before,
Had cast their cards with trust to get the game,
All male content raging in great extremes,
Cursing their chance, return with all the loss;
Railing the Spanish, saying this and that,
To be the cause of this their hard mishap.
But had you seen these Rebels in their flight,
When as our forces never made pursuit,
Tweene Cork and Mallo as they past along,
What fearful fits amazed all their thoughts?
Each bush and blast, each shadow made them say,
Here comes Mountioy, therefore make haste away.
For some of his that were fallen in the rear,
Struck such a terror in his foremost men,
That down goes arms and weapons in great haste,
Doubting our forces had been at their heels:
But lo Gods hand the wicked to confound,
In Mallow foord two hundred there lay drowned.
There who had seen the Irish love to Spain,
For whose defense the Spaniard thither came,
And for their sakes left children, wife and friends,
What cruelty to them these Rebels showed:
They murthred some, some stripped unto their skin,
And let them lie to sink or else to swim.
Thus were these traitors all dispersed abroad,
Tyrone himself came home not with eight men:
His heart was faint, for Aquavite calls,
His welcome home was sad and heavy looks:
Wishing they had the Spanish left alone,
And like false Rebels still have staid at home.
Odonnell hateful traitor to the world,
With Mustion too, sailed are into Spain;
Tyrrill the Rebel tarries still behind,
With new start Rebels sprung up very late:
Whose cursed ends no doubt will shortly show,
God hates the works which from such wretches flow.
Now Rebels all and Papists of this land,
You head-shorne Friars, and you lying Priests,
See what vain hope is in your popish trash,
Your popish standerd was not worth a straw:
Run therefore headlong, howl, cry and moan,
Throughout the world your shame and loss is blown.
Mountioy he returns back to Kinsale,
With praise to God for such a blessed day,
Attributing the glory to the Lord,
In all which fight he lost not full three men:
And soldiers laden were with booties good,
As just rewards for ventring of their blood.
Here must I marshall in their just desert,
Sir George Carew of Munster President,
Whose cost, whose care, and travel in these broiles,
Lively lays down his love to Prince and state:
Thomond, Clenrickerd, and Lord Awdley eke,
Like to themselves true honor there did seek.
Sir Richard Wingfield, Marshall of the field,
With Sir George Bourchier well deserves praise;
Dauers, and Lambert, Power, Barley too,
Saint Laurence, Bagnall, Folliot, and Rush:
Godolphin, Greame, with Taaffe, and Captains all,
Honor have got by Rebels loss and fall.
All this same while Don John lay very close,
Expecting still when Rebels promise held:
At last got knowledge of the traitors chance,
Which made him hang his head like Spanish use:
He bit his nails, he leerd up to the sky,
He stamped the ground, and musing long did lie.
Hope in Tyrone, that course he thought was vain;
Hope in himself, he saw small comfort there;
Hope out of Spain, he knew that would be long;
Hope for to fight, he found less joy in that.
At last he started from his doubtful muse,
To call a parley he thought best to choose.
Forthwith his Drum was sent to show his mind:
But happy Mountioy had no like thereof,
Whose purpose was to starve and beat him out,
As fittest guerdon for his bold attempt:
Yet still to call for parley he was bold,
And marshall men must marshall orders hold.
Parley obtaind, conditions were agreed,
Good quarter held according to contract,
Mountioy pleased, Don John was well content,
Of deadly hate more quiet did ensue:
Where otherwise, if both had still held out,
Much loss of blood had brought Kinsale about.
By which contract and composition made,
Perforce must make all Spaniards English love:
And grant that English thirst not after blood,
But mercy, love, peace, and all charity:
Which ornaments both God and man does like,
And often preuailes more then does bloody fight.
Besides, this course in reason needs must move,
The Spanish nation Irish Rebels hate,
By whose presumes and vile enticing trains,
Were hither drawn into so hard extremes:
And make them grant while life they do endure,
A Rebels word and strength is most unsure.
And eke the course Mountioy took therein,
May draw the Spanish hate to English love,
Their Irish love unto a mortal jar,
And Irish trust no more to Spanish arm:
England and Spain by this may quiet be,
And Spain no more the Irish love to see.
By this the world, the Pope, and King of Spain,
May judge the conquest that Don John has got,
Who blustred out half Ireland he had won,
And at whose fortune they did so admire,
May now perceive that Rebels, Priests, and Friars,
Coin naught but lies to fit their own desires.
And hereby may the King of Spain observe,
How God abhors and hates unjust attempts,
And leave his hate against fair ELIZABETH,
Virgin Queen, famous for virtuous life:
And blot no more his honor with disgrace,
To back base Rebels in so bad a case.
Unto which end, mark but Gods hand herein,
The Spanish present gins to show their love,
Hard by Kinsale some bands of English lay,
After the army was dissolved and gone:
Whom Tyrril and new Rebels did devise,
By strength and force these bands for to surprise.
Whereof the Spanish having notice got,
Drew forth their men to join with ours straight,
With solemn vows, there for to live and die
In English right, and Rebels for to foil:
Thus those which lately sought for English blood,
Will shed their own to do our country good.
Now since Iehoua of his mercy great,
Wonderously has fought in his own cause,
And given now Mountioy for to see,
That counsel, horse, and men get not the field:
But whom God loves, and those who serve him still,
Are sure to conquer as their own selves will.
Then let ELIZA rest still on Gods strong hand,
Obey his laws, advance his Gospel pure,
Root out blind Papists, Priests, and filthy Friars,
Bring all degrees to hear Gods holy word:
Cherish the good, snub such as wicked are,
And then ELIZA shall prosper in the war.
Laus Deo.

