Hereafter follow.x. certain Places of Scripture, by whom it is proved, that
the doctrynes and tradycyons of men, ought to be avoided.

printer's device of Robert Wyer, featuring John the Evangelist (McKerrow 67b)

The contents of this book.
The first place is Deuteronomii / the.iiii. chapter, where Moses says. The
second place / is of Esaie the.xxix chapter / which place christ. The
third place is / of Matthew, the.xv. chapter / which says. The fourth place
is / of Paul, in the i. pystle / the.iiii. chapter to Thymothe. The fyfth
place is / of Plaule in the.ii. chapter / to the Collossyans. The syxte place
is also of Paul in ye. i. chapter / to the Galathyans. The seventh place is
of Paul / in the first chapter / to Thymothe. The eight place is of saint
Peter / in the.ii. chapter / of his last pystle. The nynth place is / of
Matthew in the xxiiii. chapter / when says he. The tenth place is / of Solomon
in the xxx. chapter / of his Proverbs.
Finis.
(...) stes words we might always freely use them. Thyrdlye, this error is
also by this reproved, that the Papystes sound forth with full mouths, that
is, that the Church commanded under pain of deedly sin to be necessary,
that we should fast in.iiii. times of the year, in the euys of the apostels,
and certain other saints all which things this saying of christ
confounds. What soever entryth in through the mouth defyleth not the man.
Verily, fasting ought to be fre and voluntarye, so that without chose of days
or meats every man after his appetyte, should fast or not fast. Fourthly,
the Bn^dictynes, the Bernardynes, ye Chartusyans, and all other, which for
men's Tradycyo^s abstain from eggs, flesh and such like repugne as
adversaries to christ. For why their doctrine contraryeth Christ's doctrine /
after this manner. What soever entryth in through ye mouth defoyleth, by which
saying they reprove Christ as a liar, which says. what so ever entryth in
through the mouth defoylyth not. And so thou may perceive by this saying of
Christ that all the sects of Monks. yea and all that hole spyrytuall
ordynaunces (as they call it) are dystroyed and condemned. For if that, that
entryth through the mouth defoyleth not the man how much less than, shall
the things / which cover the body, as the cowle, the coote, the shert, the
hose, the shoo, the gown, the cloak, grene color, yelowe, read white /
diverse color, beside this, the place, the temple, ye house, the cell, ye
chamber defoyle ye man? By this it follows that they again reprove Christ of
a lie / which hold it for sin, if a monk be clothed beside ye manner of his
order. Verily what christ reakenyth for no sin, that boldly affirm they to
be sin. What other thing therefore I pray you is that, that this sort of
men do, than to say to christ. Yea, even at his face? thou lie christ. For
therein is sin, wherein thou seyst that none is. Neither verily shall it any
thing avail them although they lay forth for them Gregory, Bernarde,
Benedicte, or Frauncys. For we should more attend to Christ's sayenges, which
only in the mount of Thabor was created a teacher by his heavenly father, as
Matthew testyfyeth in his.xvii. chapter This is (says he) my dear beloved sone
/ in whom I have delight, hem here ye. Verily the father said not in this place,
here Bernarde, bn^dicte, fraunces / but this, this, this, my well-beloved sone
here ye. Ferther more who knows whether these holy men in these doings
wrought well, or of fendyd. For undoubtedly they observed these things without
conpulsyon, or else for some precept, now if they so observed them / they are
not yet so much to be followed that Christ should utterly be forsaken all
these things Christ in the same chapter of Mathewe confyrmeth with ye saying
that follows. That (says he) which comes forth from the mouth defoyleth
the man. For by it all ill adfectes break forth from the heart, as bawdry,
aduoultrye, theft, lesynges, backebytynges, and such like / these things
defyle a man. Here I ask (for as much as that is only sin, which wellyth
from ye heart, as Christ plainly concludes) by what means does butter,
chief, milk, eggs defyle a man / while they come not forth from the mouth,
but from the Cowes womb / and from the hen? what man (I pray you) ever saw
flesh, shauynges (which they call the priests crowns) places, heary
garments proceed from the mouth? The kyen perchance sin while they bring
us forth milk, butter, and calves. Moreover the dreams and Imagynacyons of
monks, yea and all the humayne tradycyons of manner of life, of clothes, of
places / and of all such outward things not only derogateth ye glory of god
/ and deceive the people / but also are like to the tryfelynge mowes / and
lyghtcastes of tomlyng apes. Nevertheless of truth some man couyteth to have
deyntye fare, and to wear fine and rich clothes / but this desire and
appetyte proceeds from the heart. And some man can as greadyly eat fysshe as
flesh. A man shall also find some that will be as proud in a cote of yelowe
clothe, as another will be in a cote of sylke, in conclusyon. Christ deceyuyth
us not when he says. Whatsoever entryth through the mouth pollutyth not a man
/ but yt that comes forth from the mouth defyleth the man. Now if it be
true that a man is not defoyled nor synneth in setting aside the humayne
tradycyons, it must needs follow that no man is made clean or deseruyth any
thing if he keep and observe them specially while that is only clean and
worthy of reward, which is contrary to syn and fylthynes. Wherefore in all the
hole life of monks, there is nothing pure nor worthy of reward, which thing
Christ also affyrmeth by Matthew, the.xv. chapter. In vain (says he) worship
they me with the tradycyons of men. Why says he in vain? verily for that
that in not regarding those tradycyons nothing is sinned, and in observing
them nothing is deserved, for surely they are but mean things, and by this
the spyrytulte suttelly deceive them self, while they reaken a reward where
none is, and suppose that they offe^de where no sin can be so that this
saying of the Prophet / in the.xiii. Psalm may very well agree with their
acts. They fear (says he) where nothing is to be feared.

The fourth place is / of Paul in his first pystle / the 4 chapter.
THe fourth place is / of Paul in his first pystle / the.iiii. chapyter to
Thymothe. The spyryte (says he) spekyth euydentlye, that in the later times
some shall depart from the faith, and shall give head to spyrytes of error
and to deuyllysshe doctrine, which are false spekers through feigned show of
holiness having their conscyences marked with a hot iron, forbydynge to mary
and co^maundynge to absteyne fro meats, which god has created to be
received with thanks gyuynge, of them which believe and have known the
treuth, that whatsoever god created is good, and nothing to be refused, so that
it be received with gyuynge thanks for it, is sanctyfyed by the word of god
and prayer / of these if thou shalt give knowledge and counsel to the
brethren / thou shalt than show thy self a good mynyster of Christ, as one
brought up in the words of faith and good doctrine / which doctrine thou
haste at all times followed. But cast away from the vnghostly and old wives
fables. O immortal god, with how great sound of words / even as it were with
thondre. Does the apostell invade and overthrow the works, doctrynes, and
sects of men. First while these tradycyonaryes here after shall take pride
that they have received their tradycyons of the Pope and other holy fathers.
What judgment (I pray you) shall Christ give upon this matter? Shall he not
say on this manner? Paul was my apostell and chosen vessyll (as Luke left it
mencyoned in thapostels acts). Why than gave ye not more credence to them than
to the Pope and the fathers / seeing that ye have no suertye whether they be
the instruments of god or of ye devil? What shall they answer than trow ye?
Secondarely, I ask these tradycionaries, whether that eggs, butter, chese,
milk, flesh, and other meats / fro which they abstain on fastyngdayes and
by their ordres / be the good creatures of god? Which if they will grant
(other wise will they not dare say) than are they undoubtedly even the same /
of whom thapostell speaks, that is. That they should forbyde meats which
god has created for ye use of the true beleuers / that they also should
forbyde to mary. And so yet shall they not win out / but shall be twyched
somewhat more on the quycke with this text of Paul. Now hark what Paul
says of them and by what fassyons he rolleth them from one place to another.
First (says he) they are departed from the faith. For it were impossyble for
the^ to teache the right wysenes of works, oneles they rekened the^ self
thereby to be iustyfyed. And this Synyon of theyrs is a very sure token yt they
are departed from the faith. For they apply, iustefyenge to works / which
iustyfyenge should be given only to faith. Secondarely, they give head to
spirytes of error, (he says not to me^ of error) but to spirytes, that is.
That they boste them self of spirytualytie / reioysynge to be called
spirytuall. And say that all their acts are done, by the aid and mayntenaunce
of the spirit. But while they are bareyne of faith / it can no otherwise be,
but that they be blinded in spirytuall things. These two therefore follow on
the other, to depart from the faith / and to give head to spirytes of error
and disceyte. Thyrdly, thapostell says / that their doctrine spryngeth of the
devil their author / which thing must also needs follow. For verily where
faith and the doctrine of Christ is not / there Satanas the wonderful
workman of such things, leads these erronyous spirytes with painted
doctrynes and words / so blyndly, madly, and prowdly, that they reaken them
selfs even the most spirytuall men. But for as much as that doctrine spryngeth
not out of the scryptures / it can not be otherwise named but deuelysshe
doctryn. Fourthly, they are false spekers / for they peruerte holy scripture
and the sayenges of fathers to their own ymagynacyons and dreams, as we daily
se. That they peruerte scripture, it is euydent by this. For their doctrynes
and holy scryptures in nothing agree. Fyftly, their living is very hypocrysye
/ which thing is so clear and opyn, that it neadeth no interpretacyon: what
is their hoole life, but a monster and hypocrysye in outward things / as
meats and clothes. Syxtly, they have their conscience marked with a hot iron,
that is / their conscience is clean alyenat from the humayne nature. For of
truth other reken they sin and are grudgyd in their conscience where no
part (as we said before) of sin can be / even as we perceive the prynte or
mark of one wound in the body, far unlike other corrupt fuysters.
Seventhly, they forbed to mary and that is because they would bring many in to
their perverse state of their relygyon, as we daily se both priests and
monks, chanons, and freres, lead that life most impurely. Wherefore dylygently
away and look for the judgment of god upon such doctrynes and such manner of
life. As upon doctrynes which spring of ye devil erronyous / false without
faith and full of hypocrysye. Good lord what man will contynewe in that life,
and apply to such doctrynes, syns god threteneth so fearful judgment upon
them? It shall make no matter with how many vows a man promise these
doctrynes for the more strayte vow and oath, that in this behalf shall be
made, ye more soon should it be broken of and let at large. For that that it
was made by the devil, and again god. But hark, how craftily they go about
to unfold them selfs from this knot, tra^sferrynge this saying of Paul to
the tatyans heretykes, which utterly co^dempne matrymony. But surely Paul
spekyth not here of them, which utterly condemn matrymony. but of those
which under a manner of holiness, and to seem the more holy forbede to mary. But
be it, that these words were spoken again the tatyans, may they not therefore
also be spoken by the Pope? Yes most of all, for if the pope do those things
which the tatyans did, why than should not these words agree with his acts? For
surely Paul in this place condempneth the works notwithstanding the respect
of the person. Now he that forbedyth matrymonye (as the sygnyfyeng of the
words plainly openyth) is the dyscyple of Satan and his messanger. Than for as
much as the Pope workyth like works, it must needs follow that he and all
his hole flock of Sophysters, are the dysciples and messanges of the devil,
or else Paul lies. Eyghtly, many days they forbede to eat certain meats:
which god has created to be received with gyuynge thanks. Where again thou
may se the tradycyons of men to be applied to Satan even by god through the
saying of Paul, as through gods Instument. Tell on (I pray you) what more
what more abhomynable thing can thou here of ye humayne tradycyons than that
they depart fro the faith, erronyous false, deuyllyshe / and full of
hypocrysye. And if this one place be not suffycyent to confound the doctrynes
of men, what than shall suffyce? Moreover if these tradycyons of abstaynynge
from meats be deuyllyshe and fer from a christen act, undoubtedly the
tradycyons of clothes, shauynges, places and other outward conuersacyons are
also even as nigh kynne to the devil and as fer from the true faith of
christ. But here again they will answer and say that Paul did speak these
words by the manychees. Yet shall they not so escape. For Paul in this place
spekyth of them, which forbede to eat meats, which thing the pope and his
doing. Now whether thou call ye pope a tatyan or a manyche, I force not.
Verily the apostle spekyth here again yt work, which the pope is gylty in.
Ferthermore this place very well appertains to them. For if a man would
forbede the eating of those meats to morrow, or.ii. days following, should
not this place serve him well, al though he were not named a manyche? For should
a man lawfully by that means do this thing which Paul here forbedyth, and
say that these words were not meant by him, but by ye old manychees? God
forbede, but whether ye pope and his monks, and priests be manychees or not,
that refer I to other men's iugementes. Howbeit I will this fer not fear to
say, that he so much contraryeth Paul's doctrine, yt I can scarsely know
whether any manyche have more contraryed it or not. Nynethly, they are
unthankful. For god has created meats for that intent (as Paul says) that
they should be received with gyuynge thanks Now they for this purpose give in
commandment to absteyne fro them yt god should not be lawded for the receyuyng
of them. The well and orygynall of al, which things is Infydelyte, and lack
of the truth of god. For the apostle says that those meats were created for
them that trewely believe and know the truth that they should receive them
with gyuynge thanks. And now for as much as they be false byleuers and
ignorant of the treweth (as thapostle in this place callyth them) undoubtedly
they are also hethens, fer fro christen men, blind and without true knowledge.
So this is the Elogye of the pope, prestes, and monks, which is given to them
by Paul. Tenthly, They are myscheuous and peryllous mynysters, which in the
same place of Paul is proved, where he says that Thymothe is a true mynyster
and norysshed up in the words of faith, and good doctrine. If he shall show
these things to the brethrene. Now of the other part, they without doubt are
false mynysters, and brought up in words of false believe and perverse
doctrine, which teache clean contrary to ye doctrine of Paul. Eleue^thly, the
apostle callyth their doctrynes vnghostly and tryfelynge fables, than which I
pray you what can be said more co^temptely, that so many doctors should be so
occupied about such tryfles, which the old wives are wont to sport them
selfs with, when they were gathered together to their butteryd cakes, to their
clensyng bolles, or to their wassynge stoles. And that their doctrine are
vnghostly, lies, and fer from any holiness, although they boste that they were
written by the aid and cause of the holy ghost. What man ever herd the
humayne tradycyons so ernestly spoken again and rebuked, For that that they be
bareyne of faith, hethenysshe erronyous, deuyllysshe, false, counterfayted
deuourers of co^scyences contrary to the glory of god, and his creatures,
pernycyous fables, and old wives lies, Let him now that can avoid so
fearful Judgment of god avoid it.

The fyfth place / is of Paul in the second chapter.
THe fyfte place, is of Paul in the second chapter, to the Collossyans Let
no man (says he) trouble your conscience for meat and drink, or for a piece
of a holy day, as the holy day of the new moon or of the saboth day, which
ar but shodowes of things to come / but the body is of christ. Let no man
myscarye you from the true pathe, which after his own Imagynacyon walks in
the humbleness and holiness of Angles, things, which he never saw vaynely
blown up with his carnal mind not holding the head of whom all the body by
joints and couples takyth norysshement and is knyt together, and grows with
the encreasynge yt comes from god Wherefore if ye be deed with christ from
the doctrynes of the world, why than as though ye yet lived in the world are
ye led with the tradycyons of them, that say towche not, taste not, handle not,
all which perysshe with the abusing of them, after precepts and doctrynes of
men, which things verily have the symylytude of wysdom by chosen holiness /
and humblenes of the mind, and weykynge of ye body, and not by any worship for
ye mayntenau^ce of ye flesh to his need. Spekyth Paul now again of the
Manychees? and Tatyans. Or can any man excuse the Papystes of these saying? No,
for the apostle spekyth here of those that entangle the wretchyd conscyences
with humayne precepts and doctrynes that they cause them to dyscerne meat fro
meat, drink fro drink, cloth fro clothe, and other outward things. Now it
is openly known that the Pope, priests, and monks, do these things. For it
is ordained by their Decrees, that certain days men should abstain from
flesh, eggs, butter, chese, milk, and other creatures of god. And they have
also for them selfs peculyer garments fascyoned fer from other me^nes, again
all which things Paul boldly fyghteth. First when he says let no man
trouble your conscyences for meat, drink, cloth, or day. Which thing what
is it other (I pray you) than to say. Be ye not priests, monks, freers,
neither observe ye the popes Decretals, nor believe ye yt to be sin which he
chalengeth and holds for sin. Now here a man may perceive that god
commands by Paul his elect vessel that we should not regard the Decrees
of the pope priests, monks, and freers, or at lest way we should reaken them
to be free, and take them as mean things, which of them self be nor
expedyent nor preiudycyall, lest happily they might trouble and stere our
co^scyences. If we take not good head / which thing is no other to say / but
be ye not priests, monks, nor freers. And they that all ready have entered in
to the Papystes holy relygyon, should either ryd them self from it, or this
wise observe the papystes Decretals, that if at any time they let pass or
transgress in any of them, they should not reaken it to be sin, but count
them as lawfully to be let slypped as retained. For all though these words
were spoken by the Jews, which observed them after the law of Moses (and
Paul here says that they were but shadows and fygures of things to come,
but the body is in christ.) Yet nevertheless they much more agree with the
decrees of ye pope, priests, and monks. For if that be sessyd which god
Instytuted, and should no more bind the conscience. How much more than ought
nothing to be Instytuted and commanded by men, which might bind the
conscience? Which thing hereafter shall be more plainly showed. Secondarylye,
Paul says, let no man defraude you, or malycyously show you a wrong mark,
to lead you fro the true prycke, and begyle you of the reward, as who would
say. Take heed to your self that no man mysguyde you from faith (which is the
only way to purchase the reward of health) in to the trust of works, that
ye should will to be Iustyfyed, and attain to the reward of health by a mean
which the Papystes have prescrybed. What way and mean they have prescrybed.
ye shall now openly perceive by that, that follows. Thyrdely, he says, let
no man deceive you in voluntary and chosen humblenes and holiness of angels.
Peynteth not Paul here, even with their colors the sects of monks and all
the Popes holy flock? Countyth not the pope and all the papystes all their
beluynges, rorynges, and cryenges in the temple, and their obedyence of beckes
and duegardes even for the highest virtues and works? So this is the honorable
and devout humble holiness of the Papystes. But now of whom had they their
precepts and tradycyons? They them selfs have chosen them, and have sought
them out even for their own myschefes. For by this means they have
withdrawn them self from the common humblenes and obedyence of men, of which
things we have by gods commandment yt one should submyt him self again
the other, and the one should obaye the other, which thing they never do. For
they are not subject to a te^porall ruler (to whom Paul commanded to obaye)
but have shaken them self from that yoke, and have begone a peculyer obedyence
and humblenes of their own Inuencyons, nevertheless they boste that their
obedyence (in which are many shameful things) fer excellyth the obedyence of
the lay men. Yea and that theyrs is perfyte, and like to the obedyence of
angels / when yet throughout all the hole world a man can find no sort of
people more dysobedye^t or blown up with more pride. They have also auowed
chastyte, and pouerte, neither labor they as other me^ do, but after ye manner
of heavenly angels they laud god night and day in often prayers and songs.
And to be short they would have men think that they led a heavenly life, when
yet no man is more gylty of horrible pleasures, no man more rich in Iniquyte:
no man less truly holy, no man more proud herted than they which name them
self spyrytuall. Yet transfer they under color of their ghostly life, the
prycke of faith from all mortal men / and dysceyue them upon ye hope and
Iustyfyeng of works. All these things (as I guess) were not spoken only by
the Manychees, and Tatyans, but also by the papystes, which things their
works full well declare. Fourthlye, walking (says he) in things which he
never saw, which thing is most prouycions in the humane doctrynes and
fascyon of life. As who says, that they which live after those tradycyons,
and doctrynes stycke to no foundacyon nor example of true scripture, neither
are they of any certayntie, whether they do well or not. For all their labor
is uncertain in so much that if a man require whether their manner of life
please god or not, they must answer. We know not, yea and that all their good
works be cast in the wind, and ar of no account. Which thing they are
constrained by force to confess. For why, they lack faith, which faith only
assertayneth us, that all deeds be acceptable to god, and that without any
occasyon of our deserts, but only by the very grace and power of god. So all
their obedyence and holiness, even when they seem best, are uncertain and of no
valewe. Fyftely, Vaynely (says he) they are swollen with pride, that is
although they can have no occasyon of presumpsyon (for they are unstable, and
false beleuers, and led a cursed life,) Nevertheless yet cast they up their
noses in the wind and boste that their manner life is ye best and most sure
way to purchase health, so ferforth, that they repute all other me^nes
condycyons as vile and of no valewe, in Regard of their own. For trewely
those wretches perceive not their proud hye carnal mind, because of their
ouermoche angelyke humblenes and obedyence. O abhomynable fruit of the humane
doctrine. Syxtly, They shall depart (says he) and varye from christ, which is
our head. Truly it is impossyble that the tradycyons of men and christ should
be in one sentence. For the one excludyth the other, for if the conscience give
credence to Christ, the trust of humane tradycyons and works takyth a fall.
But if the conscience put trust in works, than has christ lost his place.
For it can not be brought to pass that ye heart can be grounded upon a double
fou^dacion the one must needs fail, likewise se we openly that the Papystes
trust only to their cerymonyes and tradycyons, for oonles they had trust in
them, truly they would set them at naught and forsake them, or else at
lestwaye they would use them freely, and when time required. But if no ferther
danger were in them, this (Alas) were to much, yt while they put trust in
the abhomynablenes of humane doctrynes, they forsake god, and clean depart
from him, which thing Peter also testyfyeth in his first pystle, in which he
dyscryueth the orders of Monks with horrible words. They are (says he) the
sects of dampnacyon, which deny christ, and in the latter pystle the
second chapter he says on this manner. There shall be false mynysters among
you, which shall invent and bring in dampnable sects And shall deny the
lord which bought them with his blood. Seuenthlye, It may be openly thought
by this saying of Paul that our spyrytualtie ar twyched in the quycke where he
says. If ye be ded with Christ why than yet suffer ye your selfs, as though
ye were yet living in the world to be troubled and led about the busshe with
humane tradycyons, as thou shalt not twyche that, thou shalt not eat that,
thou shall not handle that, Neither can any man deny but that god in this
place of Paul forbade to teache and to here the doctrynes of men, if by them
the conscience of men should be bound and endaungered. No man therefore can be
with salve conscience, a monk, a priest, a freer, or such like. For all they
(will they or not, are compelled to confess that their conscyences ar
entangled and bond to the foresaid tradycyons. A man may perceive now how
effectual this saying of Paul is again the tradycyons of men. And how
horrible it is to be herd that they have forsaken christ which is our head:
that they have depted from the faith, and that they are made so very hethens,
while yet they suppose that all the world hangyth and is maynteyned, thoroughly
by their holiness, which is even so true as heaven is vpholden, and sto^dyth
on the sholders of Atlas ye maurytane.

The syxte place is / also of Paul in the first chapter.
THe syxte place is / also of Paul in the first chapter / to the Galathyans.
If we (says he) or the aungle of heaven teach any other thing to you than
that which we have taught, hold it accursed as we before have said, so now
say I again. If any man shall teach you any other thing, than that which
ye have received and ar learned of, hold it accursed. Behold now the Judgment
of god upon the doctrynes of the Pope and other men, that is that should be
accursed. But think thou not that this curse is like to the papystes
thretenynges of exco^munycacions and curses / but that it is eternal / which
also separateth a man from god, christ, health / and all goodness, and byndeth
him to Sathanas. O ye fearful Judgment of god. By this therefore it aperyth
whether the pope, priests, and monks can teach any other thing, or any
thing more than that that christ and his apostles have taught. For it is
spoken before that christ taught after this manner What soever entryth through
the mouth defyleth not the man, which thing the pope, priests, and monks
openly Improve saying / Christ thou lie. For the Charthusians ar polluted
and dampened for eating of flesh. Likewise think they that are like to this
sect. But is not this even to stryke christ in the face and to detecte him of
a lie, to speak ill of him and to teach an other thing than ever he taught?
Moreover this Judgment of perpetual cursynge is brought, even as it should be,
upon the blasphemers of the glory of god, that is, that they should perysshe
and be condemned in their royal holiness.

The.7. place is / of Paul in the first chapter.
THe seventh place is / of Paul in ye first chapter to Thymothe. Teach them
(says he) that they give no head to untrue Fables and me^nes tradycyons,
which things withdraw from the truth. Here again thou may perceive how
the apostle plainly commanded, that we should not attend to me^nes Doctrynes
and Decrees semyth not this unto the as a very hell, or at lest way an occasyon
to drive the to hell when Paul says, that ye precepts and tradycyons of men
ar fer from ye truth, yea and they lead a man so fer from the truth that he
can not be able to know the true thing from ye false, but call good ill, and
ill good, the day night, and the night day. For man's heart (as we before have
showed) can not have trust both in christ's doctrine, and also in the
doctrynes and works of men. For as soon as the heart begins to apply to
me^nes tradycyons it wexeth strange to the truth, and nothing regardyth it.
Of the other part, after that that the heart begins to put hole trust in
christ / it can not choose but set at naught all me^nes tradycyons. By this
thou may perceive whether the curse of christ, or of ye pope is more to be
feared. The Pope and his complyces, curse the with their cruel
exco^munycacions even to the pyt of hell. If thou apply not to their
commandments. But christ thretenyth and forbedyth the on pain of his
everlasting curse yt thou give no head to their tradycyons and curses. Now
auyse ye to which of ye both thou should obaye.

The eight Place is / of saint Peter in the.ii. chapter.
THe eight Place is / of saint Peter in the second chapter of his last
pystle. There shall be (says he) false teachers among you, which pryuely shall
bring in dampnable sects, and shall deny ye Lord which bought them
bringing on their own hedes swyfte dampnacyon. And many shall follow their
poysonable ways, by whom the way of treweth shall be ill spoken of, and
through couytousnes shall they with feigned words make marchaundyse of you.
Here is it plainly opened why the diverse sorts of monks, chanons, and freres
/ be called dampnable sects, verily for that yt they deny christ, and
falsely lie on the way of treweth. By what mean, surely in ye that christ
ordained no iustyfyeng to be in meat and drink, clothes, places, and humane
works / but they styfly affirm by their doctrine and living that iusty
fyeng, and not iustyfyeng restyth in those things. Moreover christ is by
these wretches invaded and rebuked of a lie, yea and all the doctrine of
christ, and faith is reputed as vile, and utterly denayed Yet for all that by
their glosynge and painted words under color of obedyence, and of the deuyne
mynysters, they have kept preuye their insacyable hunger of couytousnes, and
so ferforth for ye mayntenaunce of their abhomynable lusts and wanton
pleasures have they made marchaundyse of us, that they have almost shaven the
lay people of all their goods and lands even with this subtyltie, for they
booste and make men believe that who soever have done any benefyte to them, or
give them any part of their goods, shall deserve to have heaven by their
prayers and cerymonyes. Wherefore al their ordynaunces and doctrynes ar even
trewely called of Peter. sects of dampnacyon and blasphemies of god.

The nynthe Place is / of Mathewe in the.xxiiii. chapter.
THe nynth place is / of Mathewe in the.xxiiii. chapter. When (says he) they
shall say to you. Lo this is Christ, believe them not. For there shall arise
false christ's, and false prophets, which shall show great signs and
wonders, in so much if it were possible they should deceive the very elect. Lo
I show all these things to you. And when they shall say to you. Lo christ is
in wyldernes, go ye not forth, also if they shall say to you, christ is in the
secret places believe them not. Now show me I pray you what monk or frete
shall be saved. For every one rekenyth his health and salvation to be accepted
in that place, which he byndeth and auoweth him self to. And says, here is
my christ for onles I tarried here, I should perysshe and be dampened. But
christ answeryth and says, I am not there, who than shall make these two
sayenges acorde? Verylye (as I think) no man. Wherefore it aperyth by this
saying of christ, that all doctrynes which bind and dedycate the conscience
to any place ar clean contrary to christ. Now if christ will not yt the
conscience be bound to any place, surely than of right the conscience ought
to be free fro meats, drynkes, clothes, tradycyons, and other outward
things. Moreover for as much as we se the Pope and his spyritualyte do this,
it is not to be doubted, but this saying of Mathewe makyth extremely again
them. Ferthermore Christ him self by this saying ryddeth and assoyleth all
prestes, and monks, from their promised vows for that that he co^dempnyth all
such orders and monasteryes, when he says, believe them not. Go ye not
thither. Even for the same purpose Luke in his.xvii. chapter says. The
kingdom of god shall not come with the obseruyng of outward rytes and
tradycyons of men, neither shall it be said. Lo here, lo there. For the kingdom
of god is within you / Is not this saying also clear and effectual enough to
confound me^nes tradycyons?

The doctrynes of men can teach or ordain no other thing but outward things.
Seeing now that the kingdom of god restyth not in outward things, but in the
inward, it can no otherwise be, but that both the teachers and lerners of
me^nes tradycyons (which only teach outward things) ar blind and fer wide
from the prycke of treweth. They say we give head and follow the steps of our
holy fathers, which Instytuted these ordres of monks, and freres. But they
shall not escape with playeng of that pageaunt, for Christ pluckyth from them
that cloak of false color, when he says. The chosen men also, if it could be
brought to pass, shall be led out of the way yt is the elect shall be blinded,
but shall not contynewe in error. For there should no notable error come (as
christ has foreshowed to come) oneles ye elect had erryd and err. What
soever the doctrine and examples of the holy Fathers be, the words of Christ
be certain and plain, to whom therefore we should more obaye than to the holy
Fathers, because their doctrynes and works be of no certaynte, because also
that that, which was before spoken makes again their tradycyons that is. The
kingdom of god is within you, and not without you, neither here, nor there?

The tenth Place is / of Solomon the.xxx. chapter.
THe tenth Place is / of Solomon in the.xxx. chapter Of his Prouer bys The
words of god (says he) are fyred and ar a defense for all them yt stycke to
them, and believe them. Add thou nothing to the words of him, left he
ponysshe the, and left thou be found culpable of a lie. Suffyce ye thou reader
for this time with that that has been said, howbeit many other places might
have be found thoroughly among the prophets which would very well serve this
purpose, namelye in Heremye, which in his seventh chapter says. Here ye not
that which semyth ryghtfull and just to you, but that that I command you.
And walk ye in every way which I have commanded you, that it might be well
with you. And in the.ix. chapter, he says because they have forsaken my law
which I gave to them, and have not herd my voice, nor have walked in it, but
have gone from it after ye frowardnes of their hertes, and after Bailym which
thing they have learned of their Fathers. Therefore says the Lord god of the
congregacyon of Israel these things. Lo I shall feade this people with worm
wode and give them water of gall for their drink and shall dyspercle them
among nacyo^s which they nor their Fathers never knew. And I shall send my
sword after them until they be dystroyed. And Ezechyell in his.xxxiiii.
chapter, says woo be to the herdes of Israel, which have fed them selfs.
Ar the sheep not fed of the herdes? ye have eaten the milk, and have coueryd
your self with the wolle, and that that was fat ye have slain, but ye have
not fed my flock. And in the second chapter of Malachie it is said. And
now this commandment is to you ye priests, if ye will not here, and if ye
will not set it on your hertes to give glory to my name says the Lord of
the co^gregacyon. I will send pouerte upon you, and I will curse your
blyssynges, and I will curse them because ye set it not in your hertes. Then
will they cry (as Mycheas says in his third chapyt) to the Lord, but he
shall not here them, and he shall hyde his face from them at ye time, because
they have wyckedly led their lines i^ their own Inuencyons. And for the
myschefe of those Inuencyons (as O see in his.ix. chapter witnesses) god
shall cast them out of his house, and in his.xx. chapter He says god shall
reward them after their ways, and after their Inuencyons.

Our lord overthrow and break in sondre every Inuencyon of perdycyon, and
grant the contynuaunce of his faith to us, and restore us to the light of
truth, which long time has be derkyd with the clouds of me^nes tradycyons
so ferforth that the glory which ought to be given to the name of god, has
hitherto ben translated to other names, through false doctrine, and feigned
holiness, which have almost dystroyed the true Christen faith.

Be it reformed, when Gods will is. Amen.
Imprynted be me Robert wyer / dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe beside
charynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio.

woodcut of the early blazon or coat of arms of Henry VIII of England,
featuring the Order of the Garter, crowned, supported by a dragon and a dog,
encircling a shield, Quarterly, three fleurs-de-lys and three lions passant
guardant; also a Tudor rose, a fleur-de-lis, a portcullis and an eagle or
griffin with crown and scepter ^ MON ^ ^ DIEV ^ ET ^ ^ DROYT ^

^ HONEY ^ ^ SOYT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE ^



printer's device of Robert Wyer, featuring John the Evangelist with eagle, and
Wyer's name below (McKerrow 68 and 69) ROBERT WYER.



