An Apollogie confirmation explanation and Addition to the Vranicall Astrolabe
by the Author.
FIrst for Apollogie and Confirmation of the thing I do not see but I may
well (without flattering or overmuch affecting my own doings avouch it to be
the best and rarest devise for an Astrolabe that ever came forth in any age,
and to most use and pleasure, and do wish any man that thinks he can
contradict it to do it in writing that I may either yield or answer. For, to
backbyte or detract by words any man that has openly published himself by
writing is neither honest nor credible, rather it bewrays himself to be
either partial, malicious, ignorante, or vaineglorious. But to the matter I
say for an Astrolabe not comparing it (though the devise be more new and rare)
with the Catholicon or Jewel, which contains in it the several uses, not
only of all Astrolabes but also of the Sphere and Globes themselves, and of
all other Instruments both Astronomicall and Geometrical, being fitted
accordingly as hereafter if God permit I will yet more manifest. Therefore very
unaptly by Gemma Frisius named Astrolabum Catholicon had he not added thereunto
in his title. In quo quicquid vspiam rerum mathematicarum tradi possit
continetur etc. And for that cause I having amplyfied the devise both in
fashion and use, named it the Mathematical Jewel But to fetsorth an
Astrolabe: and no more but an Astrolabe: then I say, that this and no other is
Astrolabium Catholicon or Generale. Which must needs be confessed, if with
Messahala we do but define the word Astrolabe who (as Io. Stophlerus reports)
says, that Astrolabium est nomen grecum cuius Interpretatio est acceptio
stellaru^. In latin it is called (as Stophler says) Astrolat sus: quasi
astrorum casus vel lapsus, vel quia metitur lapsus vel transitus astrorumet
signoru^. Wherefore seeing it appears by the diffinition of the name: that
the very Intendement of the devise of the Astrolabe, was but to comprehend the
lapses, courses, risings, and settings of the signs, stars, and planets, unto
the sundry Horizons in several countries and latitudes: and no further. All
which this my Vranicall Astrolabe so effectually, so plausibly, so pleasingly,
so easily, and so suffitiently performs. That (the round globe it self
excepted) neither he Jewel, neither any other devise of Astrolabe either
general or particular, of which many have been, and with great joy and
applausure heretofore received, comes any way near it. Therefore I can not
see how or with what face any man can justly detract from it. Let me here
examine the matter publicquely, and to make short and come speedily to the
point omitting such horoscopes as Apian and others published with their
cylinders ships, rings and many other learned Ludicra and devises in dyalls
framed for the rising and setting of the signs and stars, and leaving out
such Astrolabes as old Sconer and diverse other did set forth which wear never
much accounted of, and straight iumpe in with that high commended and so ever
well accepted Astrolabe, even the very foundation of all that have been since
which Io. Stophlerus last established in his book de Fabrica et vsu
Astrolabij. even that Astrolabe without which on the backside, Gemma Frisius
would not allow his Catholicon current: although in my Jewel I supply it on
the face, and that more general. Well then, if you thoroughly consider of, or
look into that so excellent devise: whether to a particular Horizon as Io.
Stophlerus framed him: or general to all Horizons as G. Frisius appointed him:
or more general to al Horizons and both Poles, as my self in my Jewel devised
him: yet by all those devises, in regard that of a 1000. starts and upwards well
known and recorded by Images in the heavens conceived, there could be no use of
above 40. or 50. of them. and that use half purblind for want of the Images.
And that in this Vranicall Astrolabe there is equal use of the whole trope and
of every Image and constellatio^ in his full proportion, as plain as the day
to be feene: a few toward the South pole which with us are never seen
excepted: and that many more Astrolabicall propositiones are to be performed
thereon, general to al Horizo^s, then before could be done by that of
Stophlers to one Horizon. Therefore I can not but most confide^tly defend,
confirm, and prefer the devise thereof before the^ all in his kind. And
adding another face thereunto, for those few co^stellations wanting and
considering the small charge, the easy portabillity and the readiness of (...)
(for which 3. causes the Astrolabe was first devised and ever accounted of) it
might seem a devise now sprung up to put down the globe it self. Add to
these my new devise of the Horarlum Planetarium on the top theareof, many
ways before attempted, yet never made general before: also the devise in the
two side semicircles (wheare once I had thought to have placed the said south
co^stellations wanting) for equating and rectifiyng of the fixed stars, for
all ages, past and to come: never joined to any other Astrolabe. These I hope
may satisfy for an Appollogie and confirmation of the devise: if not: Sure I
am, they may make you look a Term or two longer for my Organum Vranicum
the^ I promised, because I mean once again to peruse and write over the copy
perceauing by this that the Incorporating of thexamples with the precepts,
which I used here and thought hereafter more to use for breuity of writing, will
make the more prolixitie of understanding for young practisers. Unto whom, my
harsh loose and deliver of that I conceive, (nature affoording me no better) I
perceive is of it self hard enough: which as I am sorry for, so have I been
always willing, as I have still offered and that gratis, viua voce to remedy
it, as diverse by experience can testify.

THen for Addition to the parts of this Astrolabe, let the Matter or Celestial
thereof remain as at the first, only I think good in steed of the letters
I.F.M.A etc, for more readiness to write the words January, February, March
etc. unto the same places of the Ecliptic circle whereas the Son enters
the 12. Months of the year.

Let the Zenitfer also remain as before saving that, I would not have the
hower-circle thereon discribed, neither any numbers wtitten in capital
letters, because they are combersom, but in steed of them smaller figures set
upright the standing way as in this figure of the Almcantifer you see done from
50. to 70. and those are needful, but in the Noone line for the double
numbering from the center out-wards, but in the North line there need not any
such.

Let the Cursor now carry one quadrant of 90 degrees. feruing chieflye for the
Azimuthes, and therefore called the Azimuthall quadrant, numbered double vz.
upwards and downwards, and another of 6. hours double numbered also: but
upwards, al one way, called the hour quadrant: all which by his figure marked
with A B C D. you may here see whose line A D is his fiducyall line which must
always run very square cross the Zenitfer as in the 1. Chap. is showed, his
line A B keeping in that motion even with the fiducyall line of the Zenitfer,
at whose point A must be a center loope hole for the Almicantifer to play upon.
And at B let be another center loope hole with a loope of thread, or a hook
always fixed therein to hitch a thread and perle unto, when need requires.

Let there be now planted to the fiducyall line of the Almicantifer E P G so
many as the length will allow of those radiall degrees which should be on the
Nooneline of the Zenitfer out-wards from the cross or Aequinoctials
intersection therewith, to help to length the Zenitfer when cause so requires,
for which purpose his Ostensor or pointer has now two center loope holes at M
and N to hitch likewise a thread and pearl unto when need so requires. I have
also added unto the center end G of the Almicantifer for use of the Cursors
quadrants 3 cross finnes. So that there are now to his center G: 4 cross
fiducial lines G K. G I. G L. and G P. of which G P. and G I. are somewhat the
longer and do answer in length to the outer numbers of the Azimuthall
quadrant. And G L and G K som-what the shorter aunswering, but the inner
numbers thereof. And all 4 serve alike to the hour quadrant. But in all: with
this distinction that when G P F the fiducyal line of the Almicantifer (which
is as the Index to the other three) comes on either of those quadrants be
sure the hour or Azimuth showed is Antemeridia^ vz between 6 of the clock in
the morning and noone. And when the moving about or application of the line G
P F unto any starr, planet, or point in the Celestial, causes G L to come on
those quadrants, the^ be sure the hour or Azimuth is Pomeridian vz. beetweene
noone and 6 of the clock at night. And when G K comes on: then Nocturnall or
Vespertine, vz. between 6. at night and midnight. And when G. K comes on,
then Matutine or toward the morning vz. between midnight and 6 in the
morning according to which I have in them placed the 4 words Antemeridian,
Pomeridian, Vespertin, and Matutyn for ease of memory.

Also I would now have even for ease as much as for use three narrow Cursors
O P and Q which may be called lydgers rather then Cursors, to be planted for
all questions of one latit. even fixed on the Zenitfer: the one at the
vertical point in the Noonelyne, the other at the Horozontall point in the
North line, the other at the Azimuthall point in the North line also, which
point is always twice so many radiall degrees from the center as the latitude
of your place amounts unto and was not mentioned any where in the Book: and
the Vertical and Azimuthall lydgers to have each a center loone hole to hitch
a thread and pearl unto, when cause requires.

Lastly you shall describe the hour circle (which before was planted on the
Zenitfer) now on a plate or plain by it self having a short Index at 12 of
clock at noone from which you shall (after the Copernitian manner) number the
afternone hours 1 2 3 etc. leftwards toward the East as by this figure you
see. This hour circle must be planted on the ce^tre of the Celestial to move
stiflly under the Zenitfer with a bolster between the Zenitfer and it: that
the moving of the Zenitfer do not stir it.

NOw to the Explanation which methinks should not need any until past the first
12 chapters because those co^taine nothing but what is common in every
Astrolabe in a manner: most easy to be understood of any that has read but
the first principles of the globe or spear. For all the Exce^trick circles of
the Matter, vz. such as are not described on the center of the Celestial or
Matter of the Astolabe, are no other (as in the 2 cap. is said) but thecliptick
circle of the Zodiac marked with BC, with every fifth of his circles of
lo^gitude, distinguishing the whole face into the 12 signs and their parts,
yssuing from his poles: and every fifth of his parallel circles of latitude,
passing on each side toward each of his poles, or so many and so much of the^ as
the proiectme^t would allow, which admits but one of the Zodiacks poles
within it marked with the letter D. And thereon is only the Aequinost. circle
described co^centrick cutting thecliptick at the beginnings of Aries and Libra
at B and C, whose numbers and deuifio^s because they should not disturb the
Matter, are set in the outer limb thereof: where note that B stands at the
tip of the tail of Cetus, C. in the right wing of Virgo, D under the foot of
Draco though some has said there be no such letters. And now, who can not
easily by the squares made with the crossings of those circles of long. and
latit. easily descrye the lo^gitudes and latitudes of any star, carect, or
constellatio^ thereon set or drawn as in the 2 cap. is taught. And seeing the
center of the Astrolabe marked with A, represe^teth the north pole of the world
about which the Zenitfer moves. The radiall degrees of whose nooneline are
nu^bered from thequinoctials intersectio^, where the sta^derh either way
toward each pole. Who ca^ be so ignorant but to know that by the leading about
thereof by the degrees of the Matters limb, that his fiducyall or noone-line
may show the 360 Meridians of the globe, though to avoid confusion of lines
they be not drawn on the Astrolabe, and that his radial degrees do lymit out
the parallelles of latitude or declinatio^ from thequinoctiall by that leading
about.

But to come unto the residue of the book wherein our new devised tackling is
applied to so excellent uses general to all Horizons: which as it seems has
more want of Explanation. The first thing you have now to do when any question
is proposed, is to set the Index of the hour circle unto the place of the, for
the day or time of your question by help of the 5 cap. the and noneline, that
is to say bring the nooneline of the Zenitfer unto the degree of thecliptick
aunswering your day proposed, and then apply the Index of the hower-circle
even therewith, so is the hour circle planted for that day, and in like sort
you shall from day to day by help of the nooneline remove the Index further
and further for every day a degree rebating the odd minutes in the 5 cap.
mentioned. So shall the nooneline now show you still thereon the hour in every
question unasked as they say: without labelling to the son, as in most chapters
of the book was used, although he that desires variety may now use both: For
the Amicantifer labelled from the ce^tre of the Astrolabe unto the Sons place
in thecliptick as in the book is used, either it self or one of his three
cross finnes shall show you the hour in the hour quadrant of the Cursor, so
you take those hour numbers which fit unto the direction of the fin written
thereon: that is to say, if the Matutine or Pomeridian fin come thereon then
the numbers from 1 to 6 must serve: if the Antemeridian or Vespertine then
those from 6 to 12.

The second thing most material to be done is as in the 10 and 17 cap. I
endeavored to show to choose out on the Zenitfer the points and lines
appertaining to your latitude, Horizon, or place of your abode, and to prepare
him with his furniture to the Horizon of that place: Which having now four
Cursors you shall do and understand I hope with ease. And for more facility
as well in working as nu^bering, you shall reject the odd minutes of your
latitude, if any happen, and work upon the nearest entire degree as in all
auntie^t Astrolabes the use ever was until practice has made you more perfect
for the minutes. For example, to prepare the Zenitfer to the latitude and
Horizon of Reading, where the latit. or poles eleuatio^ is by the 10 cap. to be
found about 51 2/3 degrees. you shall in steed of 51 2/3 take 52 degrees. and account
that for our latit. neglecting the od 20 min. which for common use will hurt
little. Wherefore you shall seek out this latit. 52 among the radiall degrees
of the nooneline, where I have in this figure set E, and there to plant the
fiducial line of your Vertical lidger in the former figure marked with O. The^
likewise seek the same 52 latit. among the radial degrees. of the North line where
I have set R, and there to pla^t the Horizontall lidger Q. And between those 2
lidgers thus placed you shall ever find 90. radial degrees. of the Zenitfer as if
you tell the^ with a stick as they say you may easily try, now the 20 min: be
rejected, and those 90 ra. degrees. are the 90 intersectio^s of the 90 Almica^tares
with the North quadra^t of the Meridia^ in every latit. and therefore I call the^
the North degrees. The^ seek out twice 52 degrees. vz. 104 degrees in the Northline
reckoned from the ce^tre outward which will fall out at 14 degrees. without the,
where I have set X and there plant the Azimuthall lydger P. And these 3 thus
planted shall never be stirred so long as you keep in the 52 latit. Then to
proceed further if now you follow the fiducyall line of the Vertical lydger
thus planted cross the Zenitfer from E, you shall perceive it of it self, to
find out and touch the Zenith point of your latitude, that is to say, the
innermost end of that Zenith line which appertains to the 52 latit. marked
with F, whose outer end is marked with B, this line B F is the Zenith line of
the 52 latit. and all the rest of his fellows are of no use in that country,
yet is he jointly with them divided by the cross slope lines which you see
into 90 parts, though unequal which are as in the 1 cap. is said, the 90
Almicantar roots that is to say out of these 90 roots severally does spring the
90 several Almicantares or circles of altitude of the 52 latit. which roots
are easily reckoned by the upright numbers set in the left marge^t unto every
10 of them. And because these roots begin from the outer-most ends, and thence
are nu^bered inwards, therefore the point B being the outer end of the 52
Zenith line, is the root of the first or 0 Almicantare of this 52 latit. which
in deed is always the Horizon it self. For the Almicantares begin from the
Horizon and thence grow less and less til they come to nothing at the Zenith,
as the parallells grow from thequinoctiall to the pole, where they end at 90,
so that ever the Horizo^ circle is the first or 0 Almica^tare. This well
understood the^ shall you set the fiducial line A D of the Cursor even with the
point B on the Zenitfer and there pla^t him fast with a screw pin, if your work
be of metal and so shall he cut the noneline at A, thence apply the fiducial
line G F of the Almica^tifer in the former figure eue^ with the noone line, and
thero^ slide down the finger of the pointer til it touch the Horizontall
lydger at the point X there screw fast the pointer also. Lastly you shall from
the point X where the Azimuthall lidger rests exte^d his thread eue^ with the
noone line, and there slide up the perle til it touch the Vertical lidger at
E, and there knit the pearl fast with a knot never to be stirred in the 52
latit. And so at the last (your three lidgers thus placed at E R and X and the
Cursor to B A and the pointer distant from A according to the quantity A R and
the perle from X according to X A) your Zenitfer is prepared to the Horizon of
this 52 latitude, which being done (once for all as they say) performs all the
Chapters of the book without any altering or removing, some 2 or 3 Chapters
excepted, for which the Cursor only is to be removed but none of the rest, and
therefore in regard thereof the labor is short though it seem long.

The Zenitfer thus prepared to the Horizon of the 52 latitude and the
Howercircles Index set to the as before, for the day and time proposed, you may
then presently even with one bare inspection see almost half the co^clusions
of the book performed without any labor at all more then to apply the
nooneline unto that planet carrect or star which you mean to work upon.

Example: the 5 day of March 1598. proceeding as in the 5. cap. is taught, you
shall find the his place in thecliptick 25 degr. 3 min. in thereto dyrect the
Index of the hower-circle by help of the Noone-lyne. Where let him rest fixed
for all that day, so have we no more troble with that part. And now will we
here work upon the great star of the first magnitude which you see in the
face of Taurus commonly called Paliliciu^ Aldebaram or Oculus tauri to know
his state in the heavens. His longitude is easily descryed as in the 2 cap. is
showed by the circles described on the Celestial, to be about 4 degrees. and an
half, and his latitude in like sort to be almost 5 degrees Southwards from
thecliptick, for all the Stars which have North latitudes, even the one half
of the globe are in this Astrolabe comprehended within the Zodiac.

Then do but apply the Noone line of the Zenitfer as before prepared, unto the
middle prick or center of this star Oculus tauri, it shall there show you in
the Matters limb 62. degrees. and better his right ascension and in theclipticke
circle four degrees and better in his degrees. of culminacon as in the 8 cap. and
in the hour circle almost half an hour past 4 of the clock afternoon the
time when as he shall that day culminate or come unto the meridian in the
South part, as in the 16 cap. And thus much the bare line shows you. Now do
but mark what point or radiall degree of the nooneline cutteth upon the
middle prick of the Star, and that point shall play as good a part, for if
you reckon that point or degree according to the numbers set on the noone line,
you shall find it 16 degrees. and better, and so much is the declination of Oculus
Tauri as in the 8 cap. and that Northwards from thequinoctiall circle because
he is within it. Then reckon by the radiall de. on the nooneline counting them
from the vertical lidger (set co the latitude as before) til you com to that 16
degree over the cnetre of the star, you shall find them amount to 36, and so
much will his distance from our Zenith be, when he comes to the meridian,
which 36 degrees. taken out of 90 leaves 54 degrees his Meridian altitude as in
the 16 cap. And if you turn about the Zenitfer till the North line of Media
nox come on this starr, so shall the nooneline also (whose office alone is now
to show the hours) show you halse hour past 4 in the morning and better, the
just time when as Oculus Tauri shall come unto the Meridian in the North under
the earth. And now if you list to remove the hour circles, Index from day to
day the noone line (resting still on the star) may show you what hour that
Oculus comes to the Meridian every day of the year.

And as all those Meridian conclusio^s, (as I may term them) are soon had by
bare inspectio^ without moving. So you may as redily attain all the Horizontall
conclusions with a very easy kind of motion: but eue^ with leading about the
Zenitfer by the Almicantifer, as one should lead a horse by the halter round
about an horse mill, and all the skill is but to know which way to lead him,
for if your question proposed be, to be performed on thest half of the
Horizon, which I call the East hemisphere (for the Meridian or nooneline
always deuideth every Horizon in two equal parts) then must your Almicantifer
play on the East or left side of the nooneline where Oriens is written, and
lead him about leftwards till the pointer touch upon the planet or star
proposed, but if on the West hemisphere then right-wards: as for example, to
know what hour the shall rise the said 5 of March 1598 play your Almicantifer
in the East hemisphere and thereby lead about the Zenitfer left-wards till the
pointer may be brough to touch the said 25 degrees, 3 mi. of there shall the
nooneline show you in the hour circle almost a quarter after 6 of the clock,
the time of son rising that day, and the Almicantifer labelled to the East line
of the Zenitfer, vz, to L M shows as in the 17 Chap. in the Celestialls limb
355 1/2 degrees. his oblique ascension for that day. Then if you list to lead him
on leftwards till the pointer come to touch the middle prick of Oculus Tauri,
there you shall see the nooneline to show in the howercircle a little past 9 in
the forenoone the time of his rising that day, and the Almicantifer labelled
or applied from L on M, shall show in the Matters limb 41 degrees. his oblique
ascension for that day as in the 18 cap. And if now you would know what time
they will set, then play the Almicantifer on the West hemispheare, and by him
lead about the prepared Zenitfer right-wards till the pointer do touch either
of them, and you shall so find the nooneline to show for the the son almost 6
of clock, and for Oculus Tauri the times of their setting, almost 12 at
midnight. And the Vespertine fin of the Almicantifer G I applied to L M so
shall the fiduciall line G P F of the Almicantifer which represe^teth now the
West line show in the Matters limb the 354 1/^ degrees. and for the star 86 degrees.
their oblique descentio^s for that day. Then if you reckon the hours between
the Son rising and setting the same is the length of the day, and those taken
out of 24 leaves the length of the night also, the hours between the rising
and setting of Oculus Tauri are called his diurnall arch, those taken out of 24
leaves his Nocturnall arch. Likewise the right ascension of Oculus being as
before 62 degrees. and now his oblique ascension found 41 degree take the bigger
out of the less there rests 21 degrees. his difference of ascension in this 52
latitude from that of the right Horizon.

The Third difficulty and material matter is as it seems for any latitvde
assigned to prepare the Zenitfer to any Altitude taken, taught in the 13 Cap.
thereby to know what hour of the day or night it is and such like questions.
Let your lydgers lie still unremoved so long as your questions keep in that
latitude, whereunto they are placed. And admit then you had taken the altitude
of the Son 25 degrees. the 2 of October 1596. in the Morning (the Index of the
hour circle being set as now is taught to the same degree of the Son in
Thecliptick at K vz. even with the pricked line L K. First you shall here seek
on the 52 Zenith line B E, for the 25 Almicantare root which according to
their numbers set in the left margent of the Zenitfer you shall find at the
point A of the line B F, whereunto you shall now apply the fiducyall line of
the Cursor which shall then cut the 26 radiall degrees. of the nooneline marked with
C (but of that 26 radiall degrees. there is no use) and there let the Cursor be set
fast, then exte^d the Almicantifer even by the nooneline and slide down the
poynter till it do touch the 25 North degree that is to say, at the 25 radiall
degree, reconed from the Horizontall lydger at R toward the center L (and
beyond if need so requier as here it does not) which will here fall out at the
37 rad. degrees. according to the numb. set on the North line at the letter Q. but
those numbers as I said are not much to be regarded after your lydgers are
set. And your Cursor thus planted at D C and the poynter distaunt from C
according to the quantitye C Q so is your Zenitfer prepared for that 25
altitude in this 52 latitude. Now therefore because the Altitude taken was in
the morning, play your Almicantifer on the East hemispheare, and by him lead
about the Zenitfer left-wardes till the poynter come upon the Suns place in
thecliptick at K, so shall the nooneline L C A there presentlye show you in
the hower-circle 10 of the clock the hour sought for without any labelling to
the. But if you will labell the hour because the Book shows so: then bring
down the fiducyall line of the Cursor to the center L the Zenitfer still
remaining where he was, and there the Almicantifer labelled to the Sun at K
shall show you in the hour quadrant of the Cursor 10 of the clock
Antemeridian even as the Noone-lyne does on the hower-circle.

To perform the 15 Chap. apply the Noone-lyne to the and from thence reckon
in the hower-circle set, so many hours either rightwardes or left-wardes
according as you find the hour given by his shade, distante from the Index
and at the end of that reckoning is your desire.

Now to the example of the 23 cap. if you plant the noneline on the great
Star Oculus Tauri, the howercircles Index planted at 26 degrees. 3 min. of seek
thereon, 10 of the clock at night the hour given and thence reckon thereon
the hours unto the noone line, you shall find then 5 2/3 hours those shall
be the hours distaunce of Oculus Tauri from the South there sought, and that
Westwards because the reckonning goes Westwards from 10 of the clock.

Next to the 24 cap. the howercircles Index planted (for still that must first
be done) at 20 de. 10 min.. In steed of labelling to thee you shall apply the
nooneline to 10 of clock in the morning, in the hower-circle, and there
holding still the Zenitfer, prepare it as before is taught to some altitude at
adventure, admit to 20 degrees: then playing about the Almicantifer if the
poynter so set will come to touch the Sun his place or star proposed, then
be sure that altitude prepared is your desire, but if the poynter over reach
as at that proffer it will. Then holding still the Zenitfer at the hour given,
prepare it to a greater altitude, admit to 25 degrees. at adventure, and then
playing about the Almicantifer you shall find the poynter to cut theclipticke
in the 20 degrees. 10 min. of at K being the Sons true place for that instant.
Therefore you may conclude that the 10 of October 1596 at 10 of clock in the
morning the Son was 25 degrees. high in our 52 latit. if 25 had not hit you must
have assaied again if need had been.

The last difficulty is for the general way to get the 12 houses in the 27
cap. mentioned, and all the skill rests but in triple, preparing of the
Zenitfer for that purpose, of which the first is but the preparing to the
Horizon as before is taught: And then the noneline laid to the hour proposed,
the howercircle set unto the Sons place in the 25 degrees. 3 min. of in the example
of the 27 cap. mentioned vz. unto 10 of clock, shows in theclipticke 22 degrees.
30 min. the 10 house, and the North line 22 degrees. 30 min. of, the 4 house, and
there (the Zenitfer holden still) the Almicantifer played in the East
Hemisphere, the poynter shall cut in theclipticke 28 degrees. 30 min. of the
ascendent or first house, and playde on the West Hemisphere 28. 30 of the 7
house. So have you the 4 chief Cardines of the 12 houses. And the other 8 are
as easily had by two other like preparations, for the which there are planted
on the Zenitfer 60 slope lines called Domifiyng lines, beginning from his
center line L M, and thence numbered downwards to 60. And also 60 radiall
degrees called Domifying degrees, planted in his left margent between M and V,
beginning at V with 30 and thense numbered inwards with standing figures ending
at M with 90. And unto these 60 Domifying degrees, there are lymitted 60
Domifying roots in the noone line, which are but the double radiall degrees
thereof, numbered from the center outward, that is to say every 2 radial degrees.
accounted but for one Domifying root and every 10 but 5 etc. and standing
numbers set unto them accordingly, of which because the Zenitfer yeildeth not
sufficient, therefore I have now supplied the rest from 45 forwards, in the
Almicantifer as far as it will stretch as before is showed. And as one of the
90 Zenith lines serves all the uses in one latit. as before is showed. So one
of these 60 Domifying lines serves the turn to get the other 8 houses at all
times in one latit. which is easily chosen out by the said numbers ascribed vz.
P O for the 52 latit. These things known, then to perform the second
preparation which shall get you the 2.8.6. and 12. houses is thus done: Remove
the Horizontal Lidger unto O the outer end of the 50 Domifying line, which shall
cut the North line at T, and among the Domifying degrees 42 1/6 at W: there, at
T.O.W. let the lidger rest and pla^t the Cursor at the like number of the said
Domifying roots in the noneline, vz. at the 42 1/6 Domifying root which will
fall out as the 5 2/3 rad. degrees. from the at Z there fasten the Cursor and
applying the Almicantifer even by the noone line slip down the pointer to the
point T, and there fasten him. And thus (the Horizontall lidger planted to TOW
and the Cursor to Z and the pointer distant from Z to the quantity Z T) is your
Zenitfer prepared for getting those other 4 houses. The Zenitfer all this while
standing still at 10 of clock: but now is twice to be removed, first two
hours leftwards vz, to 12 of clock where the Indez stands. And there the
Almicantifer played about, his pointer shall cut theclipticke in the East
Hemisphere at 16 30 of for the 12 house and in the West Hemisphere, at 16 30 of
for the 6 house. Then remove again the nooneline two hours rightwards from 10
of clock vz, unto 8 of clock, and there the Almica^tifer played about the
pointer shall cut in the East Hemisp. the 20 degrees of for the 2 house and in the
West Hemisphere the 20 of for the 8 house. So have you 8 of your 12 houses to
be set in your figure or scheme drawn as the manner is here present for you to
see, which had. Now you must again thirdly prepare the Zenitfer to the inner
end of the 52 domifiing line thus: by removing the Horizo^tall lydger unto P:
which shall there cut in the lest margent the 57 2/3 Domifying degree at Y, and
therefore you shall plant the Cursor unto the 57 2/3 Domifying root in the
nooneline which will fall out at the 52 2/3 rad. degrees. beyond the and thence
slide down the pointer to the lidger at P, and so is the Zenitfer prepared to
get the other 4 houses yet wanting by help of two other remoues, vz. you shall
now first plant his nooneline at 4 hours leftwards of 10 of clock, vz. at 2
of clock and there playing the Almicantifer about, it shall show in the East
Hemisp. 22 degrees. of for the 11 house, and in the west Hemisp. 22 of for the 5
house. That done remove the nooneline 4 hours rightwardes from 10 of clock vz.
to 6 of clock and there playing the Almicantifer about, the poynter shall cut
in the East Hemisp. 5. 30 of for the 3 house and in the west Hemisp. 5.30 of
for the 9 house: Now place those 4 houses also as in this figure you see and
you have done. Note that because in the 27 cap. these 4 remooues of the
nooneline are done by applying the pointer prepared unto the Horozontall point
pitched in the Celestial, and this way there but barely touched. I thought
good to show it now at large leaving every man to do it which way he best
affects. Note also that when the Domifying roots are gone out of the
Zenitfer, the^ set the Cursor to the in the nooneline and there extend the
Almicantifer outwardes even with the nooneline where fastening him with some
devise you may then hitch a thread and perle to the pointer, and use the
pointer instead of the Cursor and the thread and perle in steed of the
Almicantifer and poynter.

LAST of all for Addition in the use, take one devise more with you for the
Azmuth then before I wrate of: which with no small studdie I attained, meaning
to have reserved it with diverse other propositions that I have in store for a
second edition. But because carpers shall not say that my so commend Astrolabe
wants any needful part that other Astrolabes had. I will here though I
could perform it 2 or 3 ways for breuity only deliver the best. As to the
example before mentioned, where according to the altit. of the taken 25 degree
high by the Zenitfer prepared to that 25 altit. and the pointer applied on the
Sun his place at K, his nooneline showed in the howercircle 10 of clock. There
hold fast the Zenitfer till you have done, if you desire also to know what
Azimuth the was then in. And play about the Almicantifer (it is no matter on
which side of the nonneline) till it will mete at G. justly with the pearl
(prepared as before) of the thread fastened in the loope of the Azimuthall
lydger at X their hold also fast the thread X G. The^ apply the fiducyall line
of the Almicantifer even with the fiducyal line of the Cursor square crossing
the Zenitfer: And so slide the^ square down together til the Almica^tifer cut
the perle at G. which will be at H. in the nooneline, and there at H. faste^ the
Cursor and slice the poynter to G. and the^ vnhitch the thread from X and hitch
it to the vertical lidger at E, and from E extend the thread on the Suns place
at K, lastly play about the Almicantifer till the poynter settled at G as
before do touch the Vertical thread E K, which will be at I. H I. being equal
to H G. So does H I. the fiducyall line of the Almicantifer cut among the
Antemeridian degrees of the Cursors Azimuthall quadrant, 57 degrees. the Azimuth
sought for. That is to say, the degrees cut are to be taken by the outer
numbeing being it was in the morning because the Azimuthes are numbered from
the East and West points of the Horizon either-way unto the Meridian there
ending at 90, which is to be regarded by the letter P on the Almicantifer.

And out of this proposition (because we will leave no hard chap. of the book
vnexplaned) you may easily learn how to perform the 20 chap. another way. For
by another Synonomy of speech to know the amplitude of rising and setting of
the Sun, or stars, is but to know upon what Azimuth or point of the compass
they rise. Wherefore being that the Horizon circle of any place is the beginning
of the first circle of altititude that is to say, of the 0 Almica^tare.
Therefore to get this amplitude, you must first prepare your Zenitfer to that 0
altitude, that is to save, to the Horizon as before is taught by setting the
Cursor to A D. and the pointer to R. from A. And being so prepared, if it be
for son rising let the Almicantifer play in the East Hemisphere, and his
pointer there touching the Suns place, hold fast the Zenitfer till you have all
done, whose noone line shows in the hower-circle his hour of rising. Then
for the Azimuth work in all respects as is done last before, and you shall find
the meeting of the pearl and pointer at G. will fall out in the center line L.
M. extended. Wherefore if a thread were hitched in the center L. and his pearl
extended beyond M. to that crossing at G. the Cursor need not here be
removed at all from A. D. when the one threade is extended out of the
Vertical point E on the and this thread out of L till perle out that vercal
thread as before he did at I this center thread shall show in the limb of the
Celestial the amplitude desired, desired, If you reckon thence to 6 of clock
that is to say; unto that degree which the 6 of clock, howerline of the
howercircle would show in the Celestial limb, if it were extended.

Note that if any man shall affect to have the howercircle on the Zeniifer
according to the first direction: and not on a plate or flat by it self as now
I appoint him. Yet let him quite out away the Pomeridian hours which are
without the Zenitfer numbered from noone unto media nox, to to the end that
nothing may hinder the sight of the whole Hemisphere at all times and that the
Cursor may always have free passage to the center. And then to use in steed
of the center thread a rule or labell, like unto the Almicantifer before
described, with the Vespertine sin only. For so shall the rule show the
Antemeridian hours from midnight to noone and the fin the Pomeridian from
noone to midnight, and all by that one half hour circle described on the
Zenitfer even as before it was done on the quadrant with three finnes, and as
readily as in the book by the whole circle.

FINIS.
Paultes escaped in the Book.
In the 9 Chap. 2 line, for passes by the Zenith. Read passes from the Pole
by the Zenith.

In the 18 Chap. the 18 and 22 line, for 280 and 19. Read 180 and 29.

In the 27 Chap. line 61. for Inner end. Read outer end.

Ibidem line 65. for outer end. Read. Inner end.


