The second part of the Secrets of Master Alexis of Piemont, by him collected
out of diverse excellent aucthours, and newely translated out of French into
English, with a general Table, of all the matters contained in the said Book.

By Willyam Ward.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston: for Nicholas England. Anno domini.
M.D.lx.

The translatour to the Readers.
IN the edicio^ of the first part of the worthy secrets, of the reverend
Senior Alexis of Piemont, it was promised you (gentill readers) even of him
self in his Epistle, that he would labor in the colleccio^ of others, tried
and experimented, for the utility, profit, and pleasure of all soche, as
either delited in them, or would by them be eased, of soche infirmities, as
they might casually have been grieved withal. You heard also the cause, why he
would communicate those secrets with the world, which undoubtedly sprung of
a godly zeal, toward the common case of all men. I therefore (because he
has kept touch, performing his promise, in collectyng a second part) could no
less do herein, then I did in the first part, that is to say, no more to
spare my labor in translatyng it, into our native toungue, nor hide the
commodity of so excellent things, from those that have not the understanding
of the French tongue, then I did before. And because you should not have
only, the head without the tail, that is, the biginnyng without the end, you
shall have here, no less good and profitable matters (although not so many)
then was presented you in the other, as by your judgment in readyng, you shall
easily perceive.

THE Second part of the Secrets of Master Alexis of Piemont, by him collected
out of diverse and excellent Authors.
To make whey as clear as well water.
TAke wheie and heat it on the fire, but let it not boil: then sprinkle it
with a Sponge weate in strong vinaigre, or vergeous, or else the juice or licour
of Orenges, and so strain it in a piece of clothe made like a little bag,
doeyng so diverse times, until it be clear. But note, that the bag must not
be made cleave at every time: but you must power it always upon the skomme of
it, and it will become as clear as Amber.

To make very good Aqua vite.
TAke Wine that is not to old, that is to safe of a year or somewhat more or
less, and let it be very good, having a good odor: and distille it in a
vessel of glass having a long neck about six foot long, with a very small
and slow fire, and take it up together whiles it comes forth fast, that is
to say, when one drop tarrieth not for another, and it shall be very good and
pleasant, for there shall be nothing else but only the part of the Wine very
subtle and fine, true it is that it shall not be very hot, nor burn so much
as other Aqua vites do.

To make Arms or tables of Pictures always bright shining.
TAke very strong Vinaiger and Alome and beat the Alome into powder and
mingle it with the Vinaigre: and than rub therewith the arms or tables and
they will be always bright, or else anoint the^ with the marow of a Dear.

To make black Ynk very good.
TAke a pound and a half of rain water, with three ounces of the waighttest
Galls you can find, bruise them into small pieces and poor them into the said
water and let it stand two days in the sun. Then put to it two ounces of
Roman vitriolle well colored and beaten small, and mix all well together with
a stick of a Fig tree, and leave it again two days more in the Sun.
Finally put to it an ounce of Gomme Arabicke that is eleere and bright and
beaten into powder, and an ounce of the pill of Pomegranades, and than boil it
a little with a slow fire: that done strain it, and keep it in a vessel of
Lead or Glass, and it will be very black and perfect good.

To make Green Ynke.
TAke Verdegris elect and fayer, and make it into past with a little strong
Vinagre and distilled water of Grene galle, and let it dry, and when you will
write with it te^per it with the same water of green gall putting to it a
little gomme Arabike.

For Oxen that piss Blood.
TAke three ounces of Phasioli that be read, and six drammes of Pepper, and
the seed of brom, and make thereof ^ poulder, and give him drink of it every
day with white wine until he be hole, putting three ounces of the said poulder
to two quarte^ of the said wine, and give it him every day three times.

To make Oil of Vitriol.
TAke the Vitriol and make it into Lime, than put into Aqua vite, and let the
water cover it, than distille it, first with a very small fire, augmenting it
by little and little until al become out. Then take out the Aqua vite by
Balneum mariae with the water that is skant warm. This done distill again the
Oil, and if at the beginning there come any water, put the said Oil into some
vessel and set it in the Sun: but it were much better to set two vessels
well closed together one upon another, and the water being in the Sun will
come and cleave unto the vessel that is uppermost, and therefore you shall take
away the said vessel and set to another, and by this mean you shall purge
away all the said water, and the Oil shall remain not only pure and nete,
but also more delicat, than the common Oil of Vitriol.

To make white Teeth.
TAke Limons, and make distilled water of the^, and wash your Teeth with it,
for it is a sovereign thing, or if you will not make the water, take the licour
of them which is also good for the same purpose, but the water is much better,
because it is finer, so that in distilling, it lose not his force.

For the same.
TAke lees of wine called Tar^arum, and put it in a vessel of Marble, and stop
it surely, then bury it in the ground, and let it remain there until it
become water, and then take it out, and rub your teeth with it, and they will
wax very fair. Take also the water that falls at the beginning of the
distillacion of salt Peter and Alome, and rub your teethe therewith. If you
take also the root of Mallows, and rub your teeth with it every day, they
will be bright, white, and fair without hurting the gommes. Or if you take a
cruste of wheaten bread, and burn it even to coals, and then having made it
to powder, skower your teeth withal, and wash them afterward with clean and
fair water, either of the Well or of the Conduite, they will be white, for
it is a thing experimented.

To take away spots from the face.
TAke two ounces of the licour of Limons, and two ounces of Rose water, two
drammes of silver sublimed, and as much of Ceruse, put al together, and make
it like an ointmente, and anointe your face therewith at night, when ye go to
bed, and in the morning when you are up, anoint it with butter. This is
proved.

For the same.
TAke the white of an Egg, and stir it with some thing, until it be
taurned to water, then take an ounce of the same water, and half an ounce of
ceruse, and two drammes of quick silver, and a dram of camfire, and mengle
it all together and so anoint your face with it.

For the same.
TAke iiij. ounces of vitriol, and three ounces of Salt peter, and an ounce of the
rubbish or skale of steel, and distille all together putting to it half an
ounce of Camfire, and wash your face with it every day.

For the same.
TAke half a pound of the root of Serpentin^ called in latin Dracuntium or
commonly Serpentaria, which has certain great red grains joined together in
a lompe, or else a stalk of a reed, and half a pound of a Lily root, and
as much of with Malowes, and sees the^ all together in rain water, then beat
them in a mortar of Marbel, and put to it four ounces and a half of oil of
Tartre, and the marowe of a Dear, and six drammes of Camfire, and so mix all
together, and anoint your face therewith.

To take away little red Pimples from a man's face.
TAke fiuetene new laid Eggs, and put them whole into strong Vinaigre, then
take them out and break them even with the same Vinaigre in putting to it an
ounce of Senuey, then distille them with some vessel of Glass, and wash your
face with the water at night when you go to bed, and again in the morning wash
it with sodden water wherein must be Bren and Mallows. This is experimented.

To make a water that takes away the spots of the face and makes it faier
and bright, and keeps the hands and mouth that they chappe not or wax full
of chinkes.
TAke a white Pigeon, and pluck of his feathers, Fraxinella, is called also
Corrigiola, an herb which renneth on the ground like grass, Mainardus says
it has leaves like an Ash and therefore is called Fraxinella.
then pluck out the guts and garbage of him, and cut of his head and feet,
then take three good handfuls of Fraxinella, and two pound of Milk, and three
ounces of Cream, and six ounces of oil of sweet Almondes, and let it be new
and fresh, and put all this together and distille it in a vessel of Glass,
and wash your face and hands every day with the same water, and they will be
always white, soft, and with out any spots or pimples, as in the mids of
Somer.

To make the face fair.
TAke Fraxinella, and make water thereof in a Lembick, and wash your face well
with the same every day.

A water to make the face fair.
TAke the white of an Egg, and make water thereof in a Lembick, and wash your
face with it as much and as often as you li^^.

To make a water that makes the face white and shinyng.
TAke the milk of an Ass, and Egg shelles, and make thereof distilled water,
and wash your face with it, and it will be white fair and glistring.

A water to make the face read.
TAke the leg of an Ox or Calfe, that is to say from the knee douneward, and
take of the skin and the hoof from it, and then break all the rest in pieces,
that is to say the bones, the senewes and the marowe, and distill it, and so
wash your face with the water that comes of it every morning.

To make a kind of white to make the face fair, called in French Blanchet.
TAke two ounces of Dragantum, and dissolve it with the white of an Egg well
beaten: than put to it half an ounce of Borace, with asmoche of Ceruse, and
asmoche Camfire, and mingle all together, and make thereof little flat
balls, and when you occupy of it, tempere it in some Rose water, and anoint
your face with it at night when you go to bed, and in the morning wash your
face, with water of the flowers of Beans, or else sees Bren in well water, and
wash your face with all.

To make an other better, which makes the face white and glisteryng.
TAke two ounces of the skimme of silver, and a pound of white vineigre very
strong, and boil them together until they be diminished of two thirdendels:
Then take two drammes of Camfire, two of alome, two of Boras, and as much
oil of Tartre, and sees them in Rose water. Then take of these two licours,
that is to say, of the said vineigre, and of the other, as much of one as of
the other, and mingle them together, and rub your face with it as much as
you will, and besides that it makes the face white and glistring, it takes
away all manner of spots and pimples from it.

A water to make the face read and glisteryng.
TAke an ounce of fish glue, and an ounce of Rock alome, and two ounces of
Verzine, and put the^ into a quarte of water, that is to say. xxviij. ounces,
and let them remain in infusion three days, and then sees them, and strain
out the water, and keep it in a vessel of glass as you will.

To make an other manner of the same, which the French men call Blanchet.
TAke two drammes of silver sublimed, and put it into a violle of water that
holds a quarte, and sees it until it decreaseth of the tenth part. Then put
to it half an ounce of Ceruse, and a dram of Camfire and of Boras, and the
licour or juice of a whole Limon, and mingle all together, and let it sees
with a slow fire, the space of seven hours. But you must note, that this,
because of the silver sublimed makes by long using it, the teeth somewhat
black, and at the last to fall out, it makes also a stinking breath, and
hurts the senewes and the brain.

To make an other Blanchet that makes the face white, and of a ruddie color,
and hurts not as the other aforesaied does.
TAke two ounces of Boras, four ounces of Ciche Peason bruised, that is to say,
without the husks, and four ounces of Phasiols, and asmoche of Beans, and
make them all into powder, and the galle of a Bulle, and the yelkes of fiftene
eggs, and a quarte of white wine, and put all together to distille, and wash
your face with the water in the morning.

To make an other Blanchet, which is called royal that is the best, and the
excellentest of all other.
TAke a good handful of the flowers of an Olive tree, and a handful of the
flowers of an Eldern tree, a handful of white roses, a handful of the flowers
of Orenges, and an other of Gelsemines, and twelve new laid Eggs, twelve
grene Figs and fresh gathered, and twelve Snailes, one dram of Camfire, an
other of Alumen desquamatum, two drammes of Boras, half a dram of Alome,
four penie weight of Alumen plumae, otherwise called in Latin Tricbiti^, eight
penie weight of silver sublimed, an ounce of red wax, a good handefull of
white Lilies, and distille all the flowers when they be grene in their season,
and also the Figs, Snailes, and the eggs, and mingle all these waters
together, and put a part half of the same water, and keep the other half, and
put it into a vessel of glass, and mingle into it all the other things, and
let them be first made into powder, and put to also the wax, then set it in
the sun, and leave it there until all become like unto wax, then take it
out with a white linen clothe, and take fiftene Eggs and stille them in the
same water, and power all this co^posicion into the said water distilled, with
a pound of raw Honey, and set it again in the Sun, and let it remain there
until the water be dried up, and it will be parfite good. And afterward when
you will occupy it, take asmoche of it as a Wheat corn, and anointe your
face with the water that you did set aparte, that is to say, that of the
flowers: and it will prove a merueilous thing.

To take out the wrinkles of the face.
TAke a little of the wood of a white Vine, or else a little of Brionie, and
stamp it with a dry Fig that is fa^te, that is to say pastie, and anointe
your face with it, and then go walk till you sweat: for if you should not
sweat, the Vine would take of the skin, and the Brionie make you black.

To make bear slack in coming forth, or growing in young men, as well on
their beard as in other parts.
TAke a rasour that is made of copper, mixed with Auripigmentum, otherwise
called Arsnic or Orpine, in the melting of it, so that it be incorporated
together, and shave the bearde or hear withal, and it shall never grow
again, or if you heat the said rasour of copper in the fire, and quench it in
the blod of a Salamander, or else in the milk of Sowthistles. If also you rub
the place where you will not that hear shall grow, with the blood of a fish
called a Tony, it will done the like. Also if you take Beans and sees them
in water, and wash the place every day with that water, the hear will not
grow, or at the least long or they came forth.

To make hear grow in every place of the body where you will.
TAke great green Lisardes, or sea Frogs, and cut of their heddes and
their tails, and dry the rest in an Oven, and make powder of it. Then take
the yelke of an Egg, and make Oil thereof, and mengle all together
diligently, that is to say, the powder and the oil, and anoint the place with
it, where you will hear shall grow, and they will come for the shortly.

To make hears black.
TAke a Comb of Lead, and kembe your hedde with it always, and the hears
will be black. Take also Crows eggs and make oil of the^ and lay a comb
of horn in it, and let it remain there till it has drunk up all the oil,
then take it out, and kembe your hedde with it, and by continual using of it,
your hear will be black.

To make a water that will make the face read and glisteryng.
TAke a pound of Aqua vite of three seethinges, an ounce of Brasill that is
good, ten Cloves oriental, and ten grains of Nasturtium, otherwise called
Carda^^, in English Cresses or town Kerse, and five grains of Cubi^es, and
stamp all together very small, then put it into a vessel of glass with the
Aqua vite, and stop it sure, and boil it a little, and then distill it in
Balneo Marie, or with a very small fire, and it shall be in his perfection.

To die or color here.
TAke half an ounce of Aqua fortis, six penie weight of good ^^lu^r, and six
ounces of Rose water, and wash your hedde with it. Take also Litarge, and of
the ashes of Nettles and mingle them together, and rub your here with it.

To take away the evil savor of the breath.
TAke Cheruile, Mirre and Cyperus, called of the Apoticaries Iu^^us odoratus,
as much of one as of the other, and make them into powder, then take Rosen,
and of all this pills, and drink them in your wine.

To get away the hears from the iye brows.
TAke the galle of a he Got or of a she Got, but the he Got is better, and
does it sooner, and rub your iye brows, and the hear will (...)ly fall away.

To die or to color all kind of metal or stone, into the color of gold
without gold.
TAke salt Ammoniac, white Vitrioll, stone salt, and Verdegris, and make all
into a very fine powder, and ^a^e of this powder upon the metal, or stone that
you die or color, until it he covered over with it: then put your stone or
metal into the fire, and leave it there a good ho^^^, then take it out and
quench it in urine or piss newly made.

For to make Iron or Steel soft.
YE shall take the juice of Hemlocke, and put the yro^ or steel being read
hoate into it three or four times, and let it remain in it, until it be
through cold. Take also oil and put into it seven times some molten Lead,
and then quench the iron in it at the end of four or five times.

To harden Iron or Steel.
TAKE the juice of Melanthiu^ otherwise called Nigella romana, or the herb
called Mouse ear, and quench your Iron hot therein three or four times.

To make Figs ripe quickly.
LET the Fygges come to their parfyte greatness than pryke them with a pin,
and rub thyem with a little Oil olive, then bind them about with Green
Olyue leaves, so that they may be covered round about with them, and so let
them ripe in what place you will.

To make Hens lay Eggs all the winter.
TAKE the tops of Netles when they begin to have seed, and dry them, and
give the Hens a little of it with Bren and Hemp seed and they shall lay
every day an Egg.

To make a Glue or paste that holds as fast as a nail.
TAKE Pixe Greca, and Rosen, and the powder of burned Brycke which is called
Ceruse, and mengle al together, and heat it when you will occupy it, and when
it is cold it will hold as fast as a nail.

To take away all manner of spots.
TAKe a Tenche and sees him much until he be dissolved into water almost,
and wash the spotted clothe therewyth oftentimes. Than take Bren, and boil it
likewise in the same water, and wash the cloth again therewith.

To cause that a woman's Breasts wax not great of swellinge.
TAKE a Fish that is called Squatina, in English a Soale and cleave him in
the myddle, and lay him upon the woman's Breasts, and they shall not increase
bygger. And if they be great and bygge they shall aswage and wax less.

To purge Honnie with out fire.
TAKE the raw Honey and put in a veessel of stone well leaded within and
large, and cover it well with a Paper and let it so stand, and every third or
fourth day uncover it, and take out the skim that is upon it, and by this
means it purges better then with fire.

To stenche the menstrual blood of women.
TAKE a Toode and bind him with a little band, and bange it about the woman's
neck that has that infyrmyte, and in few days she shall be cleared of it.

To keep Roses fresh all the year.
TAKE the Roses when they be half open, and gather them in the eueninge with
a knife, and in the night following set them in the aier abrod, and in the
morning put them in a vessel of earth well leaded within, and stop it well,
and cover it with dry sand.

For the same.
TAKE the buddes of Roses when they begin to open, and take a reed that is
yet growinge, and clean it a little that you may put in the buddes, and let
them remain so, and when you will take them out cut the reed, and put the
buddes in luke warm water, and they shall be as fair as in May.

To take away or dissolve a boil or Kernel in the grine, or the wresting of
a senewe.
TAke a Tode and bind upon the boil and it will dissolve it in short space.

To dress and trim Olives in one day.
TAke the Olives when they be green, and cut them a little on the side, than
put them in water with Lime and Ashes: but note that you must have twice
as much Ashes as Lime, as if you take half a pound of Lime, you must have a
pound of Ashes, and let them lie a stiepe in it the space of xxiij hours, than
take them out, and wash them five or six times in luke warm water, than put
the^ in some vessel of stone or Glass as you will with salt water and so keep
them as long as you list, and they will be very good.

To preserve and keep Peches or other Fruit.
TAke Peches or other Fruits that you will keep, in the fair and dry wether,
and open them in the mids, and take out the stone, and lay them a day to
dry in the sun: than take sodden sugar well purged and rub them over with
it, and the next day set them in the Sun again, and rub them with the
said sugar as often as they dry until they have gathered a crust upon them,
than keep them at your pleasure, and it will be an excellent and parfite thing.

To cause marvelous Dreams.
TAke the blood of a Lampwink or black plouer, and rub your temples, with it
and so go to bed, and you shall see merueilous things in your sleep, or
else if you eat at night a little of the herb Solan^, or Vesicaria, or some
Mandragora, or else of the herb called in Greek Hyoscyamos, in Latin it
has these names Al^ercum, Appollinaris, and Symphoniaea, in the French
Iusquiame, and in the English some call it Henban, and you shall se in the
night goodly things in your dream.

To make a woman bear Children.
TAke Ceruse and Frankensens, and way as much of the one as of the other, and
after you have companied with her, put the same into her matrice. Also if you
give her drink of Mares milk, or to eat the lower part of the belly of a
Hare, or the Genitories or stones of a he Goat, after her menstruall
purgation is come unto her, it shall profit her much unto conception.

To heal and cure Horses of the Skabbe.
FIrst you must let him blood, then take Brimstone, Quicksiluer, Honey, liquide
Pitch, Salt, the juice of Hemlocke, Vinaigre, Alome, Helesbore, soft Soap,
Oil, Sutt of a Chimney, Hogs dong, and Lime, and mingle al together, and
anoint the place with it where the Skabbe is, and within few days he shall be
healed and clean.

To heal the Kings evil, a disease called in latin Siruma.
TAke a great Tode a live, and when the Moon^ draws toward the comunction of
the sun, cut of all the legs from him, and put him about the neck of the
patie^t, and it will do him much good. Take also the hoof of an Ass and burn
it, and say it upon the sore, for it is very good and profitable for such a
sickness.

To make one that is poisoned to vomit the poison.
TAke two grains of Pazar, which is a stone tha^ comes out of Portugal, and
is grene ^ tawnie somewhat obscure glistering and light and ^^ breaking it, it
is within of the color of ashes, and give it him to drink with a little
milk, and incontinent he shall vomit by the poison, if there be any.

To make a Candell that cannot be pu^ ou^.
TAke Virgin wax, and Brimstone well purged, as much of the one as of the
other, and melt it together and make thereof a Ca^del, the which will never be
put out until it be burned and consumed to the end.

To make a Candell of Ire to burn.
TAke a Candel of Ware made as is before said, and take some Brimstone and
coals, and stamp them very small, and fifte them through a linen cloth, then
heat the candell, and rub it over well with the same powder until it wax
unto and crust round about it as thick as the back of a knife and cover it
with a paper, then ^^ it at the end of a guttour of your house, and let it
remain there till the ye be round about it a finger thick which will be
within two or three days, than take it of and it will burn as though it were
of wax only, this is a thing tried and experimented.

To make that fruit shall take what form or facion you will.
TAke a piece of wood and cut it after the form and facion that you will
your fruit shall have, but let it be as big as the fruit is when it is ripe,
then take some plaster tempered with water, and put it about the wood a finger
thick, and let it dry, and it will incontinent wax dry, than take it of,
and when the fruit is not yet comen to his full greatness, bind it fast about
this same form, and leave it so remaining until it be ripe, and it will be
after that form and facion. If you will also write upon it, dress the letters
after this manner and form made of plaster, and they shall be legible.

To make that roots shall have what form you will.
TAke green roots, but let the^ be great and thick like radishe roots, or
the root of Bryonix, and such like, and trim them with a knife as you shall
think the best facion. Then set them in the ground again, until they have
gathered upon them a skin (...) in this manner may a man make counterfeit
Mandragora, in trimming them with a knife into the shape of a man, and than
putting them again into the ground with the head dounward, and with a little
barley or mill under them which will cleave and stick fast to the head of the
root and seem like hear: but you must note that to make these Mandragora,
you must take the roots of Bryonia.

For to write letters upon a man's body or face that shall never be rubbed out.
YOu must go into the stooues or hot houses which be very hot, and when you
are in a sweat write upon your body with what ink you will, then cut the
skin with a sharp rasour, and fill the cuttes with earth of what color you
will, and leave them so and incontinent by reason of the great heat the skin
will close and shut up together and the letters or figures that you have made
upon your flesh will remain for ever.

For the same, but somewhat easier.
TAke Aqua fortis of Gold, and the beasts that ^e called Cantharides, and
put them to^ither xxiiij. hours, then with a pen very small write what you
will upon the skin, and leave it so, and by and by there will rise certain
little white bladders or pushes where you touched with the water, and that will
remain and abide for ever.

To make one have a good memory.
TAke a Tooth or the left leg of a Badger or Brock as some call it, and as
other some name it a Gray, and bind it about your right arm next unto the
flesh. Take also the gall of a Partri^^^, and rub your temples with it that
it may soke into the skin and flesh, ones in a month, and it will make you
have a good memory.

To make that no Dog shall bark at you.
TAke a black Dog and pluck out one at his eyes and hold it in your left
hand, and by reason of the savor and smell thereof the Dogs will not bark
at you.

To make all things s^eme Black and Green in the night.
TAke the black inck of a Fish called a skuttle, called Atramentum Sepiae,
and take also Verdegrice, and mingle both together, and put them in a lamp
with the wieke, and set it a fire in a chamber, where there is no other light
but that, and all that is in the said chamber walls and all shall seem partly
Green, and partly Black, which is a marvelous thing to see.

To die Hear into a Green color.
TAke fresh Capers, and distill them, and wash your hear with the water of
the^ in the sun, and they will become green.

To dress or to keep flesh in Somer.
TAke the flesh and sees it, but let it not be to much sodde^, than take it
of from the fire, and streine out the water, and set it in the shadow the space
of an hour for to dry, in a place where the wind comes, then take an
earthen pot with white Vinaigre that is strong, and take some Geniper seed
well stamped, and Salt, and cast it upon the flesh: and than put it into the
Vinaigre, and set the pot in some cold place, as a cane or ^ollex, and
remove every day the flesh within the pot, and let it stand and remain so as
long as if pleases you, and when you will eat of it, sees it a little, as
if you will (...) may eat it so, for it is a thing very sweet and delicate.

To make an instrument called Cauterium wherewith sores are burned, which shall
raise the skin without any grief or pain.
TAke soft soap, and vnslekt Lime that has not ben wet as much of the one as
of the other, and mingle them together: and when you will use of it, if the
skin be not broken, lay a little piece of lether upon it with some ointment
and leave a hole in the mids of the greatness that you will the wound shall
be, and put in the same hole as much of the instrument as a whete corn and let
it remain so, and within three or four hours it will make a hole without any
pain. But if the skin be rotten, as of a felon or cattes hear, it shall
suffice to wash the place before you lay to the Cauterium, with strong
Vinaigre, and within an hour it will raise the skin without any grief or
pain.

To make Steel cut Iron as it were Lead.
TAke the Steel and purge it well, than take of these worms that breed in
the ground, and make of them some distilled water in a Lembeck, than take the
juice of Radishe roots, as much of the one as of the other and quench the
steel in it being red hot, four or five times, than make knives, Swords, or
daggers of it, and they shall cut Iron, as it were lead.

To make red Yn^ke.
TAke strongly boiling hot, and put it in the ri^e or bark of Brasill, and
let it cool, than take eight ounces of the said lie, and an ounce of Brasill
skraped with a piece of glass, and put it to also a little Alome. Than put it
in a dishe upon the hot ashes, and let it boil well the space of an hour,
and occupy it at your pleasure and the incke shall be very good: but note that
it is not good, but when it is fresh and recent, that is to say, made of a
day or two, at the most.

For the same, and easier.
TAke an ounce of the same wood skraped with a piece of glass, and take ten
ounces of water, and power the skraped Brasill into it, and let it remain so
the space of seven hours, than sees it, and let it diminish of the four
parts three, and it will be read having a good luster. And if you let it
deminish of more then three parts, it will be red and sanguine.

To make Bones soft.
TAke bones that be holowe in the mids, as of the legs of beasts, and take
the juice of Alexanders, of milfoile, of radishe roots, of horehounde, and
Vinaigre, as much of the one as of the other, and fill the bones with these
juices, and stop them well yt nothing go out; than buried it in Horse donge
as long as you will, and the longer they be in it the softer will they wax.

To keep Grapes fresh all the winter.
YOu must gather the Grapes when it is faier and clear wether, and that it
has not rained a good while before, than must you make them clean, that is
to say, take out the rotten grains that be in them: than take pitch, and set
it upon the fire until it boil, than take the grape, and put the end that it
hangs by into it, and let it remain so a while, and then let it dry in the
sun the space of two days. Finally lay them upon wheat stray that one
touch not another, and they will keep so good and fresh all the year.

To make Melons or Coucombers ripe before their season.
FOr to have Melons, Coucombers, or other like fruit ripe before their season,
you must plant or set them in pottes or other vessels, and every third or
fourth day water the^ at the root with hot water, and when the wether is
cloudy or cold set them before the fire, and when the sun shines and is
fair wether, set them in the Sun: Thus doing you shall have Melons, and many
other like fruitos ripe before their season.

To take away the holes or marks of the small Pockes.
TAke very strong Vinaigre, and make thereof some distilled water, and wash
your face with it one day, and the next day folowinge, take Bren, Mallows,
and water and boil all together until it be diminished of the half, and
wash your face with it that same day, and the next day wash it again with
the water of the distilled Vinaigre, and the next day with the other water
made with the Bren and Mallows, and continue so until the marks or holes
begone, which will be very shortly. Also if you take Egg shelles, and distill
them, and wash your face with the water at night when you go to bed, and in
the morning with the other of Bren and Malowes as is above rehearsed.

To make the hands white.
TAke an Ox gall, and take half a sponefull of it in the ing^ning with well
water, and wash your hands with this little of the gall, and they will become
moist, soft, and very white. Take also Soap, and purge it well, than take of
the root of Iris, and dry it in an oven and make powder of it, the which you
shall mix with the Soap well purged and so wash your hands withal, and they
will be soft and white. Take also Soap well purged, and take the Ashes of a
(...), and mix them well together, until they be well incorporated the one
with the other: and wash your hands with it in the morning, and they will be
moist, soft and white as snow, which thing is experimented.

To make an odoriferous and sweet smelling grese that keeps the lips and
hands from thinks and chappes, and keeps them moist, and soft.
TAke a pound, that is to say, twelve ounces of Calves grease, or the Dear
suet that is young, and the suet fresh. Than take six ounces of Maioram, and
stamp them all well together, and make thereof little halles, and sprinkle
them with a little good White or Claret wine, that has a good odor. Than put
them in some vessel, and cover them well, that the good odor of the Maioram
go not out, and so set them in the shadow the space of four and twenty hours
somewhat more or less, than put them in water and sees the^ leisurely: and
than draine it again. Take also nine ounces of Maioram, and stamp it with the
same grease, and make little balls of it, which you shall sprinkle over with
Wine, and put it in another vessel clean, the which you shall also set it in
the shadow the space of xxiiij. hours, and than put water to it again, and
sees it, and strain it. And do so four or five times, adding to it always
nine ounces of Maioram, and sprinklinge it with good Wine, you may also put to
it a little musk, or ciuette, thus doing you shall have a very excellent
thing, to keep the lips and hands from chappes or chinckes and from all
great cold.

For to make a sweet Suet called in French and Italian Pommade in latin
Pomatum.
TAke a pound of Deeres suet, or if you can not get of that, the grease of a
kidde, three ounces of barrous greas^, and ^^. ounces of the marowe of a bucke,
and purge it clean of all filthe, and take out the little skins, veins, and
gri^e^^ that are (...) then wash it with good white Wine so often until the
wine remain clear, and the grease white, than strain out all the Wine, and
let it run abroad upon a table. This don take eight Appian apples or as many
Pepins, and pare them well both with out and within, and stamp them. Than
take half an ounce of Cloves, two drammes of Nutmegges, six grains of spike
of india, and four pound of Rose water, and mingle all together with the
grease, and set it to sees in a covered pot, with a slow fire and let it
sees until the Rose water be almost consumed. Then strain it and put it into
another vessel washed three or four times with Rose water, then add to it
four ounces of white wax well purified and purged, and six ounces of sweet
Almondes. Then set it on the fire again ^^ely until it be molten, and then
take it from the fire and strain it, and put it into another vessel washed
^ith Rose water. Finally after it is congeled and ^axen hard, take as much
musk as you will with (...) Rose water, and other odoriferous waters, and
mingle them together with a pes^ell of wood, and and keep it in a vessel of
Glass, and set it in the shadow toward the North, and if you put to it a
little ^^orax liquida, it will be as good for the skurfe or skabbe, as to keep
the hands fair.

To make that flies shall not tourment or trouble Horses in Somer.
TAke the leaves of Gourdes, and stamp them, and so rub the Horses with it
every morning and at nighe when it is hot, or else take leese of wine, and
rub them with it, and the flies shall not tourment ^^r ^oxe them no more than
in the mids of winter.

To keep Figs green all the year.
YOu must gather them when they are ripe in the fair wether and at none
days, to the intent that they may be dry from all dew, and put them in a
fair vessel of stone or earth the matter or substance whereof must be very
fine, and that the figs touch not one another, then cover them diligently,
that they have no manner of air, and put them so in wine, and they will be
green as long as the wine is good, which thing has been proved.

For to make that Pommegranates shall not open.
TAke three great flint stones which are in the botom of rivers, uncover the
earth from the root of the tree and lay the stones upon the root, and cover
it with the earth again as it was before. Also if you plant nighe unto the
tree Squilla, the Pomgranates will not open.

For to keep wine sweet all the year.
TAke a vessel well pitched within and without, and put the wine into it before
it boil in the fat, and stop the said vessel well, that it take no air,
and then lay it in a river as deep as you can that the vessel may be covered
with water, and let it remain so a month without removing it, then take it
out, and set it where you will. Thus doing the Wine shall be sweet and good
all the year, and thick like must.

For wine that will not keep long.
TAke two or three eggs, and if it be claret wine take only the yelke of it,
and if it be white wine, take only the white of an Egg, and take three ounces
of flint stone of a river that runs swift, and make it into powder, and two
ounces of Salt made into very small powder, and mingle all together. Then put
the Wine into another clean vessel that has no o^our or savor: this done
cast into it all this composition, and mengle it with the wine five or six
times a day, during the space of three or four days. But note that you must
make this provision before it be utterly corrupt and putrified: for if it were
wholly corrupt and spilled, this would avail nothing but were ^ime and labor
lost.

To cause that wine shall not be to strong.
TAke a piece of Salt lard, and tie it with a great thread at the Bung hole
within, and let the lard touch only the upper part of the vessel. Thus
doing the Wine will never be strong because of the ^ard and salt which lets
and hinders the separation and attenuation which gives force and strength to
the wine.

To make Vinaigre.
TAke the fruit of the tree called in latin Cornus, in french Corneillier,
there be none of them in England and therefore it lacks an English name, the
said fruit is like unto Olives but they be read, and somewhat longer, take of
them when they be read, take also Blackberies before they be ripe, and dry
them, and make them into powder, and with ^ little strong Vinaigre, make of
them little balls, the which you shall dry in the sun. Then take the wine and
heat it, and when it is hot but into it this composition, and it will turn
incontinent into strong Vinaigre, which thing is experimented.

To make Vinaigre with water.
TAke xxx. or xl. pound of wild pears, and let them lie three days on a
heap in some vessel, and then sprinkle or water the^ every day with a little
water the space of xxx. days, and it shall be as good Vinaigre and as strong as
if it were of Wine* ^lso if you take grapes, and wring out the wine with your
hands, and put the cell into some vessel and put water upon it, it will be
^igre and sharp.

To make Vinaigre with perished wine or wine that is marred.
TAke corrupt and rotten wine, andbo^le or sees it, and take of all the froth
or skimme that it makes in boiling, and let it remain on the fire til it be
diminishe of the third part. Then put it in a vessel, wherein strong Vinaigre
has been, and put to it some serfoile, and cover the vessel well that it take
no aier at all, and in short time it will be good and strong Vinaiger.

To take away the savor of the mouldines or putrefaction of the wine.
TAke Medlers well made ripe in straw, and open them in four parts and bind
them with a threde, and hang them within the bunge of the vessel that they
may be all covered with the wine, and let them remain so a month, than take
them out, and you shall take away also the evil odor of the wine.

To make wine have a good odor.
TAke an orange, or a citron that is not to great, and take Cloves oriental
and set them in the orange or citron until it be almost full, and so put it
into the vessel of wine, but let it not touch the wine: then stop up your
vessel sure that the odor go not out.

To make that Leekes shall be great.
TAke many seeds together and set them in Goats donge and let them grow and
ripe, and you shall see a marvelous thing.

To make tadstooles or musheroms grow.
CUt a Popler tree hard to the ground, and then take hot water with leuain in
it, and cast it upon the root and within three or four days the tadstooles
will grow about the foot of the Popler tree where you did cast the water, and
they shall be good to eat.

To make that all manner of Codware shall sees quickly.
TAke the seeds that you will sow, as Peason, Phasiols, Lintelles, and such
like, and before you sow them, sprinkle them with salt peter and than sow
them when you will, and those that ^rowe of that seed, will sees sooner, and
easelier then ^^ her will do.

To have green Flowers all the year.
TAke young plants of flowers in Somer and set them in some place very hot,
as in stoues or hot houses, and leave them so, for by the means of the great
heat, they will grow to their parfite bigness, and in the mids of winter
bear their flowers, which thing is tried and proved.

To make Corn, and podware to grow greater than they are wont to do.
TO make Corn and podware, as Wheat, Rye, Mill, Ciche peason, and all other
like to grow greater than ordinarily they do, you must sow them in a field
where Squilla is planted, because that this Squilla is hot, and consequently
gives heat unto the seeds, and so makes them grow greater then they
commonly do.

To make that fruits shall not rotte upon the tree.
TAke a Nail, and heat it glowing hot in the fire, and dri^e it into the
foot of the tree, or if you will not do so, make a hole in the same place with
a Percer, and leave it so, for at that hole all the superfluous suck or juice
will come out, which is the (...) that the fruits rotte upon the tree.

To make letters than can not be read onles the Paper be put in water.
TAke Rochealome, and make it into powder tha^ put it into a little water, and
write what you will with it upon white Paper, and let the let^er^ dry of
themselves, and when you will read them* put the Paper into clear water, and
the letters upward, and you shall read them as if they were written with incke,
because the water makes the Paper somewhat black, or rather gray, and the
Alome shines, by reason of the whiteness of it, which is a marvelous thing
and proved.

To make letters that can not be read but at the fire.
TAke salt Armoniack, and make thereof powder very small, and put it in water,
than write what you will with it upon Paper, and let it dry. And when you
will read it, hold it before the fire, and you shall read very well. Also if
you take the suck or juice of a Limon or Dinyon, and write withal, a man can
not read it but at the fire.

To make that Aqua vite shall receive all the virtues and strength of Medecines.
TAke four ounces of Aqua vite, and put it in a vessel of Glass with a
straight and narrow mouth, but yet great and thick of Glass, then take
Medicame^tes elect well dried and cut very small, and put the^ in the same
glass unto the Aqua vite and stop well and surely the mouth of the Glass
with the stopple, and than with white wax upon it: finally take what vessel
or pot you will and fill it with hot ashes so that there be n^ fire in it, and
bury this vessel of Aqua vite in the same Ashes.

To make that a woman shall eat of nothing that is set upon the table.
TAke a little green Basil, and when men bring the dishes to the table put it
underneath them, that the woman perceive it not: for men say that she will
eat of none of that which is in the dishe where under the Basil lies.

To make Oil of Roses, or other Odoriferous Herbs.
TAke a violle of Glass very thin, and of three parts, fill two with oil
olive very good and clean, and fill the rest with Roses, or the herb wherewith
you will make the oil. Than set the violl or glass in the sun, and cover
it well first, and let it so rest three or four days, than take it out of the
sun, and take out all the roses, and all the oil, and wring them well, that
all the oil may come out of them, then cast them away and put the oil
again into the violl, and fill it a new with fresh roses, and set it in the
sun other four days. Than take them away, and wring out the oil, and put
in other fresh roses, doing thus four or five times you shall have an oil as
odoriferous as the roses them selves.

To make that the Mothes and Vermin shall not eat nor destroy clothes and
apparel.
TAke Wormwoode, or Southernwoode, the leaves of a Cedar tree, and valerian,
and lay them in your coffers or presses where your clothes be, or in the
pleytes of your garments, and you shall see that they will not hurt them,
because these leaves and herbs are bitter of taste, and the savor or smell is
very strong, which the vermin do abhor, and can not abide.

For to make that wild beasts shall not hurt you.
FOr to be assured and safe from wild Beasts, as Wolves, Bears, and such
other like, take the grease of a Lion, and annointe your self therewith over
and over, and go hardely where you will and no beast shall hurt you, but as soon as they smell the savor of the grease, they will run away. And if by
chance you meet with a wolf, or other wild beast, run not away but with
a good courage go even to him that he may smell the grese that you are anointed
with all; and he will fly.

For to be assured and safe from Serpents.
TAke the suck or juice of a radish root, and anoint your hands with it, then
take the Serpents in your hands, and they will not bite nor sting you,
because of the subtilite and finesse of this juice, but will die almost in
smelling only the savor.

To take away the pain and grief of the Gout.
TAke a great foul called a Vultour, in latin Vultur, and take the skin of
her right beele and lay upon the right foot of the patie^t, then take the
skin of the left heel, and lay it upon his left foot, and incontinent
you shall see that in half an hour the pain will go away. Which is a
marvelous thing.

For to see wild Beasts in a Dream.
TAke the heart of an Ape, and lay it under your head, wha^ you go to bed so
that it touch your head, and you shall see marvelous things, and all kinds
of beasts, as Lio^s, Bears, Wolfes, Apes, Tigres, and other such like.

For to make Silk white.
TAke Brimstone and burn it, and hold the Silk over the smoke of it, and it
will incontinent wax white. Also if you will have a Rose of diverse colors,
hold him over the smoke of Brimstone burning, and it will be red, white, and
Cremsine, and will be fair, but it shall lose his sweet savor.

To make an herb grow that shall have many and diverse odours and savors.
TAke one grain of lettise seed, one of succorie, one of alexanders, one of
basille, one of a leeke, and another of persely, and plant them all together in
one hole, so that one touch not another and you must plant them in horse
donge; or Ox donge, or of any other beast, so that there be no earth at all,
and there will grow an herb that shall have the smell, of Lettuse,
Alexa^ders, of Succorie, of Basil, of leekes, and of Perslie, and this is a
thing proved.

To make an Apple or ball that provoke sleep.
TAke wild Poppy, the juice of Mandragora, and leese of wine as much of the one
as of the other, and a little ciuet, and of all this make a round ball, and
hold it in your hand, and smell to it, and it will make you sleep wonderfully.

To make a barraine woman bear children.
TAke of these little seafishes with many feet called in Latin Polipi or
Polypodes, and roste them upon the embers without oil, and let the woman eat
of them, and it shall profit and help her very much, having in the mean
time the company of a man.

To make hears grow upon a bald head.
TAke oil of Tartre, and warm it, and rub your head with it, or other places
where you will hear shall grow, and within viij. or ten days the hears will
come forth as thick as before, and not only make those hears to grow which
be fallen: but also makes other to increase more then there was before, and
which is more, if you rub the paulme of your hand with it, hears will
grow there as well as in any other place.

To make a water that dies or coloreth copper into the color of Gold.
TAke the gall of a male got, and another of a female got, and a little
Arsenick as much until you se there is enough, and distille al together, and
wete and temper your copper in this water, but let the copper be first well
skoored, and incontinent it will turn into the color of Gold.

To make oil of Brimstone.
TAke ten eggs and sees them till they be hard, then take of the shells and
cast the white and them away, so that there remain nothing but the yelke,
which you shall stamp, and take as much brimstone by weight, and make thereof
powder, and mengle all well together: and so distill it with a slow fire, and
it will be very good.

For to make salt Ammoniac.
TAke a pound of man's blood, and two pound of the blood of an Ox or other
beast, and six pound of well water, and mingle all together: than streine it
with a linen cloth very hard and straigte and set it on the fire where you
shall leave it until the water be consumed, and that which shall remain will
be good salt Ammoniac.

For to make Borase.
TAke two ounces of Alome, and temper it with two ounces of salt Alcall which
men use to make glass withal, then put it into some vessel of tin, and
sees it with a sougth fire the space of half an hour, and than take out the
water, and take two ounces of salt Gemma beaten in powder, and as much of salt
Alcall, and two pound of virgin Honny, and a pound of Cow milk, amd mingle
all together with water, and set it three days in the sun, and it will be
made.

For to make Coral.
TAke the Horns of a white male Goat, and make the^ very clean, then take a
good sharp knife, and skrape them finely that the skrapinges may be like
powder, then take pieces of Ash, and burn them, and of there ashes you shall
make lie which you shall strain three times in a linen clothe, and put the
skrapinges of the horn into it and mix it well together, and let it so
remain in infusion fiuetene days. Then take some Vermillion made in powder,
and a little water and mengle it together with the said powder, then you shall
make the Coral with your hands, or as you will and let it dry: then pollish
it with the wheel or turn, and it will be like natural Coral.

To die Iron in the color of Gold.
Melancie, is an Island called melos one of the ^iclades.
TAke Alome of Melancie, and beat it into powder, then take a little sea water,
and mingle it together: then heat your iron hot and steep it in the same
water, and set it a day in the sun, and it will have the color of Gold.

For to make Iron strong and fair as silver.
TAke salt ammoniac, and make it into powder, and mingle it with vnsleckt lime,
than put it in cold water, and mix all well together, this don heat your
iron redhote, and deep it in the said water, and it will become as white as
Silver.

For to make a water that will take out incontinent letters from the Paper.
TAke a pound of blewe vitrioll, three pound of salt peter, and four ounces of
vermillion and five pound of Alome, and stamp them all together, and make
thereof a poudre, and stille it in some vessel of glass with a small fire,
and there will come out two manner of waters the first white, and the second
green. If you take a little of the first and lay it upon the lefe of Paper
written, rubbing it with a green clothe some what course or roughe, it will
take away the letters from the paper, and leave it as white, as if there had
never ben incke upon it. Also if you take of the said water and heat it, and
hold a sheet of paper written over the smoke of it, it will become incontinent
like as it had been written ten year before.

To take a spotte of Oil out of Clothe.
TAke oil of Tartre, and lay it upon the spot, and take it of by and by
again, then wash it well with luke warm water, and three or four times with
cold water, and the cloth will be as nete and as clean as when it was new,
and before the oil fell upon it.

To stanche the Bleeding at the nose.
TAke great Ciche peason, and lay them upon a Tile in the fire until they be
dry, and then make powder of the^ very fine, and put of it in his nose, and
the bleeding will cease.

To break botches, impostumes, cartarres, or sores, coming in the throat.
TAke the dry dong of an Ass, and of swallows, and make thereof powder, and
put of it in water, or in wine hot, and gargel or wash your throat oftentimes
with it and you shall be delivered.

To take an Iron or arrowe head out of a wound.
TAke the leaves of Palma Christi, and stamp the^, and at night lay of the
juice or suck of it upon the wound, and in the morning you shall find the
wound so wide and large, and the iron or arrow head so discovered that you may
take it out with your fingers.

To make that young Children shall have no pain or grief in their teeth.
TAke an old Cock and cut of his comb, and take of the blood that comes of
it and rub their gommes with it, and they shall never feel pain.

For to make a clear voice.
TAke the flowers of an Elder tree, and dry them in the sun, but take heed
they take no moisture or wette, then make powder of them, and drink of it
with white wine every morning fasting.

For to fasten lose teeth.
TAke Frankensens, Mastick, and the pills of Pomegranates, as much of one as of
the other, and make thereof a powder: and when you go to bed, wash your teeth
with a little good wine, then take of the said powder, and lay it upon your
Teeth, and they will wax fast and sure in short space.

For the Emorawdes.
TAke a Tortese, and put him in a pot well stopped upon the fire, and let him
alone until he be all burnt, then take the pot from the fire and take out the
Tortese, and make him into powder: then first wash the Emorawdes with white
wine very hot, then lay upon them some of the said powder and in two or
three times he shall be healed.

For one that has his Sight troubled.
TAke the lunges or lights of a Barrow hog with all the appurtenances, and
sees it in water, and when it is soden let him hold his eyes over the smoke
of it, and in three or four times doing he shall be cured of that trouble.

For one that is abroke or brusten.
TAke of the root of Symphiton petreon, in English Bugle or Camfrey, and put
of it into the bread that he eats every day, and let him eat every day of
the said root either raw or roste, and it shall be a very healthful thing for
his disease.

For one that has his Coddes swollen.
TAke Rue, and stamp it, and lay it upon his Coddes, and immediately they will
aswage their swelling, which thing is sufficiently proved.

To make a woman that is wont to have daughters to bear Sons also.
KNow you that it is a had thing for a barraine woman to bear Children, and
a great gift and grace of God to obtain it, because the causes of sterilite
and barainesse be diverse, and without number: but to make a woman that bears
always Daughters to bear also Sons, it is a thing very easy, and has good
succes, and has been diverse times proved. Wherefore if you will that your wise
shall have male children, eat an herb called in English Mercury, in Italy
Mercorella, in French Mercuriale or Ferolle, which has only two seeds like
unto the genitories of a man, and make her also eat of it before you company
with her, and eat both of you the right stones of some beasts and of the
skraping of an Elephantes toth.

To make that the hands shall not chinke nor cleave.
TAke a Radishe root, and make him hollow within unto the bottom then take
three ounces of oil of Roses, and an ounce of Turpentine or more, according to
the greatness of the Radishe, and then cover the said radishe and leave it in
the hot ashes or embers, until it be half consumed, than take it out, and
anoint your hands with it.

For to make a man's Berde black.
TAke Aqua fortis, and a penny weight of fine Silver, and melte it in the said
water by the fire, and wha^ you will occupy of it anoint the beard at the
roots of the hear with oil of Roses, and with a spong wete your beard, so
that you touch not the flesh, and let it dry, than wash it with lie,
wherein there has be mirabolans and Pommegranades sodden.

To make a woman bear Children although it be not always assured, yet it is
the best remedy that can be found.
First cause the woman to be purged well and give her some water of the baines
of Aquario, or other mine of Brimstone, then let her eat of the flesh of a
hare, and the man also as much as is possible, that is to say, leaving all
other kind of flesh, the^ take ye kind of that Mercury, that has curled or
wrinkled leaves, mugwort or mother wort, valerian, and make thereof long, or
round morsels without past, with grease, spices, cheese, and eggs, and let her
eat nothing else in the morning with bread three times a week continually,
and let her drink good wine, and parfume her self three days together with
Frankensens, Bay leaves, Nutmegges, Bengwine, and a little Musk, and let the
husband also take three morninges some of this poudre following. Take the small
skraping of Cipres, a dram and a half of town Cresses, called in latin
Nasturtium, long Pepper, Nutmegges, fine wood of Aloe, of each of them half a
penny weight, and the kidney and stones of a hedgehogge, dried and not burned,
and make thereof a powder the which you shall take at three times with Malmesey,
and remain viij. This stone is called in greek Acti^es, and has many goodly
virtues, as you may read in Hermolaus barbarus in corollario.
days without the company of her, and after having companied with her, let
her sleep, and carry upon her left arm an Egle stone, not of the common sort
but of those that be as hard as steel, and let her also keep every day
upon the reins of her back a new laid egg beaten with five or six drops
of strong black Vinaigre, and remove it every day.

To make a woman laboring, to bring forth her Child that can not be delivered.
TAke of the said Egle stone, called in latin Lapis Aquilinus, and bind it
upon the left thigh of the woman, then give her to drink three ounces of white
Lilies, and she shall be delivered incontinent in adding to it a little Safran
and sugar, and make her to vomit and neese. And if she be not delivered for
all this, or if the child be dead in her body long before, you must make this
composition followyng, which is a thing experime^ted. Take three handefuls of
green Maioram, and as much of green ysope, and stamp them together, and
press them until you get out three ounces of juice, the which you shall
strain, and give it her warm to drink fasting, and let her eat nothing in
five hours after, and she shall be delivered of her Child without doubt, and
if she be not she shall die, because she is to weak, or else you must cut the
Child out, because it may lie overthwart, and except these two cases, she shall
not fail but be delivered.

For to make teeth that do ache to fall out.
TAke the root of Crow foot, called in latin Ranunculus, gathered in May,
and dry it a little in an oven, and keep it all the year. Then take a little
of it being beaten or stamped, also take a little pitche made with clammy
Turpentine, and put the said root in the hole of the said toth that aketh,
and if it have no hole, put it upon the top of the said tooth, and lay the
said pitch upon it, so that it be fast to it, and let it remain so three
hours, and in two or three times doing it at the most, the tooth will fall in
pieces within eight days.

A remedy for the falling sickness.
TAke wheat slower, and kneath it with dew gatherid in the morning on
midiomer day, and make thereof a cake, the which you shall bake, and give the
patient to eat of it, and he shall be healed.

Against the Plage.
TAke three ounces of the licour of the innar rin^ of an Ash tree and s^ill it
with three ounces of white wine, and give the pacient drink of it every iij.
hours, and within xxiiij. hours he shall be cured.

For the same.
TAke three ounces of Walnuttes that be not yet full ripe, prepared and
distilled, at midsomer, and let him that has the plage drink of it, and he
shall be hole: but it shall be better to take the outward pills of the
Walnuttes in September when they be black, so that they be not rotten, and
distille them, and give the pacient a glass full of it to drink, and let it
be luke warm before he be let blood, and this shall help him much.

For the putrefaction of the teeth.
TAke the roots of an herb called in latin Pes Alexandrinus, and cut them
very small, and distill them with the best wine you can get, and hold a spone
full of the water in your mouth, and you shall find ease and remedy in short
space: for this heals sore and currupt teeth, and makes them clean: And
besides that, it helps much in purging and clensing away of al manner of
filth of the mouth.

For the stinking of the breath, and to make the teeth white.
TAke a pound of skimmed Honey, half a pound of Aqua vite, three ounces of
Lignum aloe, two ounces of gomme Arabic, Nuttemegges, Galingale, Cububes,
Cinamome, Mastick, Cloves, Spic, and Lauander new, anna three drammes, two
drammes of Amber beaten, mix all this together, and still water of it in a
limbeck, and this water will take away the stinking of the breath, whiten the
teeth and maintain health long.

A water to make clean teeth.
TAke salt Ammoniac, and salt Gemma, three ounces of each one, an ounce and a
half of Alumen Such^^^num, and distill it, or temper it in two pound of water,
the space of eight days, and with this licour distilled, or so tempered, you
shall rub your teeth and they will be white.

Another water to whiten teeth.
TAke a pound of salt well purged, and beaten, an ounce of Alumen Glaciale, and
distill it in a limbeck, and mingle an ounce of the water, with an ounce of
Plantaine water, and rub your teeth with the composition, and with cotton,
and they will be white and clean.

To take away the smell of Garlike, Leekes, or Onyons.
AFter that you have eaten Garlike, Leekes, or Onions, take the rote of Beete,
and roast it under embers, and eat it, and you shall see the effect: or else
eat a piece of the root of Zeduaria, and you shall not smell at all, and this
is easier to be don than with the root of Beete.

A principal remedy for the flixe or laxe.
TAke Panike beaten and stamped, and give the patie^t drink of it with claret
wine, and he shall be cured. The said Panike being also sodden with Goats
milk, and eaten twice a day, at morning and night before meals, it works
the like operation.

For to make that hears shall not grow.
TAke the skins or husks of green Beans, and make a plaster of them, and
lay upon the places where you will that hear shall not grow, and if there be
any they will fall of and grow no more.

A very profitable remedy for the hardenesse of wemens breast after they be
brought a bed.
YOu must take wheat Bran, and sees it with the juice of Rue, and lay it
upon her breasts that be hardened after her liyng down, and they will wax
soft and supple. The like remedy is also very good against the biting of
Venomous beasts.

For Apostumes, Botches, Cankers, or other swellings.
TAke Barley and Bran, and sees them until they be like unto a plaster very
thick, and lay it upon the sore and it shall help much.

To make wemens milk increase.
TAke Fenell seed, and sees it in barley water, and give the woman drink of
it, and her milk shall increase abondantly. Also the broth or water that Ciche
peason be sodden in, is very good for the like thing.

To know whether there be any water in the wine or no.
TAke raw Pears, and pare them and make them clean, and cut them in the
mids, or else take Mulberies, and cast them into the wine: and if they swim
upon the wine, it is pure and clean without water, but if they sink to the
bottom, theris water mixte with wine.

To make Vinaigre.
MEn make Vinaigre putting the wine in some vessel, wherein Vinaigre has been
before, and setting it in the sun, or by the fire, or putting into it new
and clean tiles or brickes heat or made hot in the fire.

To make dry Vinaigre, which may be carried where a man will.
TAke wild Cherries, when they begin to wax ripe, but the fruit of the tree
called Cornus in latin, is better, and Mulberies or Blackberies when they be
read, or the great green Grape, and the wild Acorne before it be ripe, and
stamp all this ^ogither, then take the best Vinaigre you can get, and
incorporate all the said things together, and make of the past little loves,
which you shall dry in the sun, and when you will make Vinaigre, stiepe of
the said past in wine, and it will be good Vinaigre.

Another composition for the same.
TAke green Grapes and stamp them, putting to the^ some vinaigre, and a make
paste or dowe thereof, whereof you shall make little loves and dry them in the
sun: And when you will make Vinaiger, stiepe these loves in as much wine, as
you shall see will suffice, and you shall have strong vinaigre.

To make Rose Vinaigre very sweet and odoriferous.
TAke good white Vinaigre, and put into it fresh and new red Roses, or else
dry, keeping al together in a vessel well leaded within the space of forty
days, than take out the roses, and but them into another vessel, and keep
them in a cold place.

To make Vinaigre of Grain.
TAke an ounce of poudre of Grain, wherewith men die fine clothe and put it
into a sufficient quantite of Vinaigre, and keep it in the sun certain
days in a vessel leaded, and well covered, than keep also together, without
separating the Vinaigre from the Grain, and it will be the excellentest
vinaigre of al, because the grain is very sweet of savor and odoriferous,
hearty, and hot, and for this cause it tempereth and moderateth the great
cold of the Vinaigre.

A preservative in time of Pestilence or plage, and against all Ven^m or
poison, and biting of a mad Dog.
IF you eat before your meals, a Walnutte or two, two dry Figs, and some
leaves of Gardine Rue, with a corn of salt, it will be a good preservative in
the ^ime of a plage, and against all poison that a man eats it. And the same
being stamped and laid to the biting of a mad dog it heals it, so do
Nutmegges also work the like effect.

Against stinking vermin called Pinneses.
They that have travailed in France ^^owe what pinneses be.
YOu must anoint well the place where you doubt this vermin will breed, with
oil olive mixte with the juice of wormewoode, and there will breed none.

To purge Coler and Fleame.
TAke some little nosegaies of Colewortes, and put them in seething water, and
leave them in it after it has begone to boil, while a man will go five or six
p^se, then take them out of the water, and stamp them, and take the juice of
thy, and strain it through a linen clothe, and keep it in an earthen vessel
the space of a night in the air abroad, then put to it some corns of Salt,
and a littel Commine cut small or minsed. Now, he that will purge him self,
and take this medecin, must go to bed supperlesse, and wash well his
legs, hands, and arms with hot water, and drink the said juice so made,
in the morning, and walk upon it three or four hours, and when he has lust
to vomit, let him vomit and he shall cast up so much Coler and Phlegm
that it shall be a marvelous thing to se. And besides this, this juice will purge
also his head.

A remedy to keep flies from flesh.
IF you lay an Onion upon the flesh, there will never fly come near the
flesh as far as the savor of the onion extends.

To keep Flesh all the somer without corrupting.
Cover the Flesh in Meal, Flower, or Bran, and it shall not mar in a long
time. The like shall be done if you cast upon the flesh Coriander seed beaten
and mingled with Vinaigre.

To know if a Melon be good.
MEn say commonly that a Melon is good when the tail is bitter, and the head
of him hard, and is very heuie.

To kill and destroy Flees.
TAke Penniriall when it is in blossom, and burn it where the flees be, and
the smell of that will kill and destroy them.

To ripe a botch, impostume, felon or cattes hear, or any swelling sore.
TAke Hogs suet or grease, or else Larde, and lay it upon the sore or Botche,
and it will ripe incontinent. Also be that has many life or nittes in his
hedde, anointing and rubbing it well with the said suet or lard they will die.
Also the oil of Laurel or baies will do the like.

An excellent washing for the teeth.
TAke the flowers of Po^megranades, and sees them in Wine, and take of this
wine in your mouth for it has the virtue of restraining and fastening the
gommes swollen, and to make the flesh fine.

To make abaite for river fish.
TAke the blood and the flesh of a calfe and minse it together, and put it in
a vessel, and let it remain so the space of ten days, and then occupy it.

A remedy that no kind of herbs shall be hurt or corrupted by flees or lise.
WIth the Herbs that you will sow you must sow also roket, or else wash the
seeds of the Herbs that you will sow in the juice of Singreene, and when the
herbs be come by they shall never be hurt nor corrupted by lise nor flees.

To drive away the stinking Vermin called Puneses.
If you steep Rue in water, and sprinkle your house or place where this
vermin is you shall drive them all away. Also if you lay in your bed
steed a brau^che of hemp, you shall not be molested with Pinaises. Also
rubbing your bed steed with liquid or soft pitch which some think to be
tar, and the juice of wild Cowcombers, and the Pinneses that be there will
die. Likewise if you rub your bedstead with Squilla, stamped with Vinaigre or
with the leaves of a Cedar tree sodden in oil, you shall never feel Pinnese.
The like shall be don if you rub your bedsteed, with fish glue sodden. Also if
you set under the bed a paile full of water, the Pinneses will not trouble
you at all.

For to Kill and destroy Flies.
TAke white Elebore, and steep it in milk or sodden wine, than put to it some
Auripigmentum otherwise called Arsenick or orpine, and sprinkle your house with
it, and you shall destroy all the flies. Also the decoction of Eldern cast
about the house works the like effect.

Another way to Kill and destroy Flees.
WOrmwoode, or wild Cowcomber roots stieped in sea water, destroieth flees: so
does the water wherein M^lanthium otherwise called Nigella Romana has been
stieped, casting it about your house. Also if you boil or sees the water with
Rose cakes, or with hemp seeds, and casting it about your house it will do the
like.

For one that has eaten venomous tadstooles or Musheroms.
THere is no presenter remedy for him that has eaten venomous Musheroms or
Tadstooles, than to make him vomit as soon as may be possible in giving him
drink the roots of the leaves of Rue well stamped, and of Organy, and Honey,
and after that, the use of Triacle which shall be very good, and Mithridatum
with strong vinaigre, Oximellu^ scylliticum, is honey and vinaigre soden
together, having the roots of Scylla stieped in it.
or with Oximellum scylliticum, or else with Aqua vite. Also to eat raw Garlike
helps much in such a case, which the most part of the peisantes of the
country do, using it in steed of Triacle.

For to confite Musheroms or tadstooles, so well that a man may eat them
without any danger.
Seeing that Musheroms or Tadstooles are so pleasant in taste that men can not
abstain from them, let them learn at the lest way the mean to assure
themselves from the danger that may ensue, doing as follows. First of all
sees them with wild pears, or with the leaves of the tree that bears the
said pears. And if you can find no wild pears, you may do it with garden
pears, so that they be naturally sower and sharp, and suck as can not well
be eaten but they must be roasted, and you may take them either dry or green,
and they will take away all the danger of the venime or poison.

A remedy against the stinging of waspes, or Bees.
TAke Ox dung sprinkled over with Vinaigre, or else take Mallowe leaves so used
with Vinaigre, or in touching the stinging with an iron, it is done also with
the milk of Figs.

To make women have a quick and speedy delivery of their Children, and without
pain, or at the l^ste very little.
TAke leaves of Dittany, and stamp the^, or else make powder of them, and give
the woman that laboreth drink of it with a little water, and she shall be
delivered incontinent, and without any great pain or grief,

To take of wartes from the hands.
TAke as many Ciche peason as there be wartes, and tutche each of them with one
of the Ciche peason, so that every pease tutch his wart, then wrappe up the
said peason in a little clout, and cas^e them behind you, and all the wartes
will dry up.

For the dissenterie or flixe of the Stomach.
TAke green beans, poddes and al, and seed them with water and Vinaigre, and
eat them so poddes and all, and that shall stop you.

To fasten the Gommes, and lose teeth.
TAke a little Mirre, and temper it with Wine and oil, and wash your mouth
with all, and you shall see a wonderful experience. The Mirre also kills the
worms in a man's body, and being chewed in the mouth makes a sweet breath.

To take away the toth ache.
TAke Ysope, and make thereof a decoction with Vinaigre, and it being hot
wash your mouth withal, and the pain of the teeth shall go away. The Ysope
also being stamped, and incorporated with Honey, and a little Nitrum, kills
the worms in a man's body.

Another remedy for to heal the tooth ache.
Boil frogs with water and vinaigre, and wash your mouth with the decoction,
and it will be very profitable for the pain of the teeth.

To make Hear grow.
TAke three quick Frogs, and burn them alive in a pot, and mingle the ashes
that you make of them with honey or with tar, which is far better, and
rub the place with it where you se there grows no hear, and in short
space it will grow abondantly.

To make Hear black.
TAke leches or blood suckers, and let them rott the space of three skore days
in red wine or vinaigre in some vessel of lead, and anoint the hears with it
in the sun, and they will become black.

To kill the worms in the teeth, and to take away the stinking of the teeth.
TAke a hundred frogs, and dry them al night in an oven, so that they may
be made into a powder: and put to it as much salt beaten into powder, and rub
your teeth with it, and it will kill the worms, and take away the evil
savor of the teeth.

To heal pussiue and broken winded Horses.
TAke molin or longwort, and make thereof a powder, and give it the horse to
drink with his water, and it shall not only take away the cough: but also
heal him if he be altogether pussife and broken winded. Also Gencian will do
the like, which thing is sufficiently proved and tried.

To preserve a man from vomiting on the sea.
YOu must drink the juice of Wormwood, and you shall be quite from such pain,
and vexation of vomiting.

A remedy against the biting or stinging of Serpents.
TAke Ash leaves, and stamp them, and lay them upon the place that is
stonge, or else get out the juice of them, and give him drink of it, and you
shall see a marvelous effect, because that the Serpent is so great enemy unto
the Ash tree, that he would rather go through the fire, then to pass by an
Ash.

For them that spitte Blood.
TAke fine Rye flower, and make thereof a cake, and when it is bake give it the
pacient to eat, as hot as he may endure it, and it shall do him great ease.

A remedy against the worms in young Children.
Lupines, is a kind of ^ulse corn.
TAke dry Lupines, and make flower of them, and kneath it with Honey and lay it
upon the stomach of the Childeland it will heal him.

A remedy for the flixe or Laxe.
TAke green Acornes and stamp them a little with the skin and all, and with
the ends of the young and tender leaves, and make thereof distilled water in a
limbeck, and give the pacie^t drink of it, and it shall be a very good remedy.

For the running of the urine that is to say for one that can not hold his
water.
TAke the small ends of Oken leaves, and sees them in Claret wine, and then
stamp them, and make a plaster of them, and lay it hot upon the yard of
the pacient, and shortly he shall be cured.

For those that can not keep their meat but vomit it up again continually.
TAke the tender leaves of an ash tree, and sees them in strong Vinaigre, and
then stamp the^, and make thereof a plaster, which you shall lay upon the
stomach of the pacient, or upon his belly and he shall be greatly eased of his
disease.

To make that Antes, or Emettes shall not eat the figs upon the tree.
TAke a kind of Onyons, called in latin Cepa Scylliticae, and stamp them
with Barrowes grease or lard, and anoint the foot of the plant a ha^dfull or
two of height, and the Antes will not go up into the tree, and this must you
do in March.

To make Hoar hears black.
TAke mulberie leaves, vine leaves, and the leaves of a red fig tree, and
boil them with rain water, and wash your head with it, and the hears will be
black.

For the tooth ache.
TAke the roots and leaves of Chickwood, and boil them in water, with the
which you shall wash your mouth, and hold it in your mouth a certain space,
and it will take away your pain.

To destroy Lise and other small beasts, that do wast and mar the herbs in
gardins.
LEt a woman that has her flowers walk three or four times in the allees,
and all the vermin will fall down dead.

A remedy for Deafness.
IF a man be Deffe by some accident and not by nature, take the juice of
Colewortes mixte with warm water, and drop it into his ears, and he shall
find a marvelous ease and remedy.

Against the stinging of Scorpions.
TAke Penniriall either dry or green, and stamp it with good wine, and make
thereof a plaster, which you shall lay upon the wound or stinging of the
Scorpion, and he shall be safe, and healed.

A remedy that the Sun shall not hurt you shining upon your head, when you go
any Iornaie.
IF you put a little branche of Penniriall in each ear, the Sun shall never
make your head ache when it shines upon it.

A remedy for the Horsnesse of the voice.
IF by cold you be Horse, take Penniriall, and sees it in water, and take of
it at night when you go to bed, a dishefull somewhat hot, with a little sugar
molten in it, and doing this three or four times, you shall be rid of your
Horesnesse, and have a clear voice.

A remedy for them that can not piss.
TAke five or six leekes, and fry the^ in the oil of Scorpio^s, and then
stamp them and make of them a plaster and lay it upon their coddes as hot
as they may endure it. Also the beard or hear of Leekes will do the like, if
there be dried, and made in powder, and given the^ to drink in white Wine, and
will make the gravel, and small stones to come out.

To make a bait to ketch wild Geese and wild Duckes, and all other sort of
foul.
TAke the seed of Belenge and the roots also, and steep them in water the
space of a day and a night with the seeds: than sees the said things with
the water that they were steeped in, so that the seed may well drink and
soke up the said water: than lay the said seed or grain in the places where
wild Duckes and wild Geese are wont to rest, and they will eat this grain or
seed thus prepared and thereupon will sleep as they were drunk and in the
mean time you may take them with your hands* but there must be a great
qua^tite of this Belenge specially for wild Geese. This may also serve to
take al other manner of foul that go together in sholes or companies. Men use
to sees this grain with brimstone and lay it in the places where birds and
foul are wont to feed and all that eat of it, will fall down and die: but to
keep them that they die not, you must give them to drink oil olive, and
shortly after they will revive again.

To make that Dogs shall never be mad, and a remedy for them if they be
mad, being bitten of wild Dogs or wolves.
IF you cut of the Dogs tail within thirty or forty days after he is
whelpt, he shall never be mad, onles he be bitte^ of some mad dog or
wolf: for if he be bitte^, you must give him to eat the space of thirty day
continually Hens dunge with bread or other meat, laiyng upon the place so
bitten, a plaster, of the roots of wild Roses, and put a colla^ of it about
his neck, and in the wound some Garlike or Onyons stamped, and if you be nighe
unto the sea, cast him into it every day twice or thrice, so that he may
thoroughly wash, and continue so the space of twenty days, because the sea
water has a virtue against the madness of Dogs.

To make that flies shall not vex or trouble Dogs.
TAke the green outward shale of Walnuttes, and stamp them, and anoint the
dog with it where the flies vex him, and specially in the ears, and the
flies shall not tutche him.

A remedy to keep Dogs from Flees.
Rub the Dogs over with oil olive, and they will die incontinent, or else
take the root of Belenge and sees it water, with the which you shall wash
the Dogs, and if there be any flees they will die, or if you take the juice
of the leaves of it, and rub them with it twice or thrice. The like effect
will the water of Toruisque work, if you wash the Dogs well with it, but
true it is that they must be washed afterward with clean water, for if the
dog should tutche that water with his tongue, it would hurt him, because it is
very venomous.

To purge Dogs when they be sick.
IF dogs have any wound, you must heal the^ with molten pitche mixte with
oil olive, and rub the wound every day with it. If they be otherwise sick
you must purge them, in gi^ing them drink whey of goats milk. This don sees
a shows head, skin, and hear and all, and put a little Gi^ger in it, and make
them eat it hot with the broth and al together.

To heal mangy Dogs.
IF you kill a calf, take the blood of him hot, and sm^re it upon the dog
where he has the disease, and when that is dry plaster him over again with
calves blood warm as it is when it comes from the calfe, and this must be
done diverse times. And the^ wash him well with lie made with the ashes of the
shrubbes or twigges of Vines. It shall be also good to cast him some time into
the fattes or tubbes where they die cheuerell, and there wash him well, for
that cleanses meruelously, some wash Dogs in the water that mirre has been
stioped in. It shall be good also to take a little good plaster of Paris with
as much of the seed of Alegre^, and stamp them wet together, and mingle them
with molten pitche, and anoint the Dog with that, which is also good for
men.

To ^ake wartes from the hands.
TAke earth and kneth it with Dogs piss, and lay it upon the Wartes, and
they will dry up and consume away.

To make the Teeth white.
TAke Goats horn and burn it, and make thereof powder, and rub your teeth
with it, and they will be white, and will also fasten and confirm the Gommes.

To take away the pain of the eyes.
TAke the Langes or Lights of a ^idde hot as they be taken out of his belly,
and lay them upon the eyes of the pa^ient, and it shall take his pain fr^^
him.

For him that is stong with a Salamander.
TAke Rosen prepared and compounde with Honey in manner of an electuarie, and
let him drink it with the decoction of Nettle leaves: But he that by fortune
has eaten of a Salamander must vomit, in giving him drink diverse times oil,
and making him sharp glisteres, for to draw the venim out, and to comfort his
heart after, in giuinge him good triacle and mithridate, and that his meat be
fat flesh of young beasts.

For one that has drunk Leches or bloodsuckers.
Give him drink of some brine, and the juice of Beetes with Vinaigre, and you
shall kill the beast, that hurts so that it choketh the pacient sticking fast
at the mouth of his stomach.

For one that is stonge with the beast called in latin Psalanx which is a
kind of Lisard called Stellio.
YOu must singe and play upon diverse instruments, and make the pacient to
dance continually until he be healed.

For one that is bitten with a mad Dog.
YOu must use all diligence to get immediately the Liuar of the same mad
dog, and let the pacient eat it hot roasted, Cucurbitulae, be certain
cups that surgeons do use to dra^e out blood with by skarissyng the skin
called cupping.
and above all things you must enlarge the wound with a rasour, and cut away
all the torn and perished flesh, and cause the blood to issue out abondantly
because it brings the venime with it: And to draw out blood also with little
cups well flamed, called Cucurbitulae, and to give him garlike, onyons and
other like things to eat, and to drink Milk, and good, sweet wine.

A remedy for him that is stonge with some Venomous Beast.
TO get the Venim out of the flesh and the blood of him that is stong
venemously in any manner of sort, the best and the chiefest remedy that can be
found, is to suck out the Venim with a ma^s mouth: but you must note that he
that shall suck it out may not be fasting, but must have eaten some thing,
specially fat and greasy things his belly full. Then having washed his
mouth with good wine, let him take into his mouth some oil olive, and let him
begin to suck: Then to enlarge the place that was stong, with a rasour, that
the venim may come the better out, and set these cups called Cucurbitulae,
under with much stame for to draw it out. This done make him a plaster upon
it with Garlike and Onyons stamped small, and wash the place with hot
vinaigre, The diet of the pacie^t must be the blades or leaves of leekes,
garlike and Onions, with Pepper and salt enough, and much bread, good wine
with organy, and the seeds of Nettles, Baie berries, and Genuper berries, the
flesh of Hedge hogs of the land, and citrous with their seed.

To preserve a man from Poison.
TAke dry Figs, and eat them with Walnuttes, or raw Citro^s, the seeds of
nauewes which is a kind of rape drunk with wine, or else the leaves of
Calamint, and Terra sigillata, and ruddle or red chalk, in taking of al these
things a dram at a time, and like wise the leaves of Rue eaten with a
walnut, two dry figs, and a corn of salt, using daily these simples you
shall be preserved from poison. As concerning compoundes, the principal of
all Antidotes or conterpoisons is mithridate and triacle, for in taking every
day the quantite of a Hasill nut of Triacle there shall never Poison hurt you.

To drive away all venomous beasts from your house.
TAke Juniper, the seed of Agnus castus, the shelles of river creuices, Hearts
horn, the grease or suet of a Bucke, Kerse or town Cresses, Organy, and
Dittany, and make of all these droges a dowe or past, and when you will use it
occupy it, burn it, for where as the smoke thereof goes the beasts will
void away.

Against all poison, eaten or drunk.
Having knowledge that any man is poisoned, the chief remedy is to make him
vomit the poison, in giving him oil olive luke warm to drink, alone, or
mixte with water, and if you have no Oil, give him Butter with hot water, or
with the decoction of line seed, or the seed of nettles, or of Scinigrecum,
and all these things purge the venim as well dounewarde as upward after
having made him vomit diverse times, you must purge him with sharp glisters
douneward: then give him water mixte with Honey, and also old Wine enough to
drink. But if you can get good Triacle or Mitridate, they are the principal
against poisons with Terra sigillata, Acorne shells, and give him of it in good
wine. Let his meat be the fat flesh of old beasts, and fat brothes,
specially of Hens and fat fish, and let him not sleep, and in
continuyng this means he shall be deliuerid, by the help of God.

Against all Venim or Poison.
TAke a quantite of Flies, and dry them, and make powder of them, and give it
him that is poisoned to drink in wine, and immediately he shall be cured.

A remedy which king Nicomedes used that no poison should hurt him.
TAke Juniper Berries, Terra sigillata or ruddle, of each of them two drammes,
and make it in to powder very small, the which you shall mix with honey, or
oil olive, and so keep it. And when you will occupy it, take the biggenesse
of a hasell nut of it at a time, with water mixed with honey, and you shall be
assured not to be poisoned, for in eatinge poisoned meat after it, as soon as
it is in your stomach, there will come upon you a vomiting, so that you shall be
constrained to cast up the meat and the poison together: but if there be none
in your meat, the said preparatiue will not hurt you at all.

A secret or remedy, not to be stonge of Scorpions.
CArry about you of the root of Polimonia, or Polimonium, and you shall never
be stong of Scorpions, and if you be stong with them they shall do you no hurt.

A remedy not to be stong of wespes or Bees.
TAke Mallows and stamp them with oil olive, and where as you anointe your
self with the unction, never flies, Wespes, nor Bees will tutche you.

To make what quantite of strong Vinaigre you will.
TAke Squilla, which is a kind of an Onyon, and take the leaves of from it,
and tie it upon a threde, and leave it five or six days in the aier. Tha^
plonge it into the vessel of wine that you will make Vinaigre of, and there
must be so much void space in the vessel that the Squilla, may not tutche
the wine being tied by the bong, and let it hang so five or six days, and
the Wine will become strong and sharp, and will turn into good Vinaigre.

For one that has eaten venomous musheroms or Tadstooles.
THe cheifest thing is, that he be made to vomit in giving him drink oil
olive, and lie made of the Ashes of the shrubbes of vines, or of the branches
of a wild pear tree, with salt and vinaigre tempred with water. Hens Eggs
also be good being drunk with Vinaigre tempered with water. And these remedies
be good for any man that has drunk Plaster, or eaten any thing that choketh,
or him to whom some manne has given menstruall blood to drink, as wicked
women some time do.

To be assured and safe from all Sorcerie and Enchantement.
TAke Squilla, and tie it upon the principal gate or door of your house, and
you shall assure all the inhabitants in it from all sorcerie and
enchantmentes. Also this Squilla, assures and keeps al plants and trees that
are about the house, where it is planted or set, from all noisomnesse and
infection of the air.

Against lightning and tempest.
IN the place where there is tied the skin of a beast called in latin Hyena,
or of a Cocodrille, Hyppopotamus, is a beast living in the river of Nile having
feet like an ox his back and mane like a horse, a winding tail and tusked
like a Bore, and neyeth like a horse.
or of a Hyppopotame, or of a sea Calfe or seal the lightening tempest and
thonder will never fall there, nor likewise upon a hay tree nor fig tree.

To keep that fruits shall not fall before they be ripe.
IF you tie wild Figs upon the trees in your Garden from the which your
fruit falls, it shall not only not fall down, but also these figs will
keep them safe.

To keep that wesels and other like beasts shall not eat nor destroy
Poultrie.
Rub your Pultrie with the juice of Rue or herb grace, and the Wesels shall
do them no hurt, also if they eat the Lunges or lights of a Fox, the Foxes
will not eat them.

To make Flax as soft as Silk.
TAke what quantite of Flax you will that is good and fair, and kembe it as
ready to be sponne: Then take fresh and recent Calves dunge as much as will
suffice to paste over the said flax, and let it be well washed after it
has remained five or six hours so soked and covered with the dunge, and it
will be as soft as silk, and may be sponne as fine as a man will.

To heal the pain of the Head.
TAke Maioram, and press out the juice of it, and let the pacient take of it
into his Nose.

To heal lips that be clefte and full of chinkes by means of cold or wind.
TAke gomme Arabike, and Dragant, as much of the one as of the other and make
powder of it, and incorporate it with Oil of Violettes, and anoint your lips
therewith.

To heal hands that be full of Chappes by cold or wind.
TAke mastike, frankences, new wax, and oil of roses, and make of all this
an unguent or ointme^t, and anoint the chappes or chinkes of your hands, and
they will immediately be hole.

To grind Gold and Silver.
TAke the cutting or paringe of beaten Gold the value of half a croune, than
take some gomme Arabic as much as two beans, and stiepe it in so little water
that it skant becouered over, and leave it so a night: than braie it a little
upon a marble stone, and put to it the Gold by litlle and little, and
incorporate it well with the gomme. Then braie it slightly the space of two
hours, in gathering it up under the stone that grindeth it: for in spreading
it abroad much of it is lost, and with a pensill weate the Gold round about,
for sear less it should dry: for you should lose it because of the gomme
that makes it to dry up: Then you shall take half an ounce of salt peter,
which you shall put in a little c^fer or casket of iron, and put to it so
much water that it may be scant covered, and boil it on the fire skimming it
well, then strain it with a double linen cloth and thick, and let it cool,
and it will congele and be white: Then braie it with the Gold the space of an
hour and a half, and than it is ground. This don take it up with a fine
pensill, and put it in a cup or goblet of glass, and resolve all into
water. Than must you have ready three or four cups of Glass for to empty
the water in from hand to hand: then put the water upon the Gold, and with the
end of your finger wash it well with the Gomme and salt peter, and you shall
empty the water from hand to hand into the cups of glass. Also you must
have ready some shelles clean and dry for to put it in: and the Gold being
well washed in the cup or goblet, let there be a little water in it, and
stir the Gold with a pin, and you shall empty by little and little in the
dishe all that quantite which you think you will cut of, and make thereof
such measure that you may have your money again. And you must know that
there is always half in half gotten upon it. And in emptiyng it mix it well
together, to the end that the course may go to the bottom and mingle it not
with the fine, for you should do hurt unto your work and your self wrong:
but keep it, for you may grind it ones again, and when it is in the dishe,
you shall hold it over a flambing cole, not letting it rest still but removing
it fair and softly and it will wax dry, and seem fayrer to the eye. And
tha^ keep it from all filth, and dust.

To make fair Verdegrise after the new facion.
TAke strong Vinaigre, and viij. ounces of the siling or skales of Copper well
made clean from all dust, four ounces of Baye salt, two ounces of(...)

it, and than facion what bid stones you will, and make the hole of them
little, and let them dry well in the sun, and if you bake them in an oven,
they will dure longer, and will be stronger. Than give them a light color with
hole armenick, and the white of an egg, and lay silver foil very fine upon
them, but weate it first with water: and then polish the^ with a dogs tooth,
and make them glister and shine. Then take the shearinges or paringes of
parchement that be white and not colored or painted, and wash them with luke
warm water, and boil them in a new pot, until they be well sodden, and
somewhat engrossed and waxen to a substance or body, then strain them finely,
and when you will occupy them about your work, let them be luke warm: Than
take your Perle and put it upon the end of a needle, or some other fine or
small iron, to the intent the hole be not stopped, and so plonge it into the said
parcheme^t glue, and take it out quickly again, and turn it round that the
glue may not rest in one place of it, but that it may be of like thickness
round about the Perle, and if it appear not thick enough unto you, dippe it
in again, and it will show better, that is to faie the witness will shine
under the glue, and will make a certain obscure mark with in, and glistering
without, so that it shall seem a natural color of a Perle. And when you
shall compare him with a natural Perle, this shall appear always fairer to
the eye, because it has more gloss and luster and shall be rou^der. And for to
make these your Perles to be more esteemed keep them in little boxes, and
show but a few of them at ones, and if you will win much you must make many
of them.

To imprent medalles in bost with Dragagant.
TAke six ounces of Dragagant, and stiepe if in strong Vinaigre the space of
three days. Then stamp or beat it well, and ingrosse it into a body or
substance with pla^ter ground very small, and if you will make them of other
colors, put into it what powder you will, be it white or Orpime^t, so that the
past may be somewhat hard, and all well incorporated together. Then take your
hollow forms or mouldes, and anoint them a little, and fill them with the
said paste, and press it well down, and let it dry in the sun, and you
shall have the printe of your molde neete and fine. And of this past you may
make also other works as you will as bedes stones or other.

To make a past meet and good to make all manner of medalles or pictures in
moulde.
TAke the bones of the legs of all sort of beasts, and put them in a pot
after they be broken: and cover them well, and se^ them in a brick makers
fournese. And when they be cold again stamp them and braie them very small.
This done take the flower or offall of iron that is beaten from it when it is
hot and wash it well and clean, and when it is dry again, stamp it and
braie it very small upon a marble stone, and weate it much with strong vinaigre
until it be like as it were an ointment, then put it in a pot well covered,
and set it in the said fournaise: and when it is cold braie it again upon the
marble, arrowsing and watring it with a little Aqua vite, and let it dry, and
it is made. This don, you shall take a dishe full of the said flower or offall
of iron, and two dishes full of the first powder, and incorporate the^ well
together, and when you will make the past for to make your medalles in the
moulde, weate the said powder with salt water, Vinaigre, Piss, or Lie, and
mingle and incorporate well all together, and then frame your medalles in the
moulde, and let them dry. This done cast in your metal, or what you will
make, and your medalles shall be very fair and nete.

To make medalles, and figures chaced and imbossed, with Fish glue.
Fish glue is that which Ioyners do use commonly.
TAke a slise of fish glue or more or less, and beat it well with a hammer
upon a flint stone, than wash it well in fresh water, and finally with luke
warm water, and than put it in a new pot, and put some clear water upon it,
and let it stiepe a night, then put a little fire or embers in a chafing dishe,
and boil all in this little pot fair and softly the space of an hour and
more, until you may perceive that it is incorporated, or else prove it
otherwise in puttinge a drop upon your nail, and if it bide firm, fast and
clean, take it from the fire, and cast it upon your medalles that you have
made ready, and let them be in this manner following. Take your chaced and
imbossed medalles, and lay round about them a little wax candell, to the
intent that the glue fall not by, and anoint it: with honey, and lay on the
glue so thick that all the imbossing may be covered: than set it in the
sun, and let it be equal, and so let it dry, and when it is dried enough,
it will lense it self from the medalle, and will be as thin and as fine as
paper and all the liniamentes very well seen and perceived be they never so
subtle and small, and will have a good gloss or luster, and fold them, and
bow them which way you will and they will not break, and if you will alter
the color of them, color the water with Saffran or verdegrise, so that it be
skant colored, and use this water to sees the glue in, so that it be not to
thick: for than your work would be to gross, and not fair to look to, and
you may also give it a color within side or paynt it without, and it will be a
very fair thing.

To make a Green, Yellow, Read and Blewe color without thickness, for to
write with upon Paper.
TAke Verdegrise grossly beaten, and put it in a violl with Vinaigre very
strong, and put to it also a little Gomme arabike and a little juice of Rue,
and the violl being so full, stop it, and set it in the sun the space of
xv. or xx. days, or else boil it upon the fire, and than strain it, and let
the verdegrise be well molten: this done put it into the violle again, and
keep it well from dust, and when you will occupy any of it, stir it well
together that it may be thick and troubled, and write or paint with it, and
it will be a fair green. For to make the red take hedde lie, and put into
it some verzine cut in small pieces, and let it steep therein a night: then put
to it a little alome, and boil it until it decrease of the third part: then
strain it, and keep it against you will occupy it. And when you will put it
in effect, take as much as shall serve you, and boil it again, and put to it
some Gomme Arabic, and the more you put in the redder and cleerer it will be,
but let it be hot, and if you will have it clear, pot into it a little Alome
beaten, but very little at ones, and you shall make what color you will, read,
dark, or bright. For to make the yellowe, take little apples of Spinceruin,
not fully ripe, and stamp them grossly in a mortar: then stiepe them in head
lie, and sees them until they decrease and diminishe of the third part, and
strain them finely: and then set again on the said broth, and put into it a
little Alom beaten, and wha^ you see it begin to boil take it from the fire,
for else it would all go out, and strain it ones again, and so keep it
against ye have need of it, and when you will occupy it, stir it and
trouble it, and lay it on any thing you will very thin, and you shall make a
fair yellow which shall continue a long time, and if you add to it a little
Saffran, it will be liuelier and brighter. For to make the Blewe, take Palma
Christi, that comes out of Germany which is like the flower of woad, and
stiepe it a night in piss, and in the morning braie it upon a marble stone,
and put among it a little vnsicked lime as much as you shall think good,
according as you shall see the color come clear or dim, and temper or stiepe
it with nothing else but with piss, and it will continue a year or more always
of one color, and when you will put it in effect, stir and trouble it well
within the violle: and take a pen or a pensill and weate it, and you shall see
a fair Blewe: and if you will give it a gloss or luster, stiepe it with the
said piss, and some Gomme arahicke.

To make a piece of violet cloth to write or paint upon.
TAke of these little apples of walwort tree which commonly grows on dike
sides, and stamp the^ in a mortar, and after they be well sta^ped, leave them
in some warm place, until they rotte and putrify, then stamp them again, and
get as much juice out of them as you ca^ by pressing them in a press, having
first made ready your pieces of cloth clean and fine, and old, and take half a
dishe full of quick lime, and weate it in a basen, so that wha^ it is well
weate, there may be two or three dishes full of water above the lime, and no
more, and pour it out handsomely that it may be clear, and stiepe therein
your pieces of cloth well, then take them out and dry them in the shadow. This
done, take some clear water, and put some Alome into it, and boil it, and
sees your pieces in it the space of a Credo: then take them out, and let them
dry in the shadow, and when they be dry, stiepe them in the said juice two or
three times, and at every time let them dry in the shadow, and in the wind
upon a net, and let them be flat to the intent that the color run not at
one side, and they shall be made and well colored, and so keep them well from
dust, and from the aier that the color go not of. And this is the perfect and
true secret to trim and dress pieces that men make to paint upon, and to
take all manner of color, and is the mean, that the excellent painter John the
Evangelist did use. For to make another color of violet, take little apples of
a myrtle tree very ripe, and stamp them, and press them under a press, and
get out the juice of them, and stiepe your said pieces in it, and dry them in
the shadow. For to make a green piece, and of diverse colors for to paint on,
take Verdegrise ground small, and some saffron, and temper it with strong
vinaigre, and put to it as much more juice of Rue, then stiepe again the said
pieces in piss and dry them, this done plonge them three or iiij. times in
the said color, and dry them in the shadow. Take also half a quarter of
orpiment, and two ounces of strong lie, and a little brass of the foulest you
can get, half an ounce of Verdegrise, an ounce of Geniper berries well stamped,
and put all together, and sees it until it be a quarter diminished. The^
stiepe your pieces in the said compositions, and dry them in the shadow as
before, and you shall make a fair changeable color. If you will make also a
fair grene, take the leaves of the herb called in latin Raphanitis, which is
a kind of lilly or flower deluce, called of the Frenchmen Lis celest^s: sta^p
them well, and get out the juice of them, and put into it a little Alome
stamped, and it will be the cleerer, and stiepe your pieces therein oftentimes,
and they will receive the colors, and then dry them as before. But if you will
make the^ of a sanguine color, you shall make this fore said color with
grain, wherein you shall stiepe your pieces. If you will make them Blewe, take
the flowers of Line, or of the fore named Raphanitis, and do as before. And
when you will take of the color from every piece, you shall have a little
gommed water, and weat the piece a little with it, and wring it well, and you
shall have as much color as you will, and so use of it with a Pensill when you
will.

To get oil out of Talchum artificially, and of his own strength.
TAke six pound of Talchum, and beat it small, and put it in a pot not baked
nor leadid within, but thick^ and great of earth, and put of the said Talchum
into it until the pot be full: then set the cover upon it and bind it well
with wier, and stop the said pot well with Lutum sapientiae, and let it
well dry and so put it in a furneise of brick, or lime keele near unto the
mouth where the fire reuerberateth, and when you will take it out, beware that
it break not. This done braie it small upon the marble until it be like unto
flower, and do it quickly, to the intent it take not much aier, and put it in
a little sack pointed at the bottom like a gelley bag, and lay upon it a
cup of glass or some other well leaded and glased within, which may be meet
to receive the said oil. Then let it down into a well with a cord about a
two pardes, or a yard and a half from the water, and very nighe unto the
wall, but that it tutche it not, and remove it not in xx. or xxv. days. Then
if you se that it has begone to cast some oil you may take it out of the
well, and set it in some moiste place, that is to say in the corner of a
sellar, for fear lest the aier or the wind or any kind of best should hurt
it. And leave it so long in the said place until all the licour become out of
i^: Then take the lees that remains, and distill it through a lembick with a
small fire augmenting it little and little until by the force of the fire all
come out that may comme, and it is called of the Alkemistes the fire of
Talchum. Now the first that is gotten out by the humidite and moistnes, is
called the earth, and is very medicinable. The second is the very richesse of
the Alkemistes: And I will say unto you that many which profess Alk^^ni^
have sought this secret, and have done in all things as is here written, and
yet could never find this means to give it this great humidite, and of such
abondance and with so long time: And for as much as the matter in it self is
very stiff and dry, so will it have great moistness and in abonda^ce. And
because it has had great and it must needs have much moistness, and having
had these parts there is made of it two Clementes, separated as you see. Then
take this last lees, and stamp it in a mortar, and put it in a pot or cawdron
pouring upon it some well water, and let it boil a certain space, and then
strain it, and wash your body with it, and you shall se your skin will be
very white, and will heal a man of all manner of skabbes and skurt, and
swelling of the legs. And in using the said water for to wash your hands
with, you shall have them soft and clean from all spots or frackles. This
is the parfite way and meal^e to make oil of Talchum, which has many
properties of the which the Duchess of Sauoye did use and occupy. And who
so ever uses this licour, it will take away Freckles, Spots, Wartes,
skarres of wounds, or cuttes, and other marks, and in short space you shall
see a marvelous experience of it. It makes white teeth, and takes out the
wrinkles of the face: And t^ you drink of it two or three drops with Wine or
pottage, it will make you have a sweet breath, if it co^ne because of the
stomach. It comfort the mother and causes a good appetite, and restores
into his nature every evil stomach that is marred by some accident or
occasion of ^^ckenes. And finally much desired of the Alkemistes: for in
putting into the said oil some Mercury well purified it congeleth
incontinent and will endure the hammer, and this is very true.

To make that all metal shall seem like Silver.
TAke of Aqua fortis separatiua, and put into it the value of viij. pence or
silver well beaten thin with a hamer, and so cut it in small pieces, and set
the violle upon the coals for to heat it a little, and it will incontinent
melte in the water: Then take it from the fire, and put into it some Tartare or
lees of white wine beaten into powder small, and put so much into it that it
may suite and drink by the said water, and you shall make a dowe or past, where
with you shall rub all manner of metal what you will, and it shall seem white
as it were fine silver.

For to take much Fish, and to make a light in the night.
TAke a certain quantite of these little worms that shine and fly in the
night, and distill them in a Lembick of glass with a slow fire, and put the
water that comes of them in a violl of glass, or some round apple of glass
that is clear and bright, and put into it four ounces of quick silver purged,
that is to say, passed through leather or kiddes skins, and sloppe well the
glass that no water come into it. Then place it handsomely in the middle of
the nett, so that nothing break, and than cast your net into the water, and
it will make a goodly and clear light and shining, and all the fishes that see
this light will run in a shole together, and will fall into the net: for all
fish naturally takes pleasure to run toward the light. And carriyng also
the said round apple of glass in the night it will give a great light. It will
do the like also in a chamber.

To make a mixte stone which being weated with spettle, makes fire.
TAke quick lime, and salt peter fined diverse times, ^utia alexandrina not
prepared, calamint, as much of the one as of the other, quick brimstone, and
Camfire, of each of them two parts. And let all these things be beaten or
stamped small and sifted through a sarce or seeue. Then put the said pouders in
a new linen cloth and bind them hard. This done take two great goldsmithes
crosettes or melting pottes, and put the said pouders in them, and set the one
upon the other mouth to mouth, and bind them fast with wier, and Lutum
sapientiae so that it may sake no manner of air and dry them in the sun,
and when the said powder is dry, it will be yelow. This done set the croset in
a furneise of brick or lime, and when it is cold again take it out, and you
shall find your substance of the color of brick, and it shall be parfite and
good. And when you use of it for to make a fire or light a candell, weate it
with a drop of water, or with a little spettle, and incontinent put to it
your match, and it will light and burn. And when you will quench it again,
blow it as you blow out a candell and you shall blow it out.

To make a Vernish of Mastick, to lay upon paintinges made with oil.
TAke two ounces of hard Masticke, and an ounce of the oil of a fur tree.
Tha^ take a little new pot, and put the mastick into it beaten or stamped; and
so melte it with a little fire. This done put into it the oil, and let it
boil a little, and stir it still together, and let it boil almost nothing,
because the Vernishe would be to clammie: and to know if it be sodde enough,
put into it a Hens fether, and if it burn by and by, it is a sign that it
is made, keep it well from dust. And when you will occupy it, let it remain
in the sun until it be hot, and when it is dry again it will give a very
fair gloss or luster.

To make that a white skin shall have black spots of the color of a
leopard or panther and also to make gray hear black.
TAke Litarge of silver one ounce, ij. ounces of quick lime, and three basins full
of water, and sees all this in a new little pot wit^ a small fire, until it
wax warm. Then take it from the fire, mixyng it always with a stick, and it
will be made. Then take a Pensill of Hogs bristels, and mark your white
skin with spots as you shall think good, one spotte here and another
there, one nighe unto an other, and some what great according to your skin.
Then dry them in the sun, and when the skin is dry, beat it with a wande
and you shall see the spots dim of the color of Taunie. And if it be not
well colored to your mind you may do it ones again touching the same places
you did before, and the color will be liuelier, this doing you shall come to
your purpose. And this color keeps always, and gives a good odor. Also
laiyng the said matter upon the hears of a man's head or berde that is gray,
it will make them black.

To make good oil of Nutmegges.
TAke two or three pound of Nutmegges, and cut them small, and stamp them
well, then put them in a pan and heat them mixyng, them always together. This
done, you shall put them into a canuesse or strong linen cloth, and put them in
a press, and press them well, and get out all the licour of them, which
will be like Man^a. And then skrape it from the Canues bag as much as you can
with a knife, then put it in some vessel of glass and stop it well, but set
it not in the sun although it seem evil favored: for it will wax clear and
fair of it self with in ten or xv. days, and is worth thrice as much as the
Nutmegge it self. And this oil has great virtue for to chafe and heat, and
in anointing the stomach warm, it swageth the pain of the mother, and
Sciatikes.

To make parfite oil of Spike.
TAke the flowers of spicke nete and parfite, and in quantite as much as you
may get, and sta^pe them well, then put them in a little canues bag strong,
and press them under a press as hard as you can, and take it up together
diligently although it seem iuell favored, and put it in a strong vessel of
glass: but set it not in the sun, for it will be clear of it self, and wax
fair and bright, and will have a very sharp odor of Spike. And by like mean
may you make oil of Lauander, and serve your turn with it in many things,
because it is very hot sharp, and conforteth the stomach, and if a man put
some of it in well water, it will smell al of it when a man washes his hands
with it. And of this water men use for sweet Balls and many other things.

To make odoriferous oil of Storax.
TAke a bottell of double glass, and put into it a pound of oil of sweet
Almondes, and four ounces of Storax, grossly broken and clean, and put it
into it, stopping it well. Then set it upon the hot embers until the Storax
be molten, then take it from the fire, and being so hot as it is put into it
half an ounce of Mastick made into powder, and when it is cold, strain it
diligently pressing and wringing well the bottom. And if you will make it more
odoriferous you shall add to it some Bengewine, and two ounces of cloves, and it
will be perfect.

To make an odoriferous oil of Bengewine.
TAke a pound of good Bengewine, and beat it small, and put it in a limbecke
well glewed and closed with past, or else into some violl of glass, so that you
may put in your hand, and let it be shalowe and not very deep, because the
oil may mount up with ease. And put thereupon two pound of rose water, and
incorporate it well together: this done, set on the cover of the Limbecke, and
trim it so well that it may not breath out. Then give it a slow fire, in
soche wise that ye may get out some water, and augmente your fire little and
little, until the oil begin to come forth, and by and by change the
recipient or receptorie, pouring out the (...) water into some violle, and then
give it a good and quick fire, until you think you have drawn out three
ounces and a half of oil, and keep it in some violle of glass well stopte, and
leave it in the Sun the space of. viij. days, and it will be parfite and
good. And thus may you make oil of Storax, and if you put to it four ounces
of Storax, it will be the better.

To make good oil of Ladanum.
Take a pound of good Ladanum, and cut it as small as you can, and put it in a
pot of Copper, and put into it six ounces of Rose water, four ounces of Oil of
sweet Almondes, this done sees it fair and softly the space of two hours,
and strain it so often until the oil wax clear, and it will be perfect and
good oil of Ladanum. And first of al in taking away the earth, if you knew
that it were not clean, take the said Ladanum, and cut it small, and put it in
Rose water upon the fire for to melte it, then take it of again, and let it
stand and rest, the space of half an hour, and gather together that is
vpermoste with a spone, and put it again into Rose water, until it be
through cold, and than make and compounde it as before.

To make oil of Orange flowers, and other sweet flowers.
TAke fresh and clean flowers of Orenges one pound, and put them in a great
violl of glass at the fire, and put to them a pound and a half of sweet
Almonde oil, and a little burned Alome, and three grains of Ambergrise, six
grains of Musk, six scruples of Camfere, and braie them after the accustomed
manner. First of all the Musk, then the Amber, with fine Sugar as much as a
Bean, tempered with a little Rose water, and braie the Camfire alone with
Sugar, and put it in last, but let there not be to much of it, because
that the savor of it is to sharp, and put in but a little at ones, for you
may alwaie add to, but you can not diminish it, when it is ones in. And let
not the violl be to full, to the intent you may mix and turn up and down
the composicions, for to incorporate them, and leave them in the Sun,
eightene or twenty days, until a month be paste, and it will be parfite,
and that the flowers may sees the more in the oil, then strain them, and
wring them well, and put them again into the violle in the Sun, the space of
two or three days, until it purify. This doing you shall have a merueilous
oil, and of a very good odor, and if the flowers seem unto you but a few,
you may put other upon them, and they will augmente the odor: by this mean
you may take of all sorts of sweet flowers, and have oil of diverse sorts,
using the means aforesaied.

To make a parfume suddenly in a chamber, where a sick man lies.
TAke a little yearthen pot, and put into it a Nutmegge, two scruples of
the stick of Cloves, two scruples of the stick of Sinamome, four scruples
of Storax calamitae, Rose water, or water of Spike, or some other sweet water,
and sees it. Then put it in a pot sharde, with a few hot ashes and coals
under it, and set it in the chamber, and the smoke thereof shall give a very
sweet amiable and hearty savor.

To make long and round parfumes, to burn^ in a chamber.
TAke six ounces of Timiama, two ounces of Ladanum, three ounces of Storax
solidae five ounces of Frankencens, an ounce of Bengewine, a pound of sweet
coals, eight ounces of Dragant. And of all this make a very small poulder: but
you shall put the coals, and the Dragant to stepe in Rose water, or some other
sweet water, and leave them so the space of three days. Then stamp them in
a mortar, and put into them all the poulders, and stamp them so that they
may be well incorporated together. Then put in the coals stamping always, and
incorporating it, and put so much in of it, that the paste wax somewhat
hard. And then make your parfumes long and round as you will, and dry them
well in the shadow. And if you will not bestow so much cost upon them, take
the lees and bottom that remains, of some sweet odoriferous waters, and
make thereof a poulder, and they shall be good, putting to them a little
Timiama, the which will multiply your work, and make a good odoure, and if
you put to it a little Camfire, they will make a noise in burning, as it were
cracking.

To make a fine and sweet powder of Cipres.
TAke four ounces of Cardamomum or town Kerse, two ounces of Storax solida, two
ounces of Frankensence, three ounces of dry red Roses, an ounce of Sandalum
citrinum, three ounces of Bengewine, two ounces of Cloves, a pound and a half of
clean Egg shells, eight grains of musk, six scruples of Ca^fire, and of al
these drogges make powder, each of them by it self, and let the powder of the
Egg shelles be very fine, than put the Ca^fire molten into the said powder,
and the Musk braied small with a little fine Sugar, and let all be well
incorporated together in the mortar, and sifted small, and so all made into
fine powder, and keep it in some vessel of glass that it take no aier, for
it would lose some of his odor. You may make also of it another sort no less
good and of another color. Take read ox dung in the month of May, and dry
it well, and make thereof very small powder sifted, and not^ that of it self it
will give a very good savor alone without any other thing with it: for in that
season of May all manner of flowers smell pleasantly. And he that knews not
what it were would judge it to be a powder made of a thousand herbs:
notwithstanding put into it some of the foresaid pouders such as yo^ shall
think good, and also put to it some Musk, Ambergrise, and Camfire, after as
you will make it good.

To grind Ambergrise for to put with other drogges, to give them a good odor,
and to make little marks and spots upon beads.
TAke as much Ambergrise as you will, at the least a grain, and take a drop
of oil of sweet Almondes, or of Gelsemines, or of the or of the oil of Ben,
which the parfumers do commonly use in all their parfumes and odours, for of it
self it has no savor at all, but gives an odor unto all things where it
comes, and never waxes evil at any time, and if peradventure you had
neither one nor the other, take two Almondes, and stamp them, and take the
juice of them, and braie the Amber with it, and if you will get out much of
it, let the said Amber stiope a night in the oil: then braie it very small:
for the more you bray it, the more it works his effect in mingling it with
musk, and other sweet drooges. And if you will make sweet and odoriferous
marks upon a paier of beads, take five ounces of dragant, and ^reye it in rose
water the space of three days with as much water as will be above it four
fingars, then br^se it upon a mortar, and put to it two ounces of Ladanum, two
Nutmegges, and an ounce and a half of Storax solida, and as much of fine
Cinamome, half an ounce of Spicknard^. And let al these things be made in
powder very final, and sifted through a seeue or sarce, and incorporated with
the dragant. And when they be well incorporated, you shall put to them some good
musk of Leuant, that is to say eight grains, and six grains of Ambergrise,
three grains of Ciuet, two scruples of Ca^fer, and braie al well in the manner
aforesaid with the said oil, and well let it be incorporated with the said past
or dowe. And if it be not hard to your mind, for to cast it into a facion and
to make the whole in it, let it remain so a day or two until you may well
handle it. Than facion your beads for to make marks upon them with it, in
making two little roses of silver upon the corners of the holes for so keep
them from the heat or sweating of the hands, and so dry them in the shadow,
and when you hold the beads in your hands, it will give a marvelous odor and
sweet smell, and shall be a piece of work for Ladies, gentill women, and
personages of great estate: for in keeping them among their clothes, they shall
take the odor of it.

To make fine Muscardines, white and Read.
TAke what quantite you will of white Dragant, and sliepe it in Rose water,
that it be well covered with it the space of two days: Then stamp it well in
a mortar, and make it into a body or mass with flower of Amilum or barley that
is fine and clean, and a little fine Sugar, and as much powder of Mastick as
will lie upon a penny, and a little Musk well broken a sonder, and make hereof
paste or dowe, the which you shall remove and stir up and down betwixt
your hands being fair and clean, until all be well incorporated together:
And if you put to it a little Irios, and white Sanders the white ones shall be
the best, and if you put to it read Sanders they will be read, or else some
dragons blood. This done cut them very small, and dry them i^ the shadow, and
make them so fine that they may be like sand, and than they shall be made so
that you may use them as you will.

To make counterfete Camfire.
TAke four ounces of white Vernishe, two ounces of Mastick, and as much of white
Encens, two dragmes of true Camfire, and let all be made into fine powder:
then take the whites of four eggs, and a little Aqua vite, and so beat it
well together that it become in a foam, then incorporate well the said things
together, and facion your little balls or loves, and set them in the sun
during the sign of Leo, the space of fiuetene or twenty days, as long as you
shall think good, and it will come into such perfection, as that which is
conterfeted in Constantinoble.

To make the berde grow, and to keep that the hears fall not of.
TAke as many Bees as you shall think good, when men do empty the Hiues,
and burn them in a fire pan, and make a very fine powder of them, and
incorporate them together. The^ you shall make some oil of green Lisardes that
be drouned in common oil cold, and shall put it in a bottle of glass before
the fire, and make it boil until the Lizardes brast, than take it of and set
it in the sun the space of xv. or xx. days, and keep it so with the beasts
in it and it will be an oil as clear as fine Gold, and will keep well.
Incorporate the said powder with this oil, and anoint morning and evening the
bare place where you will that the bear shall not fall of, and they will not
fall away, but grow abundantly. But first you must make some lie with the
ashes of vines, and boil in it these three herbs, that is to say, Capillus
veneris, Agrimonie, and Edera arborea, of each of them five handfuls, and when
it is sodden, strain it, and keep it from dust, and wash your head with it
twice of thrice a weke, and when it is dry anoint your self with this
ointment, and by the means of this washing the hears will grow thick and
long: for it augmenteth the length of them, and keeps them from falling. This
has been experimented and proved of diverse men, that have been very pild and
balde.

To get away the hear, from what place you will.
TAke four ounces of fresh quick lime, an ounce of orpime^t in powder, a pottle
of strong lie, and put all this into a pot, and put to it the said pouders, and
boil it so long vn^ill it wax thick, or else deep a Duckes fether into it,
and if it pill or fall of, than it is sodden, and mix it oftentimes, and in
seething it will wax into a body or mass, then keep it in a pot leaded
within, and when you will, spread it abroad handsomely, and lay it with
measure upon the place where you will the hear shall fall of. But anoint first
the place with oil of sweet Almondes, then lay upon it the said
composition, and you shall not feel the heat at all, or else very little. But
if in case you have a fine or tender skin, that causes you to feel the h^ate
that you can not suffer it, but if you can endure it, it will the sooner work
his effect. Otherwise, take two ounces of rose water, an ounce of Plantaine
water, half an ounce of fine sugar, and put them together, and weate your face
with it, and incontinent the heat will cease. And you may make this medecin
every second day until you have your intent and purpose. And if you fear to
do that which has been experimented, make these others, that is to say, take
salt Armoniack, and the gall of a he Goat, and braie them together, and anoint
the place from whence you will take the hears, and they will fall away. You
shall take also the juice or suck of the root of Celidonia, and a little
orpiment, the juice of Iuie, and Antes, or Emettes eggs with a little
Vinaigre, and incorporate all together, and anoint the place with it and tho
hears will fall away, and if it grieve you, weate it with the aforesaid water,
and you shall a lay the heat of it.

To make hoar bears black.
TAke five flagons full of rain water, and sees it with strong Ashes, and put
into it some Litarge of Gold the quantite of six ounces, with a handful of a
black fig tree leaves, and as much of sage, and let it sees until it be
diminished of a quarter, and than it is done and made, wash your head with
this composition twice a week, and when your head is dry again, take the
juice of sage, and put into it an ounce of tartre or leese of red wine, and
half an ounce of the litarge of gold, and have ready a comb of lead which you
shall anoint with the said juice and so kembe your head and your bearde well
with it, and they will become incontinent black, using the said comb with
the said juice and powder, which thing has been proved. For the like effect
you shall take oil of tartre, and heat it, and when you have washed your head
and dried it again, you shall anoint your comb with the said oil, and so
kembe your head in the Sun a good while, or else anoint your self with a
sponge for to make your hears black, and do it twice or thrice a day, and in a
weke you shall have your hears as black as ever they were, and the like may
you do to your beard, and if you will have it savor swetely use at the end
some oil of Bengewine for to anoint the co^be withal, for it helps likewise
to the blacking of the hears, and is of good savor. This is an excellent
secret. For the like also, take white Honey, and distill it in a Limbeck of
glass, with a sharp fire, and keep that licour that comes of it, and wash
your head with it, and what it is dry again, anoint your self with it and the
hear will be black. Take also good Saffran, and incorporate it well with
yolks of Eggs ^osted, and a little Honny, and you shall make of it, as it
were a manner of ointment, with the which you shall anoint your head or berd
morning and evening, and continuyng so a month at the least in washing your
self often, the hears will ^^ of the color of Gold: but first anoint the
ko^be with oil of bitter Almondes, and do that while ye are in the sun, and
the hears will be bright and fair as Gold. Take also the root of succorie,
and sees it with lie, and in continuyng of it, it will make your hears white,
and dry your self in the Sun, and wash your self twice a week, and boil
also in the lie some commune lickerous, and when your hear is dry again,
parfume them with quick brimstone, and they will become of the color of
Gold. To make also hoar hears black, take black Soap, and quick lime, and
some litarge of Gold, and make thereof as it were an ointment, and rub your
hears with it, and continue so a while according as you shall see need, and
when they be become black, leave them so, and if they return to be white
again, do as before. Also for to make them Read, being hoar and white, take
three handfuls of Walnutte leaves, and a handful of the pills of
Pomegranades, and distill them in a limbeck of glass: then wash only your
white hears and not your face, for you should than make it black, and doing
thus the space of fiuetene days, it will continue a month, and you shall have
your hear Read. Take also ground worms burned, and make thereof powder,
also the leaves of a black Fig tree, and make thereof a fine powder, and
temper it with oil of almondes, and they will be Black. Now to make them
grow a pase and quickly, take a certain qua^tite of Hens eggs, and sees
them whole in water: than take out the yelkes, and fry the^ in a friyng pan
without any other thing, until there come furthe of them some humidite and
moisture: then take them of and put them in a little bag, and press them
in a press, and get out all the substance that may come out of them: then
burn an ox horn, and make thereof powder, and incorporate it with the said
licour, and put to it also goats turdes ^urned: and so anoint the ^are place
with the said composition diverse times, and the hears will grow incontinent
after.

To make white hear in the shadow: without the sun, and shall become white
and shining like silver.
TAke of the root of the greater centory three ounces with two ounces of gomme
Arabic and as much of Dragant and Alome, a pound of Venitien Soap, a pound of
Alumen fecis albae, and have ready first xxv. pound of river water, and put
into it of this root of Centorie cut with a few of his leaves which you
shall boil until the water diminishe of the third part, then let it stand
in the sun the space of fiuetene days, and boil in it all the said
things, and than it is called of the French men and Italians Blonde a la
venitiane. And in the morning when you please wash your hear well with it, and
wrappe or bind them up in a Naptkin or kerchief, and when night comes you
shall wash them ordinarily, and put into it this your lie of the herb
called vitriol, and then wipe them dry where you think good, be it in the
sun or by the fire, and do this twice or thrice a week, and your hears will
be white and shine as it were silver.

A sofee dowe or paste as it were Pomatum, to wash the hands, and when the
mouth, Nose, Lips, or Hands do chincke or chappe, and it keeps the flesh
soft and sweet.
TAke white Almondes, Alumen fecis, flower of Amilum of each of them six
ounces, white Pine apple kernels, clean seeds of Gourdes, and Be^^ne flower,
of each of them four ounces, powder of Cloves, Storax solida in powder, and
Macaleb in powder of each of them three ounces, with two ounces of white Salt
beaten, a pound of white Honnie, and as much of venise Soap, a scruple of Musk
and as much of Ciuet, the whites of ten Eggs. First take the Almondes, and
Pine apple kernels, with the seeds of Gourdes or Melons that be very white and
neat, and stamp the^ well in a mortar. And note that all the importance is
that they be all well stamped very small: then put in the Alumen fecis, and
stamp them well, than put in the Honey and incorporate it well together with
the pestle, And after this, you shall put in the soap cut in small pieces, and
incorporate them diligently, this don, put in two pound and a half of the herb
called Brionia, and temper all well. Put all this into a new pot, and leave it
so covered a day, then set it on a fire of coals with out smoke, and let it
sees the space of a quarter of an hour, and stir it always in the pot with
a wodden spone, that it cleave not to the bottom, and so take some evil
savor, then take it from the fire, and pour it out into a great earthen pan.
Then put into it the foresaid slower, and that being well incorporated, put in
the powder of Cloves, and all the other pouders together and all being well
incorporated, cover it close that it may take no aier, and let it remain so
the space of ten days. Then put into it the Macaleb, the musk and the ciuet
braid and beaten very small, and incorporate all well together with a slise,
this done put in the eggs beaten, so that they become as it were a skim or
frothe, and then put in the salt, and mix al well together, in such wise that
the whole may be well incorporated. And then the paste or dowe will be of a
Graie color, and odoriferous, and is called Imperial ointment, because it is
a thing noble and full of virtue, and a man may use always of this precious
odor which conforteth the memory, and if you use it to wash your hands and
face with, it will give a sweet savor to them, and makes the flesh delicate
and soft, white and well saudring, and closes up quickly al manner of cleftes,
chinkes or chappes of the mouth, hands and lips. And if you will not wash
your self with it, anoint yourself morning and evening, and you shall
incontinent b^ healed, for this has been many times proved by experience.

White Pomatum, fine and sweet for great lords.
TAke thirty or twenty Appiane apples, or other tender and mellowe Apples and
divide them in to four parts, and make them clean within and without. Then
take Cloves, and Sinamome, and flicke the apples full of it as they were
larded, and so lay the^ in rose water, that they may be covered over with the
said water, and put into it six Nutmegges, with two drammes of Mace, and let
them thus lie a stiepe the space of six days, and let them he well covered.
Then take Hogs grease, and take of from it the little sk^nne that is upon it,
and cut it very small, and put it to purge in fresh and clear water three or
four days and change the water twice a day, and put it the last time to
stepe in Rosewater, or some other sweet water, and by this means it shall be
well purged and purified, and shall not have but a good savor and odor, then
take three or four pound of the said grease, and put it in a pot or other
vessel that is not greasy, nor sauoreth evil, and put the apples cut in
pieces as they are into the said pot or vessel, and add thereto an ounce of the
oil of Orenges, and of the water which the French men call Eau de ^afe,
whereof we have spoken in the first part of this work, or some other sweet
and odoriferous water, so that all may be under the water, and boil them an
hour or more with a slow fire, until the Apples be well sodden, and then
break them well with a wooden slise, that they may be turned as it were
into a broth, this done pass them through a strainer, and then strain them
hot again through another finer and close strainer: and whiles it is thus
hot, put into it three ounces and a half of white wax cut very small, and two
ounces of white Sandalum made in powder very fine and mixed together until it be
all well incorporated: and when it is cold, wash it with rose water until it
be very clear, and this Pomatum will be as white as snow. And after it is
washed, you shall put to it eight grains of Musk, and four grains of
Ambergrise that be very smally ground, and so incorporate well al together,
and leave it in the aier abroad the space of five or six nights, and the
Pomatum will be parfite good and odoriferous, And if you will not have it thus
perfect, you may put less drogges to it as Musk and Amber: but here note and
understand that we have made of it diverse times, and never left of this order
aforesaid, and it has been excellent parfite and good. There is also another
sort of it which serves for every hot disease, and for to anoint the
hands, the mouth, and nose, as is before said. Take two ounces of sheep suet,
and an ounce of Goats suet, and choppe it small, and melt it, and then strain
it through a strainer, and put into it three ounces of new wax, and two ounces
of the oil of sweet Almondes: And melte all this on a slow fire, mixyng and
sturring it always: than take it of, and add to it four scruples of Camfire
broken, and mingle it still together until it be cold, and so keep it, and
anoint your self withal diligently. There is another better than this and
well allowed and proved, which is made as follows. Take new wax, the suet
of a he goat, and the marowe of an Ox, of each of them an ounce and a half,
an ounce of the oil of Saint John's wuit, and as much of oil of Roses, and
as much salt beaten very small: but cut the suet and marowe and melt them, and
strain them, this don set them upon a slow fire, so that they may not be
skant warm: and put the wax being cut in pieces, with the said oil and
salt, and mingle them well together with your slise of wood. Then take it from
the fire, and put into it six scrupules of Camfere, somewhat beaten, and mix
it always until it be cold. Then keep it in yearthen cups leaded within.
And the older it is, the better it is. Men use of it for all manner of hot
disease, for chappes or chinckes of the Nose, Mouth, Lips, or hands, and for
kibes on Childrens heels, and also for a felon or cattes hear, for in
anointinge them with this, they will go away, and also takes away the
pain, as it has been well proved many a time.

For those that have a stinking breath, because of the stomach.
TAke an ounce of Sage, and make thereof powder, three ounces of Rosemarie
sloures, half an ounce of Cloves, two drammes of fine Sinamom, two Nutmegges,
two grains of Musk, and make them all into powder: Then take as much purified
Honnie as shall be sufficient to knethe the said pouders, or to incorporate
them well together, this done, put it in a box of earth and let it remain
in the Sun four or five days, and it will be parfite. Then take of it in
the morning fasting half an ounce, and as much at night, to the intent it may
confort the meat, that it corrupt not nor putrify in the stomach, and in
using it oftentimes you shall be cured, and deliuerid from the evil smell of
the breath.

To make one have a good stomach, that has a naughty one.
TAke Abrotonum, Rue, Penniriall, fine Minte of each of them a handful, and
two pintes of white Wine, half a pound of white Honny, and boil it until it
be sodden enough, and put thereunto some powder of Sinamom and Cloves, of
each half an ounce. This done strain it, and keep it in some vessel of
glass, against you have need of it, and tak^ thereof in the morning the
height of two or three fingers in a glass, and let it be somewhat luke warm,
and it will confort your stomach, but use it not to much.

A remedy for him that can not keep his meat in his stomach, without vomiting.
TAke Quinces, and make them clean within and without, and sees them in
strong vinaigre, then stamp them in a mortar, and put into the^ a little
mustard seed beaten into poudre, and so incorporate well all together, and lay
it hot upon a linen cloth putting upon it some powder of Cloves, and lay it
upon his breast, and in doing this three or four times, he shall keep his
meat without vomiting.

To make a natural white Skin.
TAke a pound of distilled vinaigre, with as much water of Gourdes, and put
them into two violles, then put into the violl with the Vinaigre an ounce of
Litarge beaten very small, and into the violl with the water of Gourdes, an
ounce of salt Gemma, and set these two violles upon a tile nigh unto the fire,
and let them boil an hour: then pluck the tile back, and let them cool:
this done set them in the sun the space of eight days, and than keep the^
until you have need of them. And when you will use of them, take a dishe or
goblet, and put as much of the one as of the other into the said dishe or
cup, and it will become as white as milk, and so wash your face with it with
a sponge, rubbing well the flesh, and it will wax as white and as soft as
cotton, and delicate to tutche, and of marvelous effect. But if you will make
it read and shining, take a pound of white vinaigre distilled twice: for it
shall be the better, and put it into a little violle, and put into it an ounce
of read Sanders, cut and beaten, and so made into a very fine powder. This
done sees it on the fire the space of half an hour, and put into it a little
Alome beaten, for it will augment the gloss of it, and if you will have it of
a good odor or savor for any great Lord or prince, you may put to it two
grains of Musk or Ciuette, than sprinkle or weate it a little with a sponge,
and if perchance it be to read, you may put into it a little Alome, and it
will ware clear, and so you shall make a fair shining read of it, which will
make a sweet flesh or skin.

To make the flesh or skin fair and bright.
TAke a pound of white tartre, half a pound of Talcum, and as much salt, and
put al into a pot not bake or aneled, and cover it. This don bind it with
wier, and set it to calcine in a keell of lime or of brick, tha^ take it out,
and braie it small upon a marble stone. After this put it into a little bag
pointed at the end like an Ipocras bag, and hang it in a moist place that
it tutch nothing, and that to much enter not into it, and set under it some cup
of glass to receive the oil that shall come out of it the space of fiuetene
or xx. days and more or less occording as it shall be in a moist place: and
keep this oil as a treasure. And first wash your self with lie or water and
when you are dry again, weate a sponge or a linen cloth in the said oil,
and rub your skin finely with it, and you shall see that every spot will go
of, be it sun burning or any other impediment, and will make your flesh
white, soft and clear. And in continuing this you shall attain to your purpose
in few days. And if you will make an other sort of it, which men use newly
in Venise, take two long white Gourdes, and three dishes full of Fasils the
black spots or eyes at the end, as they call them: being taken away, with
the cromme of three white loves, and stepe the^ in milk one night, and then
take a dishefull of the seeds of Melons, with half a dishful of peche kernels
made clean of their skin or pille, and a pound of white Pine apple kernels,
and let all be well stamped in a mortar each one a part, and two great pigeons,
the which you shall cut in pieces a live, taking out only the bowels, and so
set all to distill together in a limbeck of glass, and use of the same water
that comes thereof and it will make your skin and flesh fair and soft, as
it has diverse times been proved.

To clear and m^ske cleene the face from all manner of spots.
TAke two pound of turpentine of Venise, and twelve new laid eggs of the
which you shall only take out the white, and distill all together in a limbeck
o^ glass twice, then put into the said water ten scruples of Camfere beaten,
and dissolve it well in water, than take an ounce of the said water, and as much
of the water of a torteise, and put all together, and wash well your face with
it diverse times and it will wax clean and clear from spots.

To take away a ringworme tetter, or spots and other marks, or else a privy
mark in the body by birth.
TAke a pound of Salnitrum, and as much tartre of white wine, and sta^pe each
of them be it self very small, and then incorporate the^ together, and sifte
them in a fine sarce so that all may be well mixte together, then put the
said powder in a pot of earth, made pointed like a Sugre lofe, and so close
and straight together, then set a hot cole upon the top of it, until it
burn and consume of it self, and it shall be the salt nitrum because that the
most^ subtle and moist parts, and the gross part which is the tartre, will
calcine of it, and will be like a cake, the which you shall break in small
pieces in a dishe, and put some warm water upon it, so that all may turn into
water, and for to make the thing neter, you shall distill the said water in a
guttur of felt, and then the water will be clear. This done you shall put the
water into a new pot, setting it upon the hot coals or ashes that it may
skant sees, until almost all the water be drunk up: Then you shall take the
powder which remains in the bottom, for it is the bontie and best of al
your work, then take a vial of Sirope, and put in to it four ounces of
distilled vinaigre, with an ounce of Aqua vite of three distillinges: This done
put into it of the said powder, incorporating it well together, and leave it
three days in the sun well stopped: and in the morning when you rise, and at
night like wise wash the spots of your body and they will go away shortly
and never grow again, and it will make your skin white and fair where you wash
it with this water. Also for the same effect, take white wine ^^es, and set it
in some corner of your house upon the pauement, and let it there dry well:
then burn it in a pot shard or fire pan, until you may make powder of it.
This done put it into a bag of the fashion of a gelley bag in some moist
place that it tutche no wall, and set underneath it a cup of glass to receive
the oil that will come out of it within xx. or xxx. days, and keep it in some
vessel of glass as a precious thing, and anoint your face therewith, and the
marks or spots will vanishe away in short space, so that your flesh and
skin shall become soft. And if you will have it odoriferous or well savoring,
put into it some Cloves. And to take away lentilles from your face, and that
quickly, take five or six ox galls, and two pound of Alome, six ounces of
fine sugre, and eight limons cut very small, distill all this in a limbeck of
glass, and put into the said water an ounce of sublime beaten into small powder
and so put it in a vessel of glass, and let it stand in the sun the space of
ten days and than it will be parfite, than may you wash the lentilles with
it, with a little fast spo^ge rubbing hard the flesh, and they will go of in
short time, and so your face shall remain white and fair. You may also take
the fire pan, and hete it hot, and lay upon it a dish full of wheat to roast,
then sta^pe it hot as it is, and strain it and so get out the licour of it,
and rub the lentilles with it and they will shortly go of.

To take away red rubies that grow in the face by reason of the heat of the
Liver.
TAke hogs suet well purified and brimstone as much of the one as of the other w^
the other water distilled of a Peche tree and fern, and incorporate all together
with a slow fire, and make thereof an ointment wherewith you shall anoint your
self diverse times, and they will go away. In the mean time abstain^ from
wine and all hot things: and to take away a ringeworme, take celydoine early
in the morning, and stamp it between two stones, and lay it upon the place,
and in using this oftentimes you shall shortly be healid.

To take of from the hands or feet the hardness of the flesh gotten by
labor.
TAke new wax, Verdegrise, and Blanc rasil, of each of them an ounce, and half
an ounce of sublime, two drammes of burned Alome, two ounces of oil of roses,
and all this being braid very small, make thereof an ointme^t with a slow fire:
This done weate the wart or hard flesh in water, or hot lie, and pare it
handsomely with a rasor, and so lay of this ointme^t upon it with a plaster,
and continuyng this same, it will go away. You shall take also the flower of
line seed, and with strong Vinaigre you shall make a past or dowe somewhat
hard, and use to lay it upon the hard flesh and it will shortly dry up. You
shall take also green wax, and spread it upon a plaster, and lay it upon
the place, being first weated with water, then cut the hard flesh as finely as
you can, and in using this, it will kill the root, so that it shall grow no
more.

Another secret to take away wartes or hard flesh that grow between men's toes.
TAke the greatest Singreene of Walls, and take of the little outward thin
skin that is upon it, and lay the said herb^ upon the wart or hard flesh
between the toes that it may lie right upon it and do this five or six times
in the morning and evening, and they will go away all though they were never
so old, weate them well and pare them as much as you can, and take of the said
herb and make juice of it, and put into it a little burned Alome, and
incorporate it together, and lay upon it a little burned Alome, and
incorporate it together, and lay little weate pieces upon the place that it
may be always fresh, and within ten or twelve days, the wart or hard flesh
will be gone so that you shall feel it no more. A man may make yet another
means, take the staulkes of Brionia or wild Gourdes, and burn them, and make
fine ashes of them. Then take the leaves of the said Brionia or wild
Gourdes, and of the leaves of Molin or Longwort, and of his flowers and stamp
them, and so get out the juice. This don, take of the said ashes, and put
as much of it into the said juice, as will make it like unto anoyntment: and
therewith anoint your wartes and hard flesh, and they will go away and never
grow again. If you take also the flowers of Molin or Longwort and distill
them in a Limbeck of glass, and weate them often with the water, and than
taking the said flowers and breaking them between two stones, and lay them
upon the place of the wartes binding them with some linen cloth, and doing it
oftentimes they will consume away.

To make letters of Gold and Silver embossed.
TAke two or three garlike heads and pille them and make them clean and
stamp them, and get out as much juice of them as you can, and put a little
inck into it until it be black, or else a little Saffran in powder without
inck, and write with the same juice great letters, or other: and let them
dry, then go over them again ones more, for to make the^ of the greatness that
you will have them, this done let it dry, and when you will-laie the Gold
upon them, heat it again with your breath and so lay it on: but the Gold
must be in leaves. Then cover the letter lightly with cotton and rubbing them
a little you shall take of all that cleaves not upon the letters. And thus
doing your work will remain of Gold and embossed, which will be a very fair
thing to see.

To make a devise or arms or other things, upon a violett or a rose.
TAke salt Ammoniac, and braie it in a mortar with vinaigre, and a little
Sugre candy, and keep it in a box, then take the rose, or Violet, or gelly
flower, and dress the little leaves fastened together with red wax, in such
wise that they may be equal. Then with a pensill very fine, make what devise
or arms you will, and let it dry an hour or more, and than lay gold or
silver upon it in foil, and press it down a little with cotton, so that
which cleaves not on, will go away and your work shall remain fair.

Soap to get out all spots of cloth.
TAke a pound of Alome and burn it, six ounces of powder of Ireos, and let
all be well beaten in powder together. Then take two pound and a half of white
soap, and half an ox gall, and the white of an Egg or two, and incorporate
them well together: Then take the Alome and the powder of Ireos, and
incorporate them all together, and put into them a little Salnitrum or salt
peter: This done put into it as much of the said incorporated Soap, as will
make it have a substance or body: to the intent that ye may facion and make
round balls in a good ferme and fast paste or dowe, and so dry them in the
shadow and not in the sun, because the sun is contrary to it. And if you
make them for to sell, make them by measure, and by weight, and when you will
take out your spot, weate ar^^e the clothe up and down: then rub it well
with the soap, and cloth against cloth: This don you shall wash it with cold
water until the water were clear: and if you think it be not out al together,
let the clothe dry, and do ones again as you did before, and the spots
will go out.

Another like secret.
TAke a pound of white Soap of Venise, the yelkes of six Eggs, and half a
sponefull of beaten Salt, and as much juice of Beetes as will suffice to
incorporate the said Soap, and make thereof a cleaving past, whereof you shall
form and make your balls, and let them dry in the shadow, and when they be
dry weate your clothe up and down with clear water, and then rub it with
soap, and wash it as is a fore declared, and the spots will go away.

Another like.
TAke a pound of white Soap cut very small, the Gall of an Ox, or he Goat
Alumen catinum, of each of them an ounce, the yelkes of two Eggs, and a few
ashes very fine, and incorporate well al together with the soap in a mortar,
and so make thereof paste, whereof you shall make balls and do as before is
said.

Another mean.
TAke the Gall of an old Ox, and a pound of Fenigreke made in powder, a
pound and a half of white soap, three flago^s of strong lie, and put al
together and sees it on a slow fire until it diminishe of the half. Then
wash what spotte you will with it refreshing it diverse times with cold water
and it will take it away.

Another means for spots, of fat or Oil.
TAke a pound of rock Alome, and as much fresh vnsleck lime, six ounces of
Alumen fecis, three pound of white Soap cut small, four pound of clear
water, and let it boil a certain space in some vessel that is not fatty, and
than strain it, and when you will occupy of it, let it be luke warm, and
weate the spots with the said water on both sides of the cloth, and the
cloth together: then wash it with clear water, and the spots will be gone,
then wash it again with a little Soap and fresh water, and at the second or
third time, they will without all peradventure go out. Also for spots you
may take two pintes of renning water, the Gall of an ox, four ounces of Alom
De fece burnt, and three ounces of Alumen fecis broiled, and two scruples of
Camfer, and put all together, and sees it, until half be diminished: Then
strain it, and wash what spots you will with it, and within twice or thrice
washing, they will go out.

To take spots out of Skarlate or Velvet, without burting the color.
TAke the herb called Lauaria, of the Apoticaries Condisi, and get out the
juice of it, and lay it upon the spot the space of two or three hours, the^
wash it well with warm water, and if you think the spot not well taken
away, do it ones more, and if the clothe be not died in grain, put to it a
little soap, with another little quantite of the said juice, and incorporate
it well, and so wash the spot with it, and it will go out.

To take spots out of white silk or Velvet in griene or Crimsen Velvet.
TAke strong Aqua vite of three stillinges, and weate the spot with it up and
down: then take the white of a new laid Egg, and spread it upon the spot,
and so set it in the sun to dry. This done wash it trimly with fresh and
clear water, and so wring well the spotte betwee^e your hands, and it will go
out, and do this twice at the lest: for the color will not perish nor decaie.
Also for a cloth in grain, take Alome water, and wash well the spotte with
it, rubbing it hard clothe against clothe, this dooen, wash it again with
clear water, and in twice doing it, it will go out. Also for the like effect,
take roche Alome, Tartre of tonnes, and white Soap, of each of them three
ounces, and make them into very fine powder: this done, take two Ox galls,
and an yearthen pot that is not in any wise fattie or greasy, and put into
it ha^dsomely at your discrecion, and so set it on the fire, and when it
begins to sees, cast in by and by the ox gall, and the powder, and let it
so boil until it be diminished of the third or fourth part. Then wash the
spot with this water three or four times and at every time dry the cloth. And
finally renew it with fresh water, and you shall see the effect.

To take out a spot of ink or wine of a woollen or linen clothe.
TAke the juice of Limons, Orenges, or citrons, and wete the spot with it
diverse times, letting it dry at every time, this done wash it with hot
water, and it will go out. Use also white Soap with white Vinaigre, and the
spot of inck will easily go out.

To restore the color to a cloth, that has lost it in taking out a spotte.
TAke a pound of Tartre of white wine, and calcine it in a fornaise of brick,
until it be white, and take an ounce of it, than take a pint of strong Vinaigre
and clear, and put the said powder into it, and so set it on the fire. And
when it begins to boil, take it by and by of, and it is made: Then weate by
little and little, the place that has los^e his color ^^ners times, and the
color will come again.

A water to take all manner of spots out of clo^^^ of any color.
TAke two old ox galls, and two scrupules of rock Alome, and as much of
Alumen fecis, four ounces of Tartre of white wine, one scruple of Camfire, and
stamp all together very small: This don take two flagons of clear water, and
put al together, and so sees it with a slow fire until it make no more froth
or skim. Then put into it three ounces of Aqua vite of three distillinges, and
so keep it in some vessel of glass until you will occupy it. And if the
spotte be in skarlate, take a corner of the same cloth, and weate it in the
said water, and rub well twice or thrice the spotte, and than wash it again
with clear water, and it will go out. The like may you do in all sorts of
colored clothe, in taking a little of the like colored clothe, or other that is
nighe unto the color weating it and rubbing as is before said, and it shall be
done.

To drive away Flies, Spiders, Scorpions, and other Vermin from your house.
TAke what quantite of Lapwinkes feathers you will, and burn^ them in your
Chamber, and when such Vermin shall smell this savor they will not abide.

Against Gnattes which stinge men in the night.
TAke Comine, and chewe it well, and anoint your hands, your face and al your
body if it be possible with ye juice that shall be in your mo^th and the fly
feeling this savor which is troublesome unto him, will not molest you at all.
And if you will drive them out of your house, and that they comme not into your
chamber, take Commine, and make thereof powder very fine, the which you shall
incorporate with good white wine, and take a burgeon of a vine, or other
branche having green leaves upon it, and steep it in the said wine, and so
sprinkle your windows and doors of your chamber, or the place where you will
not have them come in. And also sprinkle of it a long upon the walls: for in
smelling this savor they can not abide. If you will also drive away flies,
take Santonicum or Lauander cotton, and the leaves of Eldern trees, with some
Comine, and sees it with water, and sprinkle your house with it or your
chamber, and they shall not trouble you, for the savor of the water is very
contrary unto them, but beware you lay no bait for them to give them
occasion to enter in boldly, for afterward they will not greatly care for the
savor of it.

A very excellent Secret, for to take out spots or hard flesh gotten by
labor.
TAke salt peter, Blewe vitrioll and Verdegrise, of each of them two ounces,
two ounces of Alumen Sucharinum, and half an ounce of vnsleckt Lime, and let
all be made into powder, then distill it in a limbeck of Glass. True it is,
that the first water is not very good: but the second will be excellent
good to wash them withal often times, and they will dry up by l^ttle and
little, so that you shall not perceive it. You may take also some powder of
Euphorbium or Euphorbius, tempered with lie, and oil of Tartre, and
incorporate it well, and so soke the spots or hard flesh with it, and cut
it as near as you can, and laiyng this medicine upon it you shall be hole. Take
also the water that falls from the vignes after they be cut, and wash the
Wartes oftentimes with it, and they will were away leaving the skin clean
with out any black spots. You may make also powder of Cantharides, and
incorporate it with Rosen and Pitche, and make thereof a plaster which you
shall lay upon your Wartes and hard flesh, and you shall kill their root, so
that they will dry up of themselves, and will go away without any pain. Take
also glass heaten small, and wash it, and take the finest of it, and mixed it
with a little woman's milk and some leuaine of wheat, and make thereof a
plaster, first cutting the wart or hard flesh and paring of the head of the
warte, and so lay it upon it at night, and in oftentimes using this, they will
go away.

To take oil or grease out of a cloth of what color so ever it be, without
any drop of water.
TAke some sheep feet, and make them very clean: then sees them and eat
them, and keep the right bones, the which you shall burn, and make thereof a
clean and fine powder. This don heat the said powder and lay it upon the
spot, and let it remain in the sun, and when you see that the powder
begins to wax black, take it by and by of, and put other fresh upon it,
and do this so often that you see the powder no more black, and than the
spotte will be gone, and the color of the cloth not perished.

Balls of Soap for Barbers of diverse sorts and savors.
First you must note that the Soap is purged and purified two manner of ways.
The first is the venitian Soap being3 cut small must be put in a pot that is
not fatty, nor having any evil savor, and put into it some rose water or
other sweet waters, or else in this manner following: Take well water and put
into it cheuers of cipers, and sees it a good while, than strain it, and it
will be very odoriferous and sweet: or else put in the flowers of myrtle tree,
of Orange tree, Cedar tree, Spicke, Lauander, Agnus castus, Sticados, beyond
sea Violettes, Sage, and such other odoriferous flowers or herbs, as Ced^^,
Baie, our ladies glooues, Minte, Maioram, Time, and other sweet herbs, and
make of all this a composition, and so make a sweet water of diverse savors,
and so sees it a little: This done take of the soap that swimmeth above with a
Spoone, and lay it upon a new Tile, and it will incontinent be dry and shall
remain neat and clean, because the water has taken away all the filth and
vnctuosite of the soap, and therefore will be fair and white without any evil
savor, having augmented the good smell of it. And this may you keep against
you have need of it: And this is the very true purging and purifiyng of it,
mary it diminishes it of an ounce or a little more in the pound. Also another
manner is, that you must cut the soap very small or else grate it, and dry it
in the sun or in an oven, and make thereof powder passing it through a fine
sarce. This don weate it with Rose water or water of Spicke, and let it dry
in the shadow or in the wind, or else for to make it sooner, cut your soap and
stamp it, and nothing else, and put unto it some powder of Irios, Storax, and a
little Camfire, and beat it all together, and then make your Bals, and so you
may incontinent after distribute them. True it is that they be not of any
great value. But for to incorporate the odours in the soap for Barbers balls,
you must take six ounces of the said soap, and stamp it well in a mortar, and
put into it all these things following made into fine powder, for in this lies
the honor and perfection of your work. An ounce of Labdanum, four ounces of
Macaleb, an ounce of Anise, three Nutmegges, Maioram, dry Roses, Cipres powder,
of each of them half an ounce, three ounces of cloves, six ounces of Irios,
eight ounces of the flower of Amylum, with as much of Storax liquida, as will
lie upon a penny, three grains of Musk, or four at the most, six scruples
of Camfire, with a little of the finest Sugre that you can get. And let all
these things be well stamped, and incorporated with in the Soap, and you shall
make a past or dowe some what fast or ferme, of the which you shall form and
make great or small balls as you shall think best, and let them dry in the
shadow and they will be parfite. For to make also of another sort, take two
pound of the foresaid soap, and stamp it well, then put into it the juice of
Macaleb about two ounces, and for to know it, note that it is like a corn of
whete, and of the same color, but somewhat round and a little greater. And for
to get out the juice of it, stiepe it in Rose water, or other sweet water, and
let it remain in it until it swell. Then stamp it and put it in a linen
cloth, and strain it hard, and the white juice that comes out of it, is the
juice of Macaleb, and of the savor of Macaleb, and the rest that remains you
shall dry and make of it powder, the which you may also occupy because it
has the like virtue and the savor of violettes: with that you shall take two
ounces of Cloves, three ounces of Irios, an ounce and a half of Ladanum, an ounce
of Storax, and all this being made into very fine powder, let it be
incorporated into the Soap, and you shall make a past or dowe ferme and fast,
whereof you shall form and facion your balls setting them to dry in the
shadow. To make also balls of white soap, take five pound of the said soap,
and put into it four ounces of Irios, two ounces of white Sandale, three ounces
of the flower of Amylum, an ounce of Storax, and make all this into powder; and
stamp well altogether, and stiepe it a little in Rose water, or muskt water,
and you shall make of it a good past, whereof you shall form and make your balls
eue^ as you will. Also for to make the^ simple and good, take iiij. pound of
the said white soap* with v. ounces of the powder of Irios, two ounces of cloves,
iij. ounces of the powder of Macaleb, and incorporate them well together in a
mortar with the water of Trefle or of spike, and you shall make a form and
fast dowe, whereof you may make your balls, and they will be very soon dry.

To counterfeite all manner of green leaves which shall seem natural.
TAke green leaves of what sort you will, and skrape or bruise the biggest
strekes that be like ribs upon the leaf the contrary way, with a knife.
Then make this color following. Take common oil or the oil of line, or other
licours that make smoke, and burn them in a lamp, and set over them a pot
for all the smoke will stick and cleave round about it: This done gather
together the same smoke, and temper it in a dishe with a little oil or
Vernishe, and incorporate it well together. Then with the said color you
shall black the leaf on the side where you have bruised and skraped the great
ribs with a line^ clothe or cotton, and turn the leaf upon the Paper double
and with your hand or with a piece of Clothe press down somewhat lightly the
said leaf, until you be assured that it has leaft the color upon the
Paper. Then take it of handsomely, and you shall find all the print and devise
of the said leaf to be as it were natural, yea, eue^ unto the least vain
or ribbe, so that you shall think it fair, and with all the natural signs
and marks, and if you will make it green according to his nature: take
Vinaigre very strong, verdegrise, gomme arabic, bladder past, called in French
paste de vessre, and put all together and sees it, and it will be green as we
have before said, and with the said water you may make al these leaves
green, and it will be fair to see, for to make a painting frysed or rough
about your chamber, ye specially in winter time.

To make a Paper burde of beaten and stamped Paper for mouldes and hollow
things.
TAke the shearinges of white paper, and see that it be nete and clean and
specially with parcheme^t, and stiepe it in clear water the space of six or
eight days. Then put them again into a pot that is not greasy with other
clear water, and sees them the space of two hours. This done take the^ out
of the pot with as little moisture as you ca^ possible, and so stamp the^ i^ a
mortar as small as you can, for they will make your work so much the finer.
Then put them in a little bag which you shall steep in clear water, and
if you should leave them there a year, they would continue still, in changing
the water ones a weak: This done have ready mouldes of lead or earth, for
they be both good, so that they be clean with in, then you shall take this
chopped paper and in wringing it a little and casting out the water, you shall
put it on the moulde and press it down diligently having a sponge in your
hand for to press it the better above, and to drink or soke up the water.
Then set it in the Sun or in a hot house, and when they be dry, they will
come of easily of them selves from the moulde. And by this means you shall
make your picture fair and nete, and lively as is your moulde. And if the
paper be beaten small enough, they will be like plastre, and as white as paper:
and if you will paint them or give them a luster, give the^ first one cover
over with strong glut, that is to say, of that that painters occupy in their
work, and when it is dry, lay such colors upon it as you shall see to be
most meetest, and it will be a goodly thing to see them with some
liniamentes of Gold, as friar Cherubin did.

To give a fair gloss unto Pictures or figures painted.
TAke a pound of white and fat rosen, with two ounces of Plomme tree gomme,
two ounces of Turpentine of Venise, two ounces of oil of line. And take first
the Rosen, and melt it, and strain it hot as it is, and steep the gomme in
Common oil until it be molten: then strain it, and put the oil and the
Turpentine together in a little pot of earth that is not greasy, and set it on
a slow fire: and mingle it always in the pot until it be all well
incorporated together, and take it from the fire and keep it, and when you
will occupy it, let your pictures or Images be nete and clean, and let this
vernishe be some what hot, and so lay it upon your said pictures even as
men do other Vernishe, and it will be a very fair piece of work and have a
good gloss. And for to make another Vernish which shall be incontinent dry
after you have laid it on: take Frankensens of the male-kinde called Olibanum,
and writing vernishe, that is to say, Sandracha, which is Genuper gomme,
according to your discretion, and make thereof a powder the finest that you can,
and incorporate it together. Then take Turpentine of venise, and put it in a
little pot that is not fatty, and melt it, then put it into the said pouders
by little and little incorporating them well together, but let it not be to
soft, and so strain it hot through a strainer. And when you will occupy of
it let it be hot, and spread it abroad thinly, and your work shall be very
shining, and will be dry incontinent. Also for to make a licour which men
use for to vernish upon pictures, take oil of line, and distill it in a
limbeck of glass. The^ take three ounces of vernish of Amber that is fair, and
an ounce of the said oil, and incorporate it well together upon a slow fire,
and when you will occupy it, let it be hot as vernish is, and you shall have
a good success and issue of your work as well in wood as in linen clothe, and
other work, doing it handsomely.

To make another manner of green water clear.
TAke the little Apples of Nerpru^ when they be ripe and black, and break
them, and put them in a pot that is not fatty, and put to them a littell Alome
beaten, and set it in a hot place the space of six or eight days, and it
will boil and work as wine does in the fat. This done strain it into a
cannals under a press, and so get out the substance of it, and put into it a
little Almaine blewe: and it will make you a fair green, and if it seem unto
you to dark, you may put to it a little Alome, and so put the said
composition in a bladder, and dry it in the shadow, and you shall have a very
fair paste or dowe, not so ferme or fast as that whereof we have spoken before*
but yet both be good.

To take out a devise made in a mould, with black Soap.
TAke a pound of black washinge Soap, with strong lie, and sees it until it
be diminished of two thirdendeales, and keep it so, but when you will draw
out the devise from the natural, and that you have not leiser to do it, do
thus. Take of the said Soap soden, and Soap over your Paper handsomely, then
lay it upon the devise or picture that you will draw out, and press it
softly with your hand, and hold it fast, and the moulde will take all the
devise: so that you may draw it at your pleasure and ease in another manner:
or else make a case of wood, and past a piece of Paper upon it: then bind the
devise unto it laiyng the mould upon the Paper, and holding it in the air you
shall see all the devise, and do what you will with it, and so shall you come
to the end of your purpose. But if you will make the Paper shine for to draw
out the left thing that is, take very fine Paper, and anoint it with the oil
of line, and rub it well, doing so diverse times, and the oil will go of,
and so let it dry in the shadow: for a man may write upon it with inck and
with other colors.

To make cleave the hears, and to dry up the sweat under the arm holes.
TAke litarge of gold made into powder very fine, and when you have sweat in
somer time, or at any time else, take a little of the said powder between your
fingars, and rub your arm holes, breast, and other parts with it, and
specially where you have sweat, or where you smell an evil savor, for
incontinent after by the virtue of this powder, all the sweat will dry up,
and in short time will make cleave the hear which is knotted with the
sweat, and will keep it nete and clean, so that it shall no more savor
iuell but well, and in using often this powder, causes that you shall not sweat
so much in that place, neither does it hurt you, nor staineth neither your
flesh nor short. This secreate is very excellent and guesen.

To make Roses, Flowers, Gillefloures, and of all other sorts, white, read,
green, yellowe, and incarnate in short space.
TAke fat earth or claie as much as you will, and dry it so well in the
Sun that you may make a fine powder of i^. Then put it into the vessel
wherein you will plant your Violettes, Roses, or white natural flowers, for to
make them grow of an other color. Then plant in the said powder those that
you will have not suffering the^ to feel any other moisture than this that
follows. If you will have them read, take water, and sees in it some
Brasile cut very small, and let it sees until it be diminished of the
third or fourth part, and water by little and little morning and evening the
earth with this red water being cold, and give it no other water then this,
until you think it has taken effect and wrought as you would have it. And if
you will make them Green, take litt^^ Apples of Nerprum when they be through
ripe, and if you will have them Yelowe take them when they be not ripe, and
break the^ a little, and sees them in water, and the first will be Green,
and the other that be not ripe will be Yellow. And with the said water, water
your earth, and the flower will grow of the same color, and water it until
the plant or root be thorouly watered, which will be, in continuyng it the
space of xv. or xx. days. And if you will make them black, you shall make the
water with gall and vitrioll, as men do make incke, and if you do water the
earth with it as you do the other, the white flower will grow black, but
leave it not abroad in the night time, for fear of the dew. True it is that
all the whole flower will not be of that color: but partly, so that it will
take part of two colors. If you will make them of three colors, water them
in the morning with one color on one side, and at night with the same color
on the other side: then in the morning on one side with another color, and at
night with the same color on the other side, so that it be watered in the
morning and evening with two manner of colors, in changing the sides: for there
as you have watered in the morninge with one color put nothing at night but on
the other side, and in doing thus you shall have your flower of three colors,
and of this plant you may make as many as you will, for this has been proved.

To make trees of all sorts to grow which shall bring furthe fruit; far
greatter then commonly they do.
TAke the half of a plate of iron that is old and rustie, and specially
thin: for if it were thick, you could do no good with it, and trim the said
iron plate after the manner of a cornet, and weate it within with brine, to the
intent it may soon rust, and let it have a little hole on the pointed side.
This done put into it your seed or kernel that you will set, be it Peche,
Apple, Pere, Plumme, or other fruit, and lay them all with the young spring
turned toward the point of the cornet. Then put to his bottom made of the same
plate of iron, and let it be well closed and sodred without and within, so that
it may have no aier but at the side of the point where by you shall water and
sprinkle it with brine: And so plant it in the ground the point upward in the
month of September or Octobre, to the intent that the ground may rott the
cornet: for when the seeds or kernels so enclosed in do feel the moisture,
and be swollen enough, they begin to cast out the young springes and the root,
and wreeth and turn somuche a boyt the said plate of iron that they perce it
through underneath, because that the roots are sharp pointed and hard, and
turn so much about, that with the help of the earth which rotteth the iron,
they make little holes, and so enlarge the^ selves by little and little, and
the buddes or springes turn also and takes the savor of this brine and
color of the iron, and when the said spring or budde will come forth, it is
by force, and so they come all out at one time, and wax great incomming out,
and cleave fast and join all together: so that all they make but one plant,
and grow great meruelously, which will be fair to see.

To soften and mollify Olives with lie, in less then eight hours.
TAke green Olives and lately gathered, and that they be not bruised in any
wise, because tha^ they will perish shortly after, and will not continue above
eight or ten days, but the so^ter you put them in the lie, the better they
will be in fast and savor, and the softer also. Wherefore do it quickly and
make the lie out of hand. And for to make a bushel of it, take a bushel of
the ashes of Oak very strong, and the third part of a bushel of fresh
vnsleckt lime, and incorporate them both well together, sprinkling it with a
little fresh water, so that there may rise no dust of the ashes or lime, and
that it be well closed together and be hot and chafed the space of two hours.
This done put it into some vessel of earth or wood that has a hole
underneath, and stir it as much as you may. Then cast upon it three or
four pailes full of hot water, and let it drop out by little and little,
and when you have got out of it about two pailes full, you shall cast upon it
two other pailes full of cold water. And so use the matter that you may have
two pailes full of the said lie, and so put your Olives into it, and leave
them in it until you see that they go to the bottom, where you shall prove
them after this manner. Take one of them, and break him with your Teeth, and if
you see that he come from the kernel, and that he be somewhat yellow. Then
take them by and by out of the water, and put them into fresh water, and
change it three or four times one after another, and straight way pille
them, and take them out of one water to put them in another, and leave them
not uncovered with water, because then they will be soon black, and lose the
fair color that gives them so goodly a show beside the good savor that
they have, which seems a thing almost against nature, to see an Olive with
the leaf to be of the same color that it was upon the tree. Leave them in
fresh water three or four days changing the water twice a day, and if you
change it four or five times in the day, they will be soft and sweet in two
days, and you may eat of them with Salt and Vinaigre, and after you have
made the brine and is cold, put them into it, and within two days you may
eat of them, for they will be good. But note, that if the Olive have tutched no
water, it will have always a tender skin, and will be soft to eat, but if it
have tutched the water, it must be stieped the more, and would never be so
delicate to eat, because he would have the rine tough and hard, although it
be fair and green. You may also dress them another may, take them dry,
and that they have tutched no water, and stiepe them in brine the space of a
month then change them into another kewe brine, the space of fiueten or
twenty days: then make unto them a third brine good and strong, and they
will be soft: but of this men use not.

To make a water that will die or color althinges be it bone or wood.
TAke strong white Vinaigre, and put it into a vessel of Glass, and put into
it of the filing of Copper, with some blewe vitrioll, rock Alom, and
Verdegrise, and leave it seven days in infusion: then boil it in some
vessel, and boil what thing you will in it, as wood or bone, and it shall
take what color you will^ But note that in stead of Verdegrise you may put
in what color you will, that is to say, read, yellowe, or other, with a
little rock Alome.

A water to make Teeth white.
TAke a pound of common Salt, eight ounces of rock Alome, half an ounce of
salt peter. And all this being made into a fine powder with a ha^dfull of sage,
and as much of Lentiscus cut very small and half a dishfull of black Berries,
and so distill all this in a limbeck of glass, and when the water is come out,
change the recipient, and set under another giving it a sharper fire, and the
finer part of it will come out. And if you think good to mingle it, at your
discretion be it, but it shall be the stronger. Then keppe it in some vessel of
thick glass, and welstopt: and when you will make your teeth while, make them
first clean from meat or other things that may stick in them, and
specially the white filthe that is about them, with a point of a knife. Then
you shall have a tooth piko^ of the wood called Lentisc^s, or of some other
little stick, and weate i^ in the said water, and so rub your Teeth with
it, and they will incontinent be as white as Iuorie, and will continue so a
long time without hurting them at all, but rather will make you have good
gommes, and fasten the teeth in the said gommes. If you will also make another
sort for to make clean your teeth, take the sharp husk of a chestnut when
it is ripe, and dry it, and make thereof a powder then take as much more of the
seed of nettles made also into a fine powder, and incorporate them well
together. And when you will make your teeth clean, rub them with the said
powder, and that will set such a beat in the gommes, that skant you shall be
able to shut your mouth, by reason of so great abondance of water that will
come out of your mouth, but it will do you n^ hurt: for in taking a little
Rose water into your mouth, and a little Sugre candy, and so refreshing it
there with, the pain will pass away incontinent.

The true secret and manner how to ma^^ beyond sea Azure, or else for all
tutches or paragon. Also for to make strong paste, for to incorporate the Azure
stone in it called Lapis lasuli, and to take it out again in his time, and
when you think good.
Have first some clear and nete Turpentine four ounces with six ounces of
fair Rosine, and as much of fair Pix greca, three ounces of fair Mastick, and
as much of clear new ware, an ounce and a half of Line seed purified, or an
ounce of oil of bitter Almondes. But you shall take first a new pot of earth
well leaded, and wette, and put into it the Turpentine upon a fire of embers
somewhat slow, until it be molten, sturring it always with a wooden spoone
made after the facion of an Apoticaries slise, and when it is well molten,
put into it by little and little the Rosine cut as small as is possible: then
put into it by the same means the Pix greca, and the mastick beaten and
stamped three or four times: and then the wax being cut very small, mingle it
well with the said slise or spoone until all be well incorporated together,
and above all things see that there be but a little fire, for otherwise it
would burn, and the fire would take it because they be all hot things, and
ready and apt to be kindlid. This done put the oil into it: true it is that
the oil of line seed, is much better tha^ the oil of Almondes, not
withstanding you may put in of that which is most comodious, and let your pot
so stand on the fire, that the said composition may wawme and bubble a little
the space of a quarter of an hour, or more if need be: and when the said
past is sodden, you shall know it by this experience. Take a spoone of wood
and stir it well about with it, then take it out, and make two or three
drops of it into a dishe of fresh water, and if the drop ren a broad in
the water, it is a sign that it is not sodden inoughe, and therefore sees it
more until the drop keep together in the water. Also you may prove it this
way, weate your fingars in the water, and wring the said drop, and if it
stretche out a long in drawing it out, and vnlouse it self, tha^ it is a sign
that it is sodde^ enough, and than take it from the fire, and empty it so hot
as it is, into a bag sharp pointed at the bottom like a gelley bag being
first weate in hot water, and let the past drop into a basin being set in
a paile full of fresh water, and do it diligently and circumspectly to the
intent that all may come out, and wringe the bag between two sticks, and it
will the sooner come out. And when it is cold again, take it out of the water,
and toss it up and down between your hands, until you be sure there is no
more water in it. And if by reason of the heat it did cleave to your hands,
anoint your hands with oil of line seed, well purified as we will declare
after in the chapter of purified oil. After that you have well rubbed it
between your hands, and well cleansed from the water, than keep it always in
fresh water, and note, that if it be in somer you must change the water every
day, or every two days ones. And in thus doing it will keep viij. year,
being always good and strong.

To make the second paste, softer for beyond sea Azure.
TAke four ounces of fair Turpentine, six ounces of fair Rosin, six ounces of
clear Pix greca, an ounce of fair Wax, three quarters of oil of line seed,
and sees it like as the other was in the chapter before: true it is, that it
is sooner sodden, because it is softer, that is to say, it will make you sooner
Azure than the first, which is much stronger, but if you would labor for
Azure with both these pastes, let the softer be always the first, and if
the stone be not of perfitest having vein of Gold, give it never both the
pastes: But note, that in these two pastes consists the true art to know
well the parfite beyond sea Azure, for therein lies the gain and the loss,
and therefore do it diligently and wisely.

To purify the oil of line seed for the Azure.
TAke what quantite of oil of line seed you shall think good, so that it be
fair and clear of a yellowe color like Gold, and put it in a horn of
Glass, or in an Ox horn that has a hole in the bottom, and put upon it
some fresh water, and stir it well with a stick, than ^ette it stand still
a little while, and open the hole underneath, and let out the water, doing so
seven or eight times, or until the water come out as clear as when you did
put it in: and in this manner men purify the said oil, then keep it in some
vessel of Glass, against you have need of it. And if paraduenture you can
not get of of the said Oil, take the oil of bitter Almondes, for you may
use and occupy it without and more purifiyng: true it is that it costeth more,
and yet is not so good as the other, but for a shifte. And note well that when
you hear speak of oil, it is of this purified oil.

Lie for to wash beyond sea Azure.
TAke eight or ten handfuls of the ashes of vines well sifted, and put it into
some vessel that holds at the least a paile full and a half of water and
thath has a hole in the bottom, and so order it that the water may re^ne
out, and that the ashes keep in, and stop the hole without side. Then put in
the said ashes and press it down as much as is possible, this done power upon
a paile full of hot water by little and little, and open it not underneath
until the water begone to the bottom: And than let it out as fast as it will,
and keep this first water in a vessel of glass, and distill it through a
felt, that is to a band of old white cloth, then distill it again with a
piece of felt, or white cloth, and than it will be nete, clean and purified,
and keep it well from dust in some vessel lead within. Then put another
pailefull of hot water in to it, and let it out as before you did the other,
and keep always of these two sorts against you have need. This done do it
the third time in the like manner, and put each of these waters or lie by them
selves, the first is strong, the second weaker, the third is weakest of all and
sweet, of the which lies men do use for to wash the fore said paste with
all when the Azure will not come out, as you have learned before. Now when you
will occupy of this lie, take of all three sorts as much as you shall think
good. A man may make yet another manner of lie, to wash the paste with, and to
purge it from his vnctuosite and fatnes. Take as much calcined Tartre as you
will, and boil it in clean water the space of a quarter of an hour or more,
then let it go down to the bottom and keep it so clear: for you may
occupy it when the past is unctuous or fatty, and also for to wash the
beyond sea azure, for as much as it augme^teth lighteneth the color of it. It
is also good for to heal the skabbe, skurfe, and lasarie, if a man use to
wash him self with it, and makes all the body clean and white.

How the Vessel ought to be, wherein all the waters are put that the azure is
washed with.
THe vessel must be of earth bake and anelled, and well leaded, and polished
in the bottom, and if it be not of earth, it may be of Copper or Laton well
polished at the bottom, and let it have three pipes or conduites, one in the
middle, another somewhat lower, and the third within two fingars of the
bottom. And if you think that it is not yet azure, let it stand eight or
ten days until it be well settled, and you shall see at the bottom a
little azure. Then wash it with fresh water as you did the other, and so put
it with the other, or else keep it a part, for it is fair and good.

The first part how to know the virtues, good(...) and signs of Lapis
lasuli, and to make true ^^yonde sea Azure most perfectly and expertly.
W^ate first the said stone with spettle or water, and set a piece of white
cloth before it, and you shall see it give in it a fair luster of a Violet
color, which shall comfort your ^ight. And if you will make the proof to
know if it be fine, take a little of it, and lay it upon hot embers and make
it flame, the^ take it out, and if you see that it is not altered, it is a
sign that it is good, and if it change not at all, it is of the finest,
because it fears not the fire, but rather augme^teth his true and parfite
color. If you will make another proof, lay it upon a fire pan, or upon
some other iron, and so heat it on a flambe and then quench it with white
vinaigre very strong, and take it of, and if you see that it has not lost nor
changed the color, it is of the best, and if it take color again it is of
the finest and most parfite. And if a man could get of this second, which
increases his color, he might sell it for three or four crounes the ounce,
but very little of it is to be had that will keep his natural color, but will
change some thing in the triyng. And you must note, that in making these trials
with fire, if the stone do not keep wholly his natural b^ate, the azure shall
not be of the fairest, but of the mean sort. To know when it is powder,
whether it be good or no, take a Goldsmithes melting pot, and put a little of
it, into the said pot at your discretion, and set it on the fire and let it
flame and heat, and then let it cool again. And if it be not good it will
melte like glass, but if it be good it will remain vnmolte^ in his own
substance and essence, and although it be in powder, it will yet be good, and
if incace it were but half good, and half badde, the badde will melte, and
become like a cake, and the stone will remain in his state and color still.
And this fraud and deceit is commonly wrought of them that sell it, and
therefore let every manne beware of it. And of all the three sorts of Azure,
you shall get out for every pound of stone, I mean of that which endures ye
cimentes above said, about a five ounces and a half of Azure, and the first
which shall be the finest will be sold for xij. or xiij. du^ates an ounce, the
second for iij. or iiij. crowns, and the third a crown. Than shall you take
out the last which is called cinders which is of no great value, and yet
nevertheless it will bear the cost and charge of your past, and by this means
you may give judgment of the gain and profits of your work. But if it were
of those stones which in triyng of them do decrease and lose their color, a man can not make so much no^ so fine: but if you will take pain for to fine
them the more, you must give them the past, as it shall be declared afterward.
True it is that it diminishes much in weight. But that is good, true, and
parfite, which is full of veins of Gold, and shining: and that is it that
sustaineth and abides lively all cimentes of fire, of Vinaigre and also all
other trial.

The manner how to prepare the stone Lapis lasuli, and to calcine it when you
will grind it.
TAke the said stone, that is to say, that which has the veins of Gold, and
which has been in cimentes and fore said profes, and break him into pieces
as big as Hasel nuttes, and wash them in hot water, then put them into
a Goldsmithes melting pot and set it on the embers, and make them read hot
and flaming, then take them out one after another, and quench them in white
Vinaigre distilled through a felt three or four times, or else que^che them in
the urine or piss of a young child that is in health: And then distilled in the
manner aforesaid: but note that Vinaigre is better, and make this calcination
six or seven times, for in stamping it, it will break the better, and be the
easier to grind: whereas if it were not well calcined a man could skant
stamp it, because it casts it self within the Copper. But the other which
can not endure the fire, and remains not in his proper color being put in
cimentes, ye needs not so calcine thus, because it would lose all the means of
his virtue and color, and so should you lose both your labor and your time.

To get out the Gold of Lapis lasuli, after it is ground.
TAke of the said stone prepared, and broken in a mortar of Copper, and braie
it very small upon a Porphire, and let there not be less then a pound of it:
and put an ounce of purified Mercury in the said powder, and put this powder
in a linen cloth and wring or strain it hard, and the silver will leap out
bringing the Gold with it. This done put the said matter into a Golsmithes
melting pot, and set it on the fire, and the Mercury will fly out and turn
into smoke, and the Gold will remain at the bottom of the pot, and make of
this little quantite of Gold, what you will, for it is fine in all parfection:
but truly there is no great gain or profit to get out the Gold after this
sort: but nevertheless I thought it good to give you the knowledge of it,
because the way and mean is easy enough. Yet I will tell you that this Gold
which is within the said stone, What beyond sea Azure is.
is the very true beyond sea Azure: For it augmenteth his gloss or luster, and
the trimnesse, and in painting it is very soft under the Pensill, and
spreads abroad very softely. For to stamp the stone afterward being
calcined or not calcined, take it and stamp it in a mortar of Copper covered,
then pass it through a sieve very fine, and cover it over: for this is the
finesse, beauty, and goodness of it.

The manner how to make the licour wherewith men braie the Lapis lasuli, for
to make beyond sea Azure of.
TAke three or four glasses full of well water, and distill it through a felt
that there may not be, not past three glasses full of it in all, and put it in a
little new pot, and put as much as an Egg of raw Honny to it, so that the
water may be as it were yellowe, and let it sees so much until there
^ise no more skomme or frothe: for than it is sodden, and you may take it
from the fire and keep it in a Violle. This done, take fine Dragons blood
as much as a Nutmegge, and braie it upon a Porphire stone, with a little of the
said honnied water, and keep it in another violl or glass, and add unto it
as much of the said water that it come of a Violet color, and that is the
licour that men use, but keep it well from dust. But if the stone, out of
the which you will get your Azure have a violet color lively and parfite, put
to it the said licour that it may make a Pecockes color, that it be not of to
hie a color, and that it be rather clear then read. And if the stone have to
much color, let your licour be of a dark and clear color, and if the said
stone have a clear color, let your licour be of more high color. But note
that you must apply al these sorts of colors to your fantasy and mind, in
adding to the matter or substance little or enough according as you shall see
the colors. Take also of that Dragons blood which the Goldsmithes do use:
true it is that commonly they use that which they call Lachrima: but take of
that that is in powder. There be some that grind and braie it with two parts
of the foresaid lie, and one part of Draga^t: other make it with Bdellium,
tempered with a little water, and then it is good.

The manner how to braie or grind the Lapis lasuli upon a porphire stone, and
the signs of the same.
TAke of the said powder beaten and sifted, and begin to braie or grind it,
sprinkling it by little and little with the same licour, and that it be well
closed, and kept together as straight as possible for being at large you
should lose much of it, and being close it will braie the better. Now, you
must braie and grind a pound of the said stone, at twice or thrice, and no
less, and you may not be less than ij. hours about it at every time, if you
will have your money out of it, and so sprinkle it round about with the said
licour to the intent it may not cleave to the stone in grinding it. And note,
that you may bestow a hole glass full of the said licour about one pound of
the stone. And when you have ground one part of it take it away, and grind
the rest in the same place if it be possible, and take heed that you put none
other water to it than the said licour. And if you will know when it is ground
enough, put a little of it between your teeth before, and if you feel it
crack as it were powder, than it is well ground. But in the mean time beware
also that it be not ground so small that it lose his color, but let it be
indifferently well ground. And to dry the said stone after all is ground,
lay it upon a cleene stone, and dry it in the shadow out of the sun for
the sun is hurtful unto it. And when you think that it is dry, tutche it
with your fingars, and if it turn into powder like earth or dry claie you
must take it away, and in not taking it away, it would not hurt it. But if it
be dry and turn easily into powder: than take it away, and so it is a sign
that the powder is fatty with Honny, and therefore must you purge and purify
it, to the intent it may come in due time out of the paste. And to wash
afterward this said Azure, take a Barbers basen or a little basen of earth,
made for the purpose, which must be well polished with in every where and in
the bottom, and so put the Azure into it, than put into it some sweet lie
which we have spoken of before, and let it be above it about the height of
four fingars, and wash it well with your hand, and than let it sink down
to the bottom until it be well settled: than pour out fair and softly the
said water into the vessel before mentioned, and let it dry a little in
the shadow in the said Basen. This done take it out circumspectly and
diligently, and spread it abroad upon the Porphire stone, and let it so dry
thoroughly: Then put it among the paste for to incorporate it in this manner
following.

To incorporate Lapis lasuli in the strong past, or other soft, after that it
is ground.
TAke a pound of Lapis lasuli when it is ground, and ordered as is aforesaid,
and take also a pound of the strong past which is the first, and wash it well
with your hands on the out side, than cut it in small pieces, and put them into
a little pot well leaded within and so stiepe it, then set it upon the hot
embers, and ye shall melt the said past: but take good heed that it fry not,
and if paradue^ture it should fry, put into it a drop of the fore said oil,
and by and by it will leave friyng. And wha^ the past is well molte^ take the
little stick or sklise that you did occupy when you made the past, and anoint
it with the said oil, and when the past is turned mix it well, and in the
mean time another shall put in by little and little the foresaid powder
prepared, as men do oil upon salades and never leave turning of it so long as
there is any, but yet a little at ones, and with the sklise incorporate it
together a long time until you se that the powder be well mixed with all, that
nothing may be seen out of ye past, but al well fastened and perced in. And
wha^ you see this, by and by take the pot so boiling, and pour it into a basen
of cold water, and eue^ forth with make the said pot as clean as you can with
the sklise, that there remain nothing in it, and when the said past is cold
so that you may handle it with your hand, anoint your hands with the fore
said oil, and if you see that the past is well died and colored it is a good
sign, and with your hands so anointed toss the past up and down the space of
an hour and a half, drawing it out always in length and overthwart again, to
thinte^t that if it had made any hollow bladders within it might be all the
better brought into one massiue body or substance. And note, the more you
remove it up and down in your hands, so much the more shall you get out of it
in washing it. This done make it into the form of a long or round lofe, as you
shall think good, than put this past into a bacin well pollished, and clean
with clean and fresh water that is clear enough, and let it so soke ye space
of x. or xv. days or more for the more it soketh the fairer shall it be and
the parfiter, and will easeliar and sooner come out of the paste.

To get beyond sea Azure out of the paste.
TAke the past prepared, and wash it handsomely and well without with your
hands in the said cold water, than put it into a basen, the botome whereof
you must anoint with the before said oil, and that the said base be at the
bottom very fine and well leaded: this don, pour upon it some luke warm water
that is skant warm, and let it be two fingars above ye past, and if the said
water were distilled through a felt, it would be much better, and for to be
assured, you shall way the past after it is washed, to the intent you may know
what to do, and how much you ought to take out of it, in considering with your
judgment the oil that may paradue^ture be entered in in ha^dling it, and so
leave it in the said water luke warm the space of a quarter of an hour if it
be in summer, but if it be in winter, less. Then remember to empty out al
these waters into the foresaid vessel, having three gutters or pipes, and when
you void out the first water, put in other luke warm water, to the intent
that the past may be the softer, and so by little and little the good will come
out. For if you would have it out al at ones, you should do your things evil.
Remove and stir fair and softly the paste with the foresaid stick or sklise.
And if in case the past should cleave to the bottom, anoint your hands, and
turn it handsomely and so often until the water begin to wax blew, and when
you see the water colo^ed and died, empty it out upon the other, holding and
sustaining up the past with the little sticks or sklises, to the intent that it
cleave no more to the botom of the basin, and know, that very little of the
first Azure that comes out will stain and color a great deal of water. And
when ye past is in the way to render and give out the Azure, it will cast out as
it were certain blew beams of ye sun. And tha^ you shall empty out ye said
water upon the other, and wha^ you empty ye water that is in the basen, strain
it through a strainer for to save certain little pieces of past, if in case
there should come any among the Azure, and so will it come the cleaner and
purer. This done put from hand to hand some luke warm water upon the past and
turn pre^ily the said past with your fore said sticks, leisourly and
handsomely, specially at this beginning for fear lest the paste should lose
and undo it self and so render and give out all the Azure at ones: which
thing would be to no purpose, neither could you afterward sort it, or order it.
After you have thus turned it four or five times, take up together your past,
and you shall see how much there is come out, for of the first there should
come forth four or five ounces and a half, and that is to be understand if the
Lapis lasuli, be of the finest, and there should no less come out. And because
it is the first, set it a part by it self: for it is the true beyond sea
Azure. By this same manner and way continue to get out the self like azure
which shall be the second, and set it also a part, and you shall get out of it
three or four ounces. Keep this same order and mean in getting out the third
with this same water always luke warm, and that the cold water be skant out,
and stir it with your foresaid sticks. After, it shall be at your
discretion to get out the fourth which is called Cenders or Cinerarius of the
color of ashes, and if you will have it out, the water must be somewhat
hoter, and than it will be of greye or ash color. And herein you must wring
and press hard the paste with the sticks, and if it will not come out with the
water, give it a little of the fore said lie: This done put all the Azures
severally ^y themselves for the one will mar another else, and specially the
last. And here you must understand that before all these Azures be gotten out
you must bestow about it eight hours, and before they will strike to the
bottom, it will be no less than ten or twelve hours, for therein lies your
gain, and so empty the water diligently. And if in giving it the lukewarm
water, the Azures will not come out but in a small quantite, give it two
parts of water and one part of sweet lie, and if yet it come never the more
give it a greater quantite of lie: And yet if therefore it will not come out,
give it cold lie, but if not withstanding all this it will not come out as you
would have it, take a pot, and put into it some ashes of vines, and clear
fresh water, and sees it the eight part of an hour: then pore it out and
let it stand to clear it self, but let it be somewhat sharp in taste upon the
tongue. And shall you make for the last remedy, specially for to get out the
last Azure. You may also take of it hot for to wash the paste with, and than
cast it away for it is no more worth any thing, and note, that in getting out
these Azures consists either your loss or your gain. Now the sticks or
instrumetes of wood that men use in the paste must be of bore or other fine
wood, and about the breadth of two hands or more, and a fingar thick or a
little more, and greater at the upper end and flat like a Amande.

Of what color the Azures are when they come out of the paste, and what sign
or token they show.
THe manifest sign and token of the first Azure when it comes out, is, that
it seems somewhat courser and thicker tha^ the other, which is because of the
veins of Gold that are in the said stone. The second shall be finer and
thinner but you shall not see so good a color in it. The third shall seem
unto you more fine and thin, but it shall be paler of color, and cleerer and
open, and that is to be understand when the Lapis lasuli is good and parfite.
The price of the colors has been before spoken of. The stone costeth
ordinarily six or eight crounes the pound, according to the places. And if
the stone be good and fine (as it ought to be) a man shall get out of it at
the least all compted ten ounces and a half, and the stone be not so fine, you
shall get out at the least eight ounces. Yet nevertheless y^ slone may be so
evil that ye shall gain nothing at al, but rather be a great loser.

The manner how to wash, and purify the Azures as soon as they are gotten out
of the paste.
When you have gotten them out of the paste, and have taken out the water, put
upon the^ some sweet lie that is clear, and wash the^ handsomely with your
hands. And so shall you do to every sort of the Azures, each one by him self,
and empty out each of the waters a part, and let the said waters settle before
you put them into their basens, and wash the^ so often until they be cleansed
from al manner of grease or fat of the past. Than rense them three or four
times with fresh and cold water to the intent they may be the more purified
and made clean.

To purify parfitely the Azures with the yelkes of Hens eggs.
TAke the yelkes of five or six eggs of hens that have been nurrissed and
fed with corn, and not with grass, and perce the yelke with some sharp
pointed thing, and sprinkle it here and there, as men do oil upon salades,
upon the Azures a little upon each sort, and do so in every basen, and
incorporate well together with your hand the egg with the Azure, than wash
it again with strong sweet lie, and wash it so long until you see it come
out as clear as you did put it in: tha^ rinse it three or four times with
fresh water, and this is the true washing and the parfite purifiyng which
gives a gloss unto al azures, and this secret do all the excellent masters
use, and above all things let the water always settle before you empty it out
into the other basins, for you should diminish to much the great mass of
Azure. There is yet another goodly secret for to give a gloss unto the said
azures, which is unknown to many men, and that is when the Azure is well washed
and purified, as is before mentioned. Take the gall of a bull, and break it
upon the Azures, as you did the yelke of the Egg according as the Azure is,
upon every sort. Then rub them we^l with your hand and wash them as before.
And note, that all these manners of purifiynges are made one after another, when
the Azures be out of the paste* and you shall make all the said purifiynges
diligently handsomely and leysourly in the basen. And this is a very excellent
secret.

The manner how to strain the Azures, after they be purified, made clean and
washed.
IT is necessary to strain beyond sea Azure, and other also, if happily there
be any grease or filt or any pieces of the past remaining in it: for these
Azures must be marvelous well ordered and trimmed, as we have here before
mentioned. And therefore you shall do thus. The last water that you shall give
them after they be purified, you shall pass it through a sarse or sieve: then
through another that is finer, and the last time through a strainour, and when
you will make this washinges, always let the water stand until it be clear,
or else you shall take up the water by little and little with a sponge, but take
heed that the Azure enter not into the sponge, After that you have taken all the waters thus up, let the Azures be in their basins, and let them dry in the
shadow and not in the sun, for it is not good for it. And specially keep all
your work from dust and al other immundicites and filth: and when they be dry
take them up diligently each one by him self, and so put them in bags of
leather in the smoothest side, and when it is bosid up rub it well with your
hands, for it is made fine by that means. And ye longer it remains made,
the better color it gets when you hold it in the aier, and if you will fine
again your azures for to make the^ of a greater price and vain, you must put
them ones again to incorporate into the strong past, following the manner and
order before declarid, and let them remain so three days: then take them out
in like sort as we have showed you before: And the oftener you do thus, the
finer it will wax. It is true that it will diminishe always in the weight:
but yet for to put it in work, one ounce will go as far as three ounces of the
other, and therefore you must be diligent in all things, and specially in the
washinges, least you should lose your labor. And also be ware and vigilant to
know the stone, to make your cimentes, and to compound your pastes.

To make black Soap for clothes, with all the signs and tokens that it gives
and makes in beiling.
TAke thirty pound of vnsleckt white lime, if you can get it, and that is in
great hole pieces and not in powder, and four skore and ten pound of the
strongest ashes you can find. Then order and dress the ashes round about the
lime, in form and manner of Mortar, and sprinkle with a broom weate in water
the small pieces of lime a little at ones and often, to the intent that the fire
may enter into it, and when it is well mollified and augmented by reason of
the heat which is in it, let there be two of you, the one to incorporate
well with a spade or shouell the lime with the ashes, and the other to sprinkle
water with the broom well upon it and round about it, to the intent there rise
no powder or dust of it. And let all so well be mixed, that a man may not
know or discern the lime from the dust or ashes, and water it so much round
about, that in taking a handful of the same matier, and in wringing it, it
cleave together. And when you see that it raises no more powder or dust, give
it no more water. This done close up together all this mortar with your spade,
and let it so remain in a heap two or three hours, for it heateth and
boileth being in a heap, and wha^ it makes chinkes or cleftes about it, it is
a sign that it is risen. And if it be in cold weather you may cover it, for
fear that it take no cold and so lose his heat, for than it would make no
good magistrale. When all this is done, strain the said matter in a vessel of
earth having a hole in the bottom, being couerid with a little straw, and a
dishe over it, to the intent that the matter may run in time: and when you
put it in press egally every where as much as you can, and let it be
always even above: then pour upon it some hot water, or else do as follows,
as I my self do. Make ready six or eight pailes full of the strained lie,
and pour it on the vessel I mean of the first which is good, and at the
first put in two or three pailes full, the which being sunk down, put in as
much more, and open not the hole in the bottom, until all the matter be drunk
up: then let it run out by little and little, and because you may the better
know the first, the second and the third, take an Egg new laid, and bind
it round about with a threede and as the magistrale lie comes out, put the
Egg into it, and whiles the egg remains above, put it al into a vessel,
for it is the first which you ought to make much of. And when the egg
sinketh in the lie, put that second by it self: and if you can get of the
first fo^rty pound, you shall get of the second thirty, and of the third
twenty, and of the fourth as much as you will: And let all these be put by them
selves: and if you cover them well that they do not euaporate nor breath out,
they will continue always a year being still good, when you have done take
xxx. pound of the first, and ten of the second, and put them together and look
well if the egg remain above, and if it appear not much, weaken it no more,
for it shall be well so. And note, that unto three pound of the said lie, you
must have one pound of oil, and in pouring it in stir and mix it well with
a stick, for fear that the oil be not hurt by the violence of the said lie:
And make this composition at night, to the intent that it may remain in
infusion all the night: then in the morning sees it the space of seven or
eight hours or more, according as the quantite is great or little: for when it
is above a hundredth pound, it must sees ten hours or more: and when it
begins to sees and swell much, take it by and by from the fire, and stir
it always above until it begin to boil softly. And in the mean time cease
not to stir it, for fear it burn to the bottom. And when you make the
composition in a caudron, let it never be full by a hand breadth, because it
rises and swells always in seething, and the oil would be lost: and
mixyng it oftentimes the oil incorporateth with the lie, and seedeth the
sooner. And when it has sodden about eight or nine hours, you may begin to
assaie and prove it, and see that you keep always a little of the first and
of the second for all occasitions that may chance. And when it has boiled
unto the said hour, you shall see it wax thick, and make the bubbles in
seething long and thick. Than may you begin to make your proof and assaie.
That is to say, in taking a little of it with a spoone, and putting it into a
little earthen dishe, and let it cool, then cut it with a little stick, and
if it close together again, it is a sign that it is sodden enough: and if it
do not close together again, it is not, and therefore finishe the seething of
it. And make many of these proofs and assaies. And when it is sodden, take the
fire from under it, and so take it of, and set it in some cool place, and
when it is cold you may occupy of it, and it will be good and parfite. And
if you make it with clear oil although it be strong, it is all one: but if
you make it with oil parcht or thick, it will not be very clear. One of
the best signs that you may see in it when it begins to wax into a
thick substance, is that in taking of it up with a spoone, the thredes or
little strekes do break without shrinking up again, and this is a sign that
it is sodden enough. And when you have taken up a littel, and have let it
cool and so cut it, and than if it be ferme and fast on the sides, and in
setting it up it tarry upright, than it is sodden. And if after an hour it
were not sodden, that is to say, that it had not the sinewe, put upon it a
little of the first magistrall a little at ones, and so let it boil an hour
or a half. And than you shall make again the like assay or proof as before,
and if it show you not good signs, you shall put yet a little more to it
until you make it have a fast and solid body, and let it be not to soft nor
to hard. And he that has experience of this knows what is to be done in
seeing it boil only. And when you see that it is well take it from the fire.

The signs that Soap gives in seething, if it be to hard, or to soft,
whether it be liquide or white.
IF when the the Soap is sodden you would take it out, and that you see it
white, and in making the proof or assaie it wax hard, note, that than it is
very good, and if you will have it strong take it of, for being made it
returns to his color again, but it remains still strong. But if it be to
strong, it is not to be commmendid, for it waxes hard, and so goes in pieces
when you would occupy it, so that you shall be feign to sees it again, and
to make it return into a good and measurable sort, for being so strong or
hard it fretteth to much the clothes and consumes them. And by my Counsel
you shall set it on the fire again, but putting first into the caudron a
little of the third or fourth magistrale lie, together with a little oil, and
so boil it, This don put in the strong soap, and al will incorporate together,
and let it so sees an hour, and you shall see that it will not be so strong
or hard. And indeed it is better when it is somewhat softer. It is a thing of
great importance to know with the tongue what there lacks in the boiling. Take
your ladle and stir it well about: and then take a little upon your fingar,
and put it upon the end of your ^^ng, and you shall Judge of your self what
there lacks, for if it be strong beyond measure, you shall think that a
cole of fire had tutched your tongue: but if it be not to strong, it will not
seem unto you so burning sharp in tutching it with your tongue. And when it is
so strong it has need of the fourth magistrale lie with a little oil. And if
it were to soft (which thing you shall also know by your tongue) it has need
of the first magistrale lie, and give it these mixtures a little ^t ones, to
the intent that it be not let or hindered from seething, and mingle it in fair
and softly. It is also a great sign and token that the soap is strong, when it
breaks in little pieces, and leaves much magistrale lie in the bottom of
the vessel, where it remains long: but when it is soft and evil sodden, it
makes as it were a certain gelley: than you shall put into it a little of
the first magistrale, and boil it until it be well sodden, and wax hard
and firm, but when it is enough it will draw toward the color of green
wax some what dark and obscure, and that shall be when the soap is somewhat
soft, and not much sodden. The sign and token that strong soap ought to have
when it is well sodden and indifferently enough, is, that it will have the
color of Marmelade, and draw somewhat toward a Violet, and shall be obscurely
glistering, and have a fair flower upon it, and shall be good and parfite. But
when the black soap is become somewhat white and strong give it a little oil,
or else some of the third magistrale lie, and that a little at ones, least you
weaken it to much, and so it should lose his strength: for than you should
give it more oil, and more of the first lie, and so there should be great
danger in it. And therefore beware and see that you bestow and distribute well
your lies. But in this case you shall give it a little oil, and in boiling it,
it will be whiter, and softer. After this, continue with the first lie, and lot
it be hot and a little at ones, and proving it often times as we have said
before, you shall by and by know that it will be well trimmed and ordered. And
when it shall be to much sodden, or burnt, the sign or token shall be when it is
so strong and white out of measure, that it is burned. Than must you give it
some water only, or some of the fourth lie hot, not boiling it any more, or
at the least very little, and by this means you may parfitely atchiue and
come to an end of your work. And always when you will add or put to it any
matter upon the caudron, boil it evermore a little, because it will incorporate
the sooner: And make often times your profes and essaies. And if your work go
well, do no more in it, but be diligent and circumspect in taking it from the
fire, and take it so hot as it is out of the caudron. For to make afterward
the Magistrale, you shall do thus: when you have gotten out the first, which
keeps or bears the Egg above, which will be about nine pintes, and of the
second that bears not the Egg, a thirdendeale, which is three pintes, and
of the third the half which will be three half pintes, and of the fourth
as much as you will: for of that men use not much, and as nighe as you can
keep them all by themselves and covered, because they will so keep well
enough. True it is that some men are wont to put them all together, that is to
say one measure of the first, one of the second, and half a measure of the
third, and somewhat less, and one measure of oil, which are in all three
measures and a half, and by this means you may multiply as much of it as
you will. After you have thus ordered and dressed it, in the caudron, make fire
under it, so that it may be but skant luke warm, and stir it always in the
caudron with your ladle, to the intent that the oil may incorporate, and
perse through the magistrale: then leave it all the night in infusion, and give
it fire again in the morning, and when it is hot stir it well that it may
incorporate together. And note, that it must boil ten or twelve hours, and
will not make any lie at the bottom, and in boiling lift up your ladle a high,
and it will make long strekes like threede the space of six hours, and then
will begin to fasten and close up it self, and will make strekes which being
broken will return upward again, and that is a sign that it is not yet
sodden enough: but when they break not neither return backward but remain
fast and whole than it is sodden, and therefore you shall take it from the fire,
for this is the true sign and token of it. The other sign is, when it is cold
cut it in little rolls, and if they stand upright and not fall, it is a sign
that it is made. Lay of it oftentimes upon your tongue before it be sodden, and
if you feel it to strong give it a little of the third or of the last
magistrale, according as you shall perceive it to be strong, or else little or
enough after as you shall see it has need. If you see it to white and strong,
give it a little oil at ones, and it will alter and turn. When it is almost
sodden and that it make a gelley, give it a little of the second or of the
third, according as it shall have need by your Judgment. If it pass his
ordinary time or hours in seething, and that it fasten not neither close it
self, give it a little of the first: but let not the soap be to strong,
therefore assaie it first: for that were no small fault. But if it be not to
strong nor to white, and yet do not fasten and close it self, you may give
it of the first, as we have said, and if it be somewhat strong, you may give
it of the second after the accustomed manner. When it is almost sodden and
makes as it were a gelley, and is strong, and not being white, give it a
little of the fourth, but yet very little at ones, to the intent you take not
away to much of his force. But when it is almost sodden and is very white,
give it a little oil, and it will be well. When it should be sodden and that
the hour or time of his seething is paste, and is neither strong nor white,
give it a little of the first or of the second, or of the other, after as you
see it strong more or less, and it will return into a good state, and must
boil fair and softly, for fear it stick not to the bottom, and burn by
the reason of to much fire: for such a fire is of great importance. The
fourth lie, is not set a work but when it makes as it were a gelley, and is
strong and to raw. There be some good Masters and work men, that put in the
second magistrale with the oil, to the intent that the oil might not be so
much hurt by his strength, and then they put in a little of the third, and
then a little of the fourth, and after that a little of the first: but there
is no hurt in that, for there be measures in it, and these mixtions are made
in the presence of other men, when the master will not suffer it to be
known, for fear least that other should easily learns it. The good and
parfite magistrale lie will bear always an egg overthwart, and wayeth ever
more twice as much as water does, and contrary wise when it is less strong
it wayeth less, and the oil waieth as much as the fourth. If you order and
appoint the said lie^ by measure, give ever the advantage to the oil four or
six for the hundred, if you will have it fat and fair: for he that is well
experimented in it knows well in boiling what is needful to it, be it oil,
lie, or any other thing. When you will make white Soap, keep and use the same
mean and way, and when it is more than half sodden, put into it some salt,
according to the measure and quantite of it, and let it boil a little: then
take it out of that caudron, and put it into another, and when it begins to
boil put in again more salt, and let it sees to his parfite measure. This
done, set it to dry in a plain and eue^ place, and cut it in pieces, for it
will be parfite good. Men make the like with Soda, as they do use at venise,
the salt must be grossly beaten, and ten pound of it for the hundredth, and
mix it with it all about, and put in but a little at ones.

To heal the Skurfe.
TAke the root of the herb callid in latin Panis porcinus, and skrape or
grate it, and put it in a little pot, and put to it six ounces of oil of
roses and let it sees well, and when it begins to boil put in six ounces
of litarge of Gold, and a dragme of Precipitatum prepared, and let it remain
a little on the fire, mixyng and sturring it still, and also afterward until
it be cold: then anoint the skuruy head with it and strowe upon it like spice a
little flower of the grain called Lupines, and some bean flower mixed
together, and so put a coife upon his head, and that shall suffice ones a day
in doing it three days together. And if the hears fall not of them selves,
pull them out by little and little, and within twelve or thirtene days he
shall be cured. Also another way, take Sage, Rosemarie, our Ladies glooues,
Camomille, and Panis Porcinus, cut this very small, of each of them a handful,
boil them until they be sodden enough and that the virtue and strength be
remained in the wine, than strain it and press well the herbs, and wash the
skabby head with the said wine and dry it well, this done make a fine powder
of a piece of flesh of a young Bulle, and strowe it upon the head like spices,
and bind the coife upon his head, doing this ones a day, and pluck every
day some of the hears away, for they will die away by little and little of
themselves. And do thus so often until you see his head nete and ^leane, and
than shall he be thoroughly whole. There is yet another secreat whereof men make
little or none account, and yet nevertheless if you prove it you shall find a
marvelous effect of it. Take three pound of old larde of a barrow hog, and
lay it to stepe two days in strong Vinaigre, and let it be covered over
with the said vinaigre: this don wrappe it in three or four sheets of paper,
and upon that two or three leaves of Cabbedge, and lay it under the hot
embers or ashes when you cover your fire, and there let it lie two hours or
more or less, according as the fire was great, or as long until you think it
be roste enough: then take it out of the fire, and make it clean, and strain
out the grease of it, passing it through a line^ cloth, and by and by put into
it a quarter of an ounce or more or less of Verdegrise braied very small,
according as the infirmite shall be great or small, and incorporate it well
together with a stick the space of an hour, until it begins to wax
cold, to the intent that the Verdegrise descend not al to the bottom, and
keep this grease as a precious thing: and the older it is, the better
operation it makes. And anoint the head of the patient with it, every second
night, and wash also his head twice or thrice a week with sweet lie, with a
handful of lean bran boiled and dry it well again, and anoint his head
again, putting the coife upon his head and none other, and when you have
anointed it three or four times, the root of the hear will be ripe, and you
may pluck always some out in washing, and they will come of easily and
without pain. And if in case they would not come of easily neither with force,
care not for that: for the disease has not perced thither and therefore let
them alone: for some time they be not dangerous: but if they were infected or
hurt with the disease they would be lose and fall of or else ^asy to be plucked
of, because that the ointment does ^ipe the root, and when the head is all
bare, without hear and made clean, fear not: for all the hear will ^ome
again fairer than ever they were, and he shall be cured and sound. This has
been oftentimes proved, and has wrought well almost in all men: for you must
know that there are four kinds of skurfes, the one is more gross and fleshy
than the other, and therefore marvel not, if you find so many diverse
receiptes: for there be many men that heal the skurfe which know it not:
but if it be the skurfe look upon his nail, and if there be a black circle
about the white at the root of the nail, and the greater the circle is, the
worse kind of skurfe it is, and therefore you shall use the remedies
aforesaid, and let him not eat any hogs flesh nor eigre or sharp
things, and with the help of God he shall be healed. Take also a great lisard
or two, and drown them in common oil, and than sees them until they
consume, and with this oil anoint his head oftentimes, and the hear will come
so fast and such great quantite, that he shall not tell what to do with
them. There is also another remedy for to heal the simple skurfe. Take of the
grease of a male hog as much as you will, and some strong vinaigre for a
third part, and half an ounce of salt beaten and stamped, and boil it with a
small fire until all the vinaigre be consumed: then take it from the fire, and
put into it all these pouders following: verdegris, alome of the rock burned,
of each of them two drammes, brimstone and suet of each one a dram, and
pigeons dong, and let al be well incorporated together, and anoint his head
with it ones a day, and wash it twice or thrice a week, and boil in the lie
the root of Lapathum or Rumex, in english Sorrel, and strain it, and then
wash him with it, and when it is dry again, anoint him a fresh. Of the four
kinds of skurfe the first is called Porrig^ farinosa, flowery or white
skurfe, the other Furfurea or Furfurosa, because it has the color of bran and
skales like unto bran, the third Viscosa, cla^my or cleaving like bird lime,
and the fourth Lupinosa, because it is like the grain called lupin^s. And in
the form and matter the one is dry, the other moist, the one vlcerous, and
the other without ulcers, and here of it follows that the one is more sharp
and smarting than the other, for the causes of the skurfe are gross humors
corrupt and clammy, which sometime is brought with us even from our mothers
womb, and some by evil governing of our selves in our life, the moist skurfe
is with broad sores, and the dry with crustes.

An excellent and a tried water for the skabbe.
TAke a violl full of well water or Rose water, or else of other sweet water, as
though you would make it for some noble man, and put into it an ounce and a half
of silver sublimed that is beaten very small, half an ounce of salt. This done,
set it before the fire upon a tile, to the intent that the violl take no hurt
in boiling, and let it boil until all the length of the neck of the viol be
decreased. Then take it of, and when it is cold, put into it the whites of
three new laid eggs well beaten that they have no more viscosite or
clammynesse in them, and put also into it the juice of four Limons, and of two
sour Orenges, and let al be well incorporated together in the said violl, and
stir it well, when you have thus done leave it in the sun two or three
days and it will be made. And in this manner is the said water made, and thus
men use it. At night when you go to bed wash your self only about the
iontes with a sponge weate in the said water, and then wring and pressed
hard, wash your self ^ligthly over with the said sponge. This said water
will be as white as milk and odoriferous, and where as you wash your self with
it there it will make the skin white, and do thus every second night, and
where there is any skurfe or crust, weate it with this water rosid about not
touching the crust, for that would grieve you. You may make another water
simpler, and without danger. Take a glass or violl as before, and fill it with
water, and put into it two ounces of rock alome, half an ounce of silver
sublimed, and as much salt, and all being beaten into powder very small, boil
it as the other before was, until it be decreased beneth the neck of the
viol: then strain it handsomely, and occupy it as before the other was: for
by this means the skabbes will come out at the iointes, and will incontinent
dry up, leaving your flesh and skin nete and fair, as it has been oftentimes
proved.

A remedy for any burning or skalding, either by fire or by hot water, or any
other casual chance what so ever it be.
TAke vnsleckt lime as much as you will, and slecke it in common oil, and take
it out as dry as you can possible, and incorporate it with oil of Roses, and
it will be as it were an ointment, wherewith you shall anoint the place that is
burned or skalded, and it will shortly ease the pain and grief, and heal
within six or eight days, not leaving any mark or skarre upon the skin. Also
for the same effect. Take an ounce of litarge of gold, and sees it in white
wine and a little Vinaigre, than take it of, and make thereof a very fine
powder. Take also an ounce of butter, and as much oil of Roses, and wash it
four or five times in fresh water: than take half an ounce of Blanc rasill
burned, and the yelke of a new laid Egg, and a little fine sugar, and
incorporate all together with a little Rose water, and spread this ointment
upon a linen cloth, and it will profit you very much. Another for the same.
Take some strong white Vinaigre, and the white of a new laid egg, with the
juice of the rine or bark of an eldern tree, and mingle al together, and w^^e
some pieces of linen cloth in it, and lay them upon the burned place one after
another, and you shall be hole, and when you will heal up the wound, take a
little of the second rine or bark of an eldern tree, and get out the juice of
it, and a little powder of ^^ankensens, a little oil of roses, and a little
new wax, and make thereof as it were an ointment, and spread it upon the
pieces of linen cloth, and lay them upon the burned place, and you shall see
that they will consolidate and heal up in short time. For to make afterward an
ointment to the intent that the consolidation and closing up may be fair:
take ten ounces of oil of Roses, two ounces of new Wax, and set them on a
slow fire, and when these things be molte^, put into it two ounces of Minium,
in english Sinople, red lead, or Vermillion, and four ounces of Litarge, and
let all be made into a very fine powder, and make it to come into a substance
or body, and lay it upon the sore, and you shall see a marvelous effect. There
is yet another mean and remedy for any burning that is, take old larde of a
male hog, and choppe it well, the^ take a flagon of white vinaigre that is
very strong, and let the lard sees in it the space of two hours: then take it
from the fire, and let it cool, and take of the grease that is upon it, and
wring it hard with your hand, that all the vinaigre may go out and none
remain in it: This done keep it in an earthen pot leaded, and the older it is
the better it will be, because it does his operation sooner. And when any man
burns him self, let him take of the said grease, and anoint the place with
it and the pain will cease. In the mean time you must have made ready the
hear of a hare chopped or cut as small as is possible, and when you have
anointed it, strowe of the said hear upon it as it were spice, and let it
remain so. And when you anoint it again at night, and in the morning anoint it
upon the other ointment, which you used before, and then cast on more hear as
before, and take it never of until it come of, of it self, which will be
within six or eight days, and the thing healed perfitly without any mark or
skarre. And note here that at the beginning of the evil, ^he oftener you
anoint it, the more the pain will decline away, and the patient shall feel
great allegement and ease, and shall be merry. And for to take away the pain
out of the hand, and to do a marvelous cure, as soon as the inco^uenient
shall have happened skrape a little larde of a barrowe hog upon it, and do
it quickly, for in doing it with speed you shall perceive it fry, as though
it were in a friyng pan, and the pacient shall feel great ease, and the
pain will cease. Lay to it of this at the beginning three or four times in
an hour, and the patient shall receive great consolation and comforth. This
secret is good, and ought not to be contempned, al though it be no great matter.

To make pills of Turpentine.
TAke an ounce of turpentine of venise, and wash it well with borage water, or
with some other cordial waters, eight or ten times as you shall think good.
Then take three ounces of fine sugar beaten small, and incorporate it well
together by little and little: for that takes away the viscosite and
clamminesse of it, in such sort that it cleaneth not together: and at the
end you shall leave a little of it without incorporating it, in the paste: for
it shall be always good to take at any time, and never perishes: and when you
will take of it, you may do with it at your pleasure. And this past has one
excellency in it, that is, that it cleaves not to a man's fingars, but may
also be chewed so that it will not stick nor cleave to the palate or rofe of a
man's mouth. And when you have made them, take a little sinamome mixte with
sugar, and roll them in it: then hardely take the^ at all times and hours,
for they will work maruelously in flegmatike, and colerike stomachs, and
rid men from many inward passions, and will cause a good appetite, and the
urine of the man shall give an odor as it were march violettes.

An electuarie of Nerprum, that is to say, a solutiue Iulep marvelous good for
the Gout.
TAke these little fruits of Nerpru^ about the end of September, when they be
through ripe, and have had a white froste, and gather them early in the
morning, and stamp them a little in a mortar, so that they be skant broken,
and put them in a pot or some other vessel leaded within, that has no savor
of any thing, and cover them well, and set them in a hot place to confite
the space of eight or ten days, then press out the juice and substance of
them the most that you can: and for every pound of the said juice you shall
put in a pound of purified honnie. This don, set them on the fire, and boil
them slowly until they be sodden, and assaie upon a piece of Paper, if the
drop remain fast together it is sodden enough, if it run abroad it is not
sodden inoughe: Than take it from the fire, and put into it an ounce of
Sinamome, and two ounces of Ginger both well braied and beaten, and incorporate
it well together so hot as it is, and so keep it in boxes well covered, and
the older it is, the better. Take of this before your meals a sponeful as well
in the morning as at night, and keep your self specially out of the air, and
so it will do much good to them that have the gout more than to any other,
because it eases the pains very much, and does good through out all the body
likewise by reason of the euacuation.

To make giltinges upon leather which shall seem like Gold, and laiyng them
upon Silver or glass, they shall appear to be Gold in deed.
TAke a new pot well leaded of the same bigness that you will make your
work, make also a fourneise of the height of the pot, for fear that the fire
get not into it, because it is almost like unto artificial fire, and
therefore you must take heed. This done, take three pound and four ounces of
line seed and sees it slouly in the said pottes until it be sodden, and if
you will know when it is sodden, (...) into it a hens fether, and take it out
again incontinent, if the feathers go of in it, it is sodden enough, otherwise
let it sees, and when it is sodden enough, put into it eight ounces of
Rosen, and Sandrac, that is to say, Vermix such as scriuenats use, four
ounces of Aloe epaticum: and all this being well beaten and stamped very small,
put it in sturring and mixing it with a stick and if all come together in a
mass, be not therefore abashed, but augment the fire, and never leave sturring
it: for in feeling the great heat, these things will melte, and become
liquide. And then let them boil slowly a good while: having so done take an
assaie of it upon a piece of paper, or upon your nail, as men commonly do,
when they will know if the Iulep be well sodden: or else between your fingars to
see if it be thick enough or no, and if you think it be to clear you shall
put to it, for two days, an ounce and a half of Aloe sucotrinum, which gives
it a color somewhat darker, and the work shall not be so bright or clear:
but put to it also so much the less of Sandrac as you shall that it is
sodden. This don pluck back the pot by and by from the fire, and let it stand
where any fla^be is, because it draws unto it self the heat, and so the fire
would burn it all: the^ empty it out ha^dsomely before it be cold, into a
coople of little bags pointed at the end, one within another like Ipocras
bags. And the matter that is not molten will remain in the bags, which will
be more then the half, and that will no more be any thing worth for that
purpose, and by this means you shall have made your vernishe for to gilte with
all, which will keep very well and long, and the older it is, the better
operation it has, keep it therefore well from all manner of duste, and let
it not drop or run out. And note, that the Aloe is it that gives the
yellow color to it and makes it look like Gold, and the other things make
it thick. And if you will make it exceeding firm and fast, when the oil is
sodde^, being put in by measure, you shall take out of it as much as you think
good, then go foreward in your work, and when it is sodden, there will not be
of it above three or four pound, and that is the least you can make at a time:
and yet nevertheless those that meddle with the making of it, make xl. or lx.
pound at a time, and keep it for their necessity. And if you will lay it upon
glass or tin, either the matter must be hot or else the glass or tin, and
it must be laid abroad upon it with a pensill, and so shall you have a fair
piece of work.

An experimented oil against poison.
TAke three pound of old oil olive, and divide it into three sundry vessels,
and to one pound put three handfulles of Hypericon, in english saint John's
wort, and leave it in the sun eight days, the^ boil it in Balneo mariae the
space of twelve hours, which is made as we will show you afterward. This don
you shall strain it hard, in pouring upon it some good wine, as Maluoisie, and
after that put also to it three handfuls of the said herb, and a pound of the
said oil, and so set it viij. days in the sun as before, in boiling it
afterward twelve hours in Balnea mariae, and wring and strain it hard again
as before, whereunto you shall put three handfuls of the seed of the said herb,
and a pound of the said oil. This done do as before, with straining it in the
sun, and in Balneo mariae, you shall also after this put into it these drogges
following, as gentian Crocodilium, an herb (after Pliny) like the thistle
called Camaelion niger. Ruellius supposes it to be that which is called
commonly Carlina or Cardina, Zeduaria, Aristolochiarotunda, Torme^till, white
Dittany, Sandall of all sorts, boil Armenik, prepared, of each of them two
ounces, and put all the said things in a great glass, the space of ten
days in the sun. Having thus done, you shall sees the^ thirtene hours in
Balneo mariae, and strain them afterward very hard: then shall you add to it
saffran, Aloe, Spicinardi, Reubarbari electi, of each of them six drammes, and
set them in the sun again the space of six days, and boil them a new in
Balneo mariae, four and twenty hours, and make the same expression and
straining that you did before, whereunto you shall put an ounce and a half of
good Mitridatum, and than it is made: and being thus made, keep it for your
necessite and need, for it is a very sovereign thing against poison taken at
the mouth, and has a secret property against the plage, and for worms. M^n
use it also in anointing all the poulses, and the heart, that is to say the left
side, then cover all his body and let him alone with the hot linen clothes
until he fall into a great sweat. And this has been proved diverse times. Now
Balneum mariae is thus made, you must set a caudron full of water on the fire,
and in the same water a great glass such as men still with all, wherein to you
must put all your things to boil. And make your caudron of water so boil
that the things in the glass may also boil, and because that water in the
caudron co^sumeth, you must fill it up again always, and lo here is Balneum
mariae.

For the heat or burning of the urine.
TAke the seed of purselane, of wild succory, and garden succory of each of
them two drammes, the flowers of Nenuphar, and of Violettes, of each of them a
dram, an ounce of the seed of white P^rpadol, two ounces of the seed of
Sebest^^, half a dram of Iusquiama alba, a dram of saffran, five drammes of
Lignum dulce, ten dra^mes of the berrie of a pine apple tree, and boil all
this in six pound of water, until it be decreased of the third part, then
strain it, and take six ounces of this straining with an ounce of Iulep of
violettes, and drink it luke warm every morning at the break of the day,
and you shall see a marvelous effect, within four days.

A water of a marvelous and excellent virtue to bring again the sight of the
eyes, to him that has lost it, or is diminished by sickness or any other
accident or chance.
TAke three drammes Tutia, made in powder very small, and as much Aloe Epaticum
in powder, two dra^mes of fine sugar, six ounces of rose water, six ounces of
good white wine, rather sweet than other wine: but true it is y^ to sweet is
not commendable. Mix all this together, and put it in some clean vessel of
glass, and being well closed and stopped, set it in the sun a month together
continually, mixyng and stirring together all the said things at the least
ones a day, to the intent they may incorporate well together. This don take
of the same water, and put certain drops of it upon your eyes morning and
evening, and in continuyng so a certain space, it will cause the sight to come
again as clear, and as pure as it was before. And this was made and ordained by
a consultation and counsel assembled of the wisest and best physicians of all
Italy, to bring the Emperor of Constantinoples sight again the year 1438.
when he was at the sinode and concile of Ferrare with pope Eugene the fourth,
and his sight came again unto him, as fair as ever it was, by the mean of
this water.

To remedy or help bloodshotten eyes coming by any Reume, fluxion, or such
other like cause.
TAke the tops or ends of Wormwood, which is an herb well enough known,
and stamp it, mixyng it with the white of an egg, and rose water, and make
thereof as it were a plaster, and spreading it upon a linen cloth which you
shall lay upon the eye where the blood is, or else upon both. And do this at
night when you go to bed, and the next morning take it of, and you shall see
that this plaster shall have drawn to it self all the blood and all the
redness that was in your eyes, and so you shall be quite of it.

To take away the yellow Iaundise from the face of every man to whom it is
happened be reason of the gall run and shed about the body.
TAke a great white Onyon and make a hole where he buddeth out, casting away
the green of it, and put into this hole as much good triakle as the
quantite of a chestnutte, but let this triakle be incorporated with half an
ounce of saffron beaten, and let him roast by little and little nighe unto the
fire, for fear that he burn not or roast to much, or else take some filth of
the ashes. And when he is roasted enough, lay him in a white linen clothe and
wringe him hard that the juice may come out. And let the pacient drink of the
same juice in the morning fasting, three days together, and the Iaundise will
go away. Also for the like effect. Give him to drink a dram and a half of
Scolo pendria in english hearts tongue, well made in powder, with white wine luke
warm every morning fasting, the space of twenty days together and all the
yellownes and palenesse will go away. The like effect works Lapatium
acatum, sodden with his rote. And likewise the wine wherein valerian has been
sodden, being dronken in the morning fasting, heals the spleen and the liuar,
which many time^ are the cause that makes the gall to run and spread
abroad, as we have before said.

To make come out of the ears any thing that i^ by chance fallen into them,
or has purposely bone put in.
TAke the herb Marmorella, and stamp it, and put of the juice into the ears
of the pacient, for it has the virtue and strength to draw out any thing that
is in them.

For the tooth ache.
TAke the little grains or seeds that come of the herb or shrubbe called in
latin Fusaria, or Euonimos, or Anonymos, some there be that say it is the tree
called Anagyris, which is an herb or shrubbe very pleasant to see to, and
has a fair yellow flower, but a very horrible and stinking savor, look
Dioscorides, in his third book the. 142. chapter. Take of the seeds hereof
if you can get them, if not, take some of the root, and make of it a powder:
This done, take a little dry or green organie, and boil all this in strong
vinaigre unto the third part of it. Then wash your mouth with this vinaigre as
hot as you may endure it, and incontinent you shall be healed. Also for the same
grief, take Cloves, honny rosat, and aqua vite as much of the one as of the
other, then put it al together into a little pot, and take of the said
composition in your mouth on the side where the tooth greeueth you, and hold it
so a certain space of time, and the pain will cease.

To make an a king tooth to fall out of him self, without any instruments or
iron tools.
TAke wheat flower, and mix it with the milk of the herb called in latin
Herbalactaria, in french Tintima^ll^: or herb a laite in English Spurge that
has milk in it, in greek Tithymalos, which is an herb well enough known,
and thereof make as it were a past or dowe, with the which you shall fill the
hole of the tooth, and leave it in it a certain time, and the tooth will fall
out of it self. Also if you wash your mouth every month ons with wine where in
the root of the said herb has been sodden, you shall never have pain in
your teeth. Also the decoction or powder of the flowers of a Pomegranate tree,
being put in your mouth and between your gommes fasteneth the teeth.

An electuarie for the head, which conserueth the memory, cleereth the sight,
and conforteth the stomach.
TAke the flowers of Buglosse, of Borage, and of Rosemarie, of each of them a
pound, take also fenell seed, annise seed, the seed of sea fenell, and Siler
of the hills of each of them six ounces, with an ounce of fine cinamome. Beat
and stamp all that ought to be beaten and stamped, and sift al those things
that must be sifted. This done mingle them together and make thereof an
electuarie, of the which you shall take in the morning the bigness of a
chestnutte, and you shall see a marvelous operation, for this is come from a
great personage.

Against the pildnesse or baldness of the head, and to let that the hears
either of the head or berd, shall not fall of.
TAke the rotes of bramble or blackbery bush called in latin Rubus or Sentis,
of the kind that bears flowers at the first, and the roots of nettles. Then
take pigeo^s dung, and burn it into very ashes, have also some ashes of Vines,
with the which you shall boil the said roots, and make thereof some lie, and
wash your hedde with it and also your berd, and the hears will not fall of.
Also for the same effect, take honny, fenigreeke, and the eyes clipped or shoren
of from a bramble or blackberie bushe, as much of the one as of the other, and
incorporate them well together, and distille them in a lembick, and keep the
water of the^, and if you will distill a few broom flowers withal it will
make you aberne hears, weate and moiste your head and berde the day time in
the sun, and at night when you go to bed, and the hears will not fall
away. Also for the like matter distill in a lembick the herb called in latin
Sisymbrium aquaticum, in english water cresses. And of the water that you get
of it, you shall make yet another distillatio^ with agrimonie, Capillus
veneris, rosemary, sage, and cloves, of each a handful, and let the
distillation be made in Balneo mariae, and in oftentimes washing your self with
such water your hear shall fall no more away, as many men have proved and
tried.

An ointment to cure the skurfe.
TAke good old lard, at your discretion, and enterlard it round about with
rosemary, like a piece of roast meat, and let there be a good qua^tite of
rosemary, then put it to roast on the fire turning it fair and softly. This
done you shall take and save the grease that droppeth from it, in a driping
pan, and cast it hot as it is into a dishe full of cold water in washing it
very well, and when you have well washed it, put it into another clean
dishe, and so shall you the grease thus taken up fair and neat. Having thus
done, way the grease, and if there be a pound of it, you shall put to it two
ounces of fine sugar well beaten, and upon that as much verdegrise puluerised as
the quantite of a hasell nutte, and four deme^s of quick silver, with as much
soote of an oven of the hardest* as the qua^tite of a hasell nutte: but let it
be well puluerised and made in powder. This ended, incorporate all together,
^it will be a very good ointment, wherewith you shall anoint the first morning
the head of the pacient, and leave it so anointed until the next morning:
th^n wash his hedde with lie that is not to strong but somewhat temperate, then
anoint it again, and let i^ alone so until the third morning, and do thus
nine morninges in washing and anointing it, and it will be as neete as a perle.
Also bitter almondes blanched and sta^ped, and laid as it were a plaster upon
the head of the patient, it will easily heal the scurfe, changyng and renewyng
the plaster certain days.

To kill lise, and nittes in the head.
TAke the powder or scraping of Had^^s horn, and make the pacient to drink of
it, and there will no lise nor nittes breed in his head, but ^^ you (...) the
said powder upon his head, all the lise and nittes will die.

For one that can take nothing at the mouth, or else to make him go to the
stool, and to sweat well.
FIrst the pacient must be well rubbed with hot linen clothes, from the head
to the foot, and must be very warm kept in his bed, the^ give him this
ointment following. Take as much pepper as will lie upon a grote, and put it
into half a glass full of vinaigre and oil, as much of the one as of the
other, and let it be very warm, and anoint all his body over with it, and let
him be well couerid in his bed: and than shall he sweat, and go well to the
stool.

To heal those that have the disease of the Spleen.
TAke Lignum aloe, and make thereof a powder, and put it in some manner of
brothe, or wine, as much as will lie upon a grote, and let him take of it three
morninges together. Also the seed of an Ash tree does the like, and the root
of Palma christi, if it be eaten nine morninges fasting.

For the pain of the side, or colike.
Boil a ha^dfull of Rosemary with water, wherewith you shall temper the wine of
the pacient, and let him drink none other water. Also for the like. Take a
dog, and keep him xv. days in a chamber, and give him only lambs or
motton bones to gnawe, then take of his excremendes, and dry it in the sun,
and make thereof a powder, and give the patient to drink of it every morning
half an ounce in white wine hot, and doing this three morninges, he shall be
deliuerid of the pain, as it has been oftentimes tried. Also for the like
effect, take the dung of a black ass as hot as you may find it when it
comes from him, and sees it in white wine that is not sweet, wringing well
the dunge into the wine. Of this make warm glisters for the pacient: for it is
the best, and the aptest remedy, that can be found for such a disease: as many
notable men, worthy of credit, have affirmed. Likewise for the same disease,
it shall profit much if he eat every day, or four times in the week four
peche kernels each day. Thus doing he shall never feel pain of the colike.
This secret was had first of a Jew. There is yet another remedy easier then
all the rest, and that is, you must take four Garlike heads, and boil them in
a little pot with a pint of good white wine, and let it sees well. Then take
a glass full of this wine, as much as you may endure to drink, and so go to
bed, covering your self well, and you shall feel incontinent great ease. If
you take also an ounce of the rote of Imperatoria made in powder, with white
wine hot, fasting, the pain will incontinent go away.

For him that can not piss.
TAke the stones and kernels of Peches and meddlers, as much of the one as of
the other, and make them into powder very fine, and sift it in a sarce: this
done take fine Sugar the weight of all this, and mengle all together, and the
pacient drink of it in good white Wine, and incontinent he shall make water.

For one that is broke by reason of any travail, either riding post, or by
any other accident or chance.
TAke salt Armoniak and Rosen, of each of them two ounces, and stiepe it in
Vinaigre the space of xxiiij. hours, and dissolve it by the fire, so that it
burn not: Then mix with it half an ounce of powder of Cipres, and half an
ounce of Gall, and make thereof as it were a Ciraene. True it is, that these
gommes ought not to be thoroughly molten. And if it be in winter so that the
Ciraene be to hard, put into it a drop of mastic, and then spreede it abroad
upon the rupture or the place a broke, and change it ones in four days, and
you shall see a marvelous operation.

To take away the pain, and to heal the Goat.
TAke a little whelp of a brake, that has a while begone to see, and the
fattest that you can find, and skalde him like a Pigge, and take out the
guts and garbage at one of his sides: This done, take Nettles stamped, with
two ounces of Brimstone, four yelkes of eggs, and four ounces of turpentine,
and incorporate all together, and put it into the whelps belly sowyng up
surely the hole for fear lest the composition should run out: then roast him
with a temperate fire, and receive the grease that comes of him and anoint
the place of the Gout with it: for it will bring great ease, and cease all
manner of conuulsions of the sinews or muskles, and pain of crampe that may
be felt in a man with this remedy many have not only eased the pain of the
Gout, but have also healed it and put it clean away. Also for the like
effect. Take a new pot, and fill it half full with oil, and the other half
with good white wine, and put some Nettles into it the which you shall sees,
and lay them as hot upon the place as the pacient can endure, and in twice or
thrice using this, the gout shall be clean driven away.

Against the hot Gout.
FOr as much as there is two manner of goutes, the one hot and the other cold,
you shall make this medicine following for the cold one, take the juice of great
reisins, and sugar rosat of each of the^ an ounce, with sugar made with Buglose,
five ounces of Diapruni soluti^i, an ounce of Reubarbari electi, and mingle al
these things together with a Iulep of Violettes, and make thereof a
composition, of the which you shall take half an ounce every morning an hour
before day, and in short space you shall be healed.

A marvelous and very good water for diverse infirmities and diseases.
TAke an ounce of Frankensens of the male kind called in latin Olibanum, and
as much of Sarcocolla, six ounces of Aloe epaticum, good and clear ho^ny, the
juice of Plantain, white Rosen, of each of these three ounces, and stamp them
al well together, and mingle them. This don, put them into a great vessel of
glass meet to distill in, well closed and luted about, and distill these
things in a le^beck as we have before declared, holding the recipient close
underneath well luted round about the mouth, to the intent there may no breath go
out, and give it a slow fire, that the matter mount not upward: for it would
mar, if you made it not desce^d incontinent, in weating the mouth with river,
well, or conduite water. And this water that comes out is a wonderful water
for all the infirmities and weakness of the members: for I have seen the
experience of it upon a young maid that had broken her arm: whether it were
that it was not well dressed, or by any other occasion, I know not, but with in
four days it began to putrify and to rot, in such wise that the physicians
and surgeons would have cut it of: But by the counsel of master Seraphin,
this water was laid to it (which is made in four or five hours,) and after
they had well washed and rubbed her arm, and the bands that she was bound
with all, in laiyng it upon the broken place and wound, she was cured within
few days after. In distilling this water you must understand that at the end
it cha^geth color, and than you must chance the recipient, because the last
would mar the first which is very good, and having ended your distillation,
you shall take up the lies, or the gomme which has no less virtue the^ the
water. And if you make powder of it, it will be good for putrified wounds.

For one that can not sleep nor take his rest either for pain in the head or
other like cause.
TAke oil of violettes with the yelke of an egg, and woman's milk, as much of
the one, as of the other, and having mengled all together, make thereof a
plaster, and lay it either upon his forehed or upon his eyes, and the pain
shall cease, and desire of sleep shall come upon him.

To consolidate and close up the chappes or chinkes of the mouth.
TAke Honny and the dry marrow of a Hog, and mingle it together heating it a
little at the fire in a little pot, and so anoint your lips with it.

A water to keep the hands delicate and soft.
TAke small Limons, dry Figs, and the root of Enula campana, as much of the
one as of the other, and make them very fine and small: then put to it a
handful of sodden wheat, and sees it with a slow fire in one part of
vinaigre, and two parts of river or fountain water, and let it sees a
little, and then take it of, and keep it covered that no duste come into it.
Wash your face with this water oftentimes, and you shall se a marvelous trial
of it.

An excellent water, and of small cost, for to wash a man's face, and to keep
it in one state always.
TAke the flowers of Orenges, incarnation Roses, the flowers of thorns as
much of one as of the other, except of the thorns which must be less in
quantite. And being all distilled together: keep the water of them, which is
very precious.

To take out the wrinkles of the face.
TAke an old Capon, and pluck of his feathers, and cut him a long the back,
and dress it as it were to eat. Then fill him full of little yellow Limons
cut very small, and the fenell seed, and put all this together in a limbeck
with a moderate fire. And than wash your face with the water that comes out
of it, and the wrinkles will go away.

To mantaine and keep the face without wrinkles.
TAke a new fire pan of iron, and set it on the fire, and when it is very
hot, sprinkle it with good white wine, and so parfume your face over the smoke
of it, and than wipe it with fine white linen clothes: this done, set the pan
upon the fire again and a little Mirrhe upon it, and so perfume your face again
over it, and in the mean time keep your self covered so that the smoke may
not go away from you. This done bind up your face in some linen clothes and so
go to bed and sleep. And this you must do ones in fiuetene days.

To heal a swollen face, and that is hurt or marred by reason of some strange
skorching, which only chances when the subline is not good.
TAke the juice of Barba Iouis, in English Singreone, and rub your face with
it twice or thrice a day, you may do the like with the juice of Purcelane,
but if your face were to much marred or hurt, take xl. or l. yelkes of eggs,
and put them in a friyng pan upon a great fire, and get some oil out of them,
wherewith you shall anoint your face.

To know whether the sublime be good or no, or whether it be made with arsenick.
I Have shewde you in the first chapter of the sixth ^ooke in the first part of
my secrets, the manner of subliming quick silver as it ought to be sublimed.
Now for as much as many men have not this manner to make sublime: they must buy
it ready made: and therefore I thought it good to show you the mean and way
how to know whether it be good or no, or whether it be made with Arsenick:
for all the sublimes that are made with Arsenick, destroy commonly the face,
and make it swell. Take therefore of sublime the quantite of a bean, and cast
it upon the hot coals, and if it be good it will burn, and will make a blewe
flame: but if it make any other color, it is not good.

To take letters out of Paper.
TAke Salnitrum, and blewe Vitrioll, a pound of each one, and distill them,
then take a sponge, and weate the letters with the same water, and they will
easily go of. Also for the like effect, take powder of white bones, and two
ounces of plastre, and stamp it very small, and mingle them both together,
and temper it with the yelke of an egg, and anoint the letters with it, and
let it so dry, and then scrape them with a pen knife, and the Paper will
remain white.

To renew old and worn Letters.
TAke Galls, and stamp them a little: then lay the^ a stiepe one day in
good white wine. This done distill them, and with the water that comes of
them, you shall weate handsomely the letters with a little cotton, and they
will be fresh and new again, in such wise that you may easily read them.

To mollify or to make soft Iuorie and bones to work what thing on them or
with them.
TAke strong vinaigre, and Sage, and boil the Iuorie and the bones, in it and
they will be soft. Also for the like effect, take blewe Vitrioll and salt
prepared, and all being made into a powder very fine, distill it, and keep
the water of it, and than lay your Iuorie and bones in it, and leave them so
half a day, and they will be soft: Then put them three days in the juice of
Beetes, and they will be tender, so that you may make of them what you will.
And when you will harden them again, lay the^ in strong white Vinaigre.

To take out the marks that are commonly made in the faces of Sclaues, for to
know them, and also such as many men carry upon their bodies, for diverse
causes.
FOr to make such caracters or marks, they first draw the form or figure of
them upon the flesh: then with a sharp rasour, they lance the flesh upon the
said mark, much like unto cupping that Surgeons do use, and when the blood
is come out, they take of the powder of the smoke that Printers do use, or else
of coals beaten very fine, and so rub the cut well with it, and then are
they well and surely marked. Now for to take out these marks, you must cut
open the flesh again and in steed of the foresaid powder or coals, you shall
put into the place some Blanc rasil well puluerised, or else some flower of
wheat well blu^ted or sifted, and let it so dry, and by this means all the
marks well go away, be the blewe or black, and the place al nete and as fair
as ever it was.

For one that is stong with a Scorpion.
IF you can get the Scorpion that did stinge you, in cutting of his feet and
his tail, and letting him die upon the place where he pricked you, he will
draw all the venim unto him. Any other Scorpio^ will do the same being bruised
between two stones, and putting to it a little Sage and salt. Also for the
like, let three or four drops of a green fig fall in or upon the wound
and the venim will not abide.

For one that is stong with waspes, or Bees.
Stamp Mallows, and lay them upon the place where he is stong, or else take
flies stamped with a little dirt.

When a man is tutched or poisoned of a spider.
TAke the Ashes of the wood of a fig tree with salt stamped, and lay it
upon the place. Also take Mallows, and sees it and with the decoction of them
weate the place, or else with sea water.

For one that has eaten toodes or the spetile that comes from them, which
is a deadly thing.
MAke the patie^t vomit, in giving him to drink some oil olive with vinaigre
tempered with water. This done, give him to drink often times after his
vomiting the best claret wine that can be gotten, and two drammes of the roots
of reeds, causing him to run excessiuely, for to take away the heaviness or
vnlustines that the venim causes him to have.

To heal cleft or kibed heels.
TAke Dragant, and Galban^^, as much of the one as of the other, and make thereof
a powder, then take new Wax, oil of Violettes, and a little Goats suet, or
Ox tallowe, and melt it on the fire: then put in the said pouders and make of
all this an ointment, wherewith you shall anoint your heels, and the will be
hole incontinent.

To heal the cankre that happens upon the yard of a man, or in the nature of
women.
TAke an ounce of rock alome, and half an ounce of verdegrise with smithes
water: and put it in some vessel of glass, and sees it two hours, then
strain the said water, and keep it in some kind of vessel for to occupy at
your need.

To heal a foundred Horse.
TAke an Onion and stamp him: then stiepe him a good while in strong Vinaigre,
then take the said Onion thus stamped and imbibed with the Vinaigre, and make
the Horse swallowe it do^^^ this done, cast the Vinaigre, wherein the said Onion
laid into the nosetrels of the horse, and ^e shall forthwith be cured.

To kill the bottes in horses.
TAke a good handful of Agrimonie, and make the horse eat it early in the
morning, and then let him tarry fasting, and without meat until noone, do
this four or five days, and he shall be healed.

For a horse that cannot stale.
Give him to drink hot water, that is more then luke warm^, and he shall
stale.

For a horse that is cloied or prickte with an nail.
TAke out the nail, and when his foot is well made clean, make a little hole
even unto the quick flesh, where the nail touched, then fill it up again
with Rosen: and with a hot iron, melte some Pitche upon it: This done, lay
some Cotton upon it, and shoe him well, and then fear not to ride him after
where you will.

To make a horse to have a good hoof.
TAke Ox dung, and temper it with Vin^gre, and at night lay it hot upon his
feet, and wrappe them up in some cloutes, to the intent^ that the heat may
keep in, whiles it makes his operacion, and by and by it will be a good hoof.

FINIS.
The Table.
TO make wheie as clear as well water. Folio. 1. TO make very good Aqua vite.
Idem. To make arms or Tables of pictures always bright shinyng. Idem. To make
black ynke very good. Idem page 2. To make grene ynke. Idem page 2. For Oxen
that piss blood. Idem page 2. To make oil of Vitrioll. Fol. 3. To make white
tethe. Idem. For the same, idem. To take away spots from the face. idem page
2. For the same. idem. For the same. idem. For the same. idem. To take away
little read pimples from a man's face. Fol. 5. To make a water, that teketh
away the spots of the face, and makes it fair and brighte, and keeps the
hands and mouth, that they chappe not or wax full of chinkes. Idem. To make
the face fair. Idem. A water to make the face fair. Idem. To make a water
that makes the face white and shinyng. Idem page 2. A water to make the face
read. idem. To make a kind of white to make the face fair, called in French
Blanchet. idem. To make an other better, which makes the face white and
glisteryng. idem. A water to make the face read and glisteryng* Fo. 7. To make
an other manner of the same, which the French men call Blanchet. idem. To make
an other Blanchet, that makes the face white, and of a ruddie color, and
hurts not as the other aforesaied does. idem. To make an other Blanchet,
which is called royal, that is the best and the excellentest of al other.
idem To take out the wrinkles of the face. idem page 2. To make hear flacke in
coming forth, or growyng in a young manne, as well on their beard as in other
parts. Fol. 9. To make hear grows in every place of ye body, where you will.
idem To make hears black. idem. To make a water that will make the face read
and glisteryng. idem. To die or color hear. idem page 2. To take away the
evil savor of the breath. idem. To get away the hears from the iye brows.
idem. To die or color all kind of metal or ston^, into the color of gold,
without gold. idem. For to make iron or steel soft. Fol. 11. To harden iron
or steel. idem. To make figs ripe quickly idem. To make Hens lay eggs
all the winter. idem. To make a glewe or paste, that howeth as fast as a
nail. idem. To take away all manner of spots. idem. To cause that a womannes
breasts wax not great^ or swellyng. idem page 2. To pourge honey without
fire. idem. To stenche the menstruall blood of women. idem. To keep roses
fresh all the year. idem. For the same. idem. To take or dissolve a boil or
kernel in the griue, or the wrestyng of a sinewe. idem. To dress and trim
Olives in one day. Fol. 13. To preserve and keep Peches or other fruict. idem.
To cause merueilous dreams. idem. To make a woman bear children. idem page 2.
To heal and cure horses of the scabbe. idem. To heal the kings evil, a
desease called in Latin Struma. idem. To make one that is poisoned, to vomit
the poison. To make a candell that cannot be put out. idem. To make a candell
of ice to burn Fol. 15. To make that fruicte shall take what form or facion
you will. idem. To make that roots shall have what form you will. idem. For
to write letters upon a man's body or face* that shall never be rubbed out.
idem. page 2. For the same, but somewhat easier. idem. To make one have a good
memory. idem. To make that no dog shall bark at you. Fol. 17. To make all
things seem black and green in the night. idem. To die hear^ into a grene
color. idem. To dress or to keep fresh in Somer. idem. To make an instrument
called Cauterium, wherewith sores are burned, which shall raise the skin
without any grief or pain. idem. pagi. 2. To make steel cut iron as it were
lead. idem. To make read ynke. idem. For the same, and easier. Fol. 19. To
make bones soft. idem. To keep Grapes fresh all the Winter. idem. To make
Melons or Conconibers ripe before their season. idem. To take away the holes
or marks of the small Pockes. idem. page 2. To make ^he hands white. idem. To
make an odoriferous and sweet smellyng grease, that keeps the lips and
hands, from chinkes and chappes, and keeps them moiste, and soft. Fo. 21. For
a sweet suete called in French and Italien, Pomade, in Latin. Pomatu^. idem.
To make that flies shall not tourment or trouble houses in Somer. idem. To keep
Figs grene all the year. idem. For to make that Pomegranates shall not ^pe.
fo. 23. For to keep wine sweet all the year. idem. For wine that will not keep
long. idem. To cause that wine shall not be to strong. idem. pa. 2. To make
vineigre idem. To make vinaiger with water. idem. To make vinaiger with
perished wine, or wine that is marred. idem. To take away the savor of the
mouldines, or putre faccion of the wine. Fol. 25. To make wine have a good
odor. idem. To make that Lekes shall be great. idem. To make tadstooles or
Musheroms grow in a. idem. To make that all manner of codware shall sees
quickly. idem. To have grene flowers all the year. idem. page 2. To make corn
to grow greater, then they are wont to do. idem. To make that fruictes shall
not rot upon the tree. idem To make letters that cannot be read, unless the
Paper be put in water idem. To make letters that cannot be read, but at the.
fo. 27 To make that Aqua vite shall receive all the virtues and strength of
medicines. idem. To make that a woman shall eat of nothing, that is set upon
the table. idem. To make oil of roses, or other odoriferous her. idem To make
that the Mothes and vermin shall not eat nor destroy clothes and apparel.
idem. page 2. To make that wild beasts shall not hurt you. idem. For to be
assured and safe from serpents. idem. To take away the pain and grief of the
gout. fo. 29. For to see wild beasts in a dream. idem. For to make silk
white. idem. To make an herb grow, that shall have many and diverse odours and
savors. idem. To make an apple or ball that provoke. idem. pa. ^. To make a
barrain woman bear children. idem. To make hears grow upon a balde hedde.
idem. To make a water that dies or colors Copper, into the color of gold.
idem. To make oil of Brimstone. idem. For to make salt Ammoniac Fol. 31. For
to make Borace. idem. For to make Coral. idem. To die iron into the color of
gold. idem. page 2. For to make iron strong, and as fair as silver. idem. For
to make a water, that will take out incontinent letters from the paper idem. To
take a spot of oil out of clothe idem. To stanche the bleedyng at the nose.
Fol. 33. To break botches, impostumes, Cartarres, or sores coming in the
throat. idem. To take an iron or arrowe head out of a wound. idem To make that
young children, shall have no pain or grief in their teeth. idem. For to make
a clear voice. idem. For to fasten lose teeth. idem. page 2. For the Emeraudes.
idem. For one that has his sight troubled. idem. For one that is abroke or
brusted idem. For one that has his coddes swollen. idem. To make a woman that
is wont to have daughters, to bear sons also. idem. To make that ye hands
shall not chink or cleave. fo. 35. For to make a man's beard black. idem. To
make a woman bear children, although it be not always assured, yet it is the
best remedy that can be found. idem. To make a woman labouryng, to bring
forth (...) child, that cannot be delivered. idem. page 2. For to make teeth
that one ache, to fall out. Fol. 37. A remedy for the falling sickness. idem.
Against the plague. idem. For the same. idem. page 2. For the putrefaccion of
the teeth. idem. For the stinkyng of the breath, and to make the teeth white.
idem. A water to make clean teeth. idem. An other water to whiten teeth. Fol.
39. To take away the smell of Garlike, Leekes, or. idem A principal remedy
for the flixe or laxe. idem. For to make that hears shall not grow. idem. A
very profitable reamedie for the hardness of womennes breasts, after they be
brought a bed. idem. For Apostumes, Botches, Cankers, or other Swellynges.
idem. page 2. To make womennes milk increase. idem. To know whether there be
any water in the wine or no. idem. To make vinaiger. idem. To make dry
vinaiger, which may be carried where a man will. idem. An other composicion
for the same. fol. 41. To make rose vinaiger very sweet and odorife. idem. To
make vinaigre of grain. idem. A preseruacion in time of Pestilence or plague,
and against all venime or poison, and bityng of a madd Dog. idem. Against
stinkyng vermin called Puneises. idem pa. 2 To pourge coler and fleame. idem. A
remedy to keep flies from flesh. idem. To keep flesh all the summer without
corrup. idem. To know if a Melon be good. fol. 43. To kill and destroy flees.
idem. To ripe a botche, impostum, felon, or cattes hear, or any swellyng sore.
idem. An excellent washyng for the teeth idem. To make a bait for river fish.
idem. A remedy that no kind of herbs shall be hurt, or corrupted by flees
or lice. idem. To drive away the stinkyng vermin called pu. ide^. For to kill
and destroy flies idem. page 2. An other way to kill and destroy flees.
idem. For one that has eaten venomous tadstooles, or musheromes idem. For to
confite Musheromes or tadstooles, so well that a man may eat the^ without any
danger. fol. 45. A remedy against the stinging of waspes or bees. ide^. To
make women have a quick and speadie delivery of their children, and without
pain, or at the least very little. idem. To take of wartes from the hands
idem page 2. For the dissenterie or flixe of the stomach idem. To fasten the
gommes; and lose teeth idem. To take away the tothe ache idem. An other remedy
for to heal the tothe ache idem. To make hear grow idem. To make hear
black fol. 47. To kill the Worms in the teeth, and to take away the stinkyng
of the teeth idem. To heal pussiue and broken winded horses idem. To preserve
a man from vomityng on the sea idem. A remedy against the bityng or stinging of
serp. idem. For them that spit blood. idem. A remedy against the worms of young
chlid. ide^. pa. 2. A remedy for the flixe or laxe. idem. For the runnyng of
the urine, that is to say, for one that cannot hold his water. idem. For
those that cannot keep their meat, but vomit it up again continually. idem.
To make that Antes, or Emettes shall not eat the figs upon the tree. idem. To
make hoar hears black idem. For the toth ache Fol. 49. To destroy lise and
other small beasts, that do wa^^ and destroy the herbs in gardens idem. A
remedy for deafness idem. Against the stinging Scorpions idem. A remedy that
the Sun shall not hurt you, shinyng upon your hedde, when you go any journey.
idem. A remedy for the hoarsnesse of the voice. idem. A remedy for them that
cannot piss idem. page 2. To make a bait to catch wild Geese, and wild
Duckes, and all other sort of foul. idem. To make that Dogs shall never be
mad, and a remedy for them if they be mad, being bitten of mad Dogs
or Wolves idem. To make that flies shall not vex or trouble do. fo. 51. A
remedy to keep Dogs from flees idem. To pourge Dogs when they be sick
idem. To heal mangie Dogs. idem. page 2. To take wartes from the hands.
idem. To make the teeth white idem. To take away the pain of the iyes idem.
For him that is stong with a Salamander Fol. 53. For one that has drunk
leches or blood suckers. ide^. For one that is stong with the beast, called in
Latin Psalanx, which is a kind of Lizard called Stellio ide^. For one that is
bitten with a mad Dog idem. A remedy for him that is stong with some
venomous beast idem. To preserve a man from poison. Idem. page 2. To drive
away all venomous beasts from your. idem. Against all poison, either eaten or
drunk. Fol. 55. Against all veneme or poison idem. A remedy which Nicomedes
used, that no poison should hurt him idem. A secret or remedy, not to be
stong of Scorpi. ide^ pa. 2 A remedy not to be stong of waspes or Bees. ide^.
To make what quantity of ^^ong vinaigre you. ide^. For one that has eaten
venomous Musheromes, or Tadstooles idem. To be assured and saffe from all
Sorcerie and enchauntement Fol. 57. Against lightnyng and tempest idem. To keep
that fruictes shall not fall before the be ri. ide^. To keep that Weselles and
other like beasts, shall not eat nor destroy Poultrie. idem. To make flax
as soft as silk. idem. pa. 2. To heal the pain of the hedde idem. To heal
lips that be clefte and full of chinkes, by means of cold or wind. idem.
To heal hands that be full of chappes, by cold. idem. To grind gold and
silver idem. To make fair verde grise after the new facio^. fol. 59 An other
way briefer for to have Verdegrise. idem. To make a past or dowe of Amber, for
beads. fol. 61. To counterfete perles that shall seem natural. idem. To
imprent medalles imbossed with draga. ide^. pa. 2. To make a paste mete and
good, to make all manner of medalles or pictures in moulde. Fol. 63. To make
medalles, and figures chaced and imbossed, with fish glewe. idem. To make a
Green, Yellowe, Read, and Blewe color without thicknes, to write with upon.
ide^. pa. 2. To make a piece of violet clothe to write or paint. ide^. To get
oil out of Talcum artificially, and of his own strength. Fol. 67. To make
that all metal shall seem like silver. fol. 69 For to take much fish, and
to make a light in the night. Idem. page 2. To make a Mixte stone, which
being weated with spettle makes fire. idem. To make vernishe with Masticke,
to lay upon paintynges made with oil. Fol. 71. To make that a white skin
shall have black spots of the color of a Leoparde or Panther, and also to
make graie hear black. idem. To make good oil of Nutmegges. idem. page 2. To
make parfecte oil of Spike. idem. To make odoriferous oil of Storax Fol. 73.
To make an odoriferous oil of Bengewine. idem. To make good oil of Ladanum
Idem. page 2. To make oil of Orange flowers idem. To make a parfume suddenly
in a chamber where a sick man lies Fol. 75. To make long and round parfumes
to burn in a chamber idem. To make a fine and sweet powder of Cipres. idem.
pa. 2. To grind ambergrise for to put with other Drogges, to give them a
good odor, and to make little marks and spots upon beads. Fol. 77. To make
fine muscardines, white and read. ide^. pa. 2 To make counterfaicte Camphire
idem. To make the bearde grow, and to keep that the hears fall not of Fol.
79. To get away the hear from what place you will. ide^. To make hoar hears
black Idem. page 2. To make white hear in the shadow: without the Sun, and
shall be come white and shinyng, like Silver. fol. 81. A soft dowe or paste
as it were Pomatum, to wash the hands, and when the mouth, nose, lips, or
hands do chincke or chappe, and it keeps the flesh soft and sweet. fol.
83. White Pomatum, fine and sweet for great. idem. pa. 2. For those that have a
stinkyng breath, because of the stomach. fol. 87. To make one have a good
stomach, that has a naughty one. Idem. A remedy for him that cannot keep his
meat in his stomach, without vomityng. idem. pa. 2. To make a natural white
skin idem. To make the flesh or skin fair and bright Fol. 89. To clear and
make clean the face from all manner of spots. Idem. page 2. To take away a
ryngworme, tetter, or spots and other marks, or else a privy mark in the
honey by birthe. idem. To take away red rubies that grow in the face, by
reason of the heat of the liuar. Fol. 91. To take of from the hands or feet,
the hardness of the flesh, gotten by labor Idem. page 2. An other secret to
take away wartes or hard flesh, that grow between men's toes Idem. To make
letters of gold and silver embossed. Fol. 93. To make a devise or arms, or
other things, upon a Violet, or a Rose Idem. page 2. Soap to get out all
spots of clothe Idem An other like secret Fol. 95. An other like Idem. An
other means Idem. An other means for spots, of fat, or oil Idem. To take
spots out of of Skarlate or Velvet, without hurtyng the color Idem. page 2.
To take spots out of white silk or Velvet in grain, or Crimsen Velvet Idem.
To take out a spotte of Ynke or Wine, of a Woollen or Linen clothe Fol. 97. To
restore the color to a cloth, that has lost it in taking out a spotte Idem. A
water to take all manner of spots out of clothe of any color Idem. To drive
away Flies, Spiders, Scorpio^s, and other vermin from your house Idem. page
2. Against gnattes, which sting men in the night. idem A very excellent
secret for to take out spots or hard flesh by labor, called in Latin
Callum Fol. 99. To take oil or grease out of a clothe, of what color so ever
it be, without any drop of water. ide^. pa. 2. Balls of Soap for Barbers, of
diverse sorts and sauoure Idem. To counterfaicte all manner of green leaves,
which shall seem natural. Fol. 101. To make Paper board of beaten Paper, and
stampte Paper for mouldes and hollewe things. Fol. 103. To give a fair gloss
unto Pictures or Figures painted Idem. pa. 2. To make an other manner of grene
water clear. 105. To take out a devise made in a moulde, with Black Soap.
Idem. page 2. To make clean the hears, and to dry up the sweat under the
arm holes Idem. To make Roses, flowers, Gilliflowers, and of all other sorts,
white, read, grene, yellowe, and incarnate, in short space Fol. 107. To make
Trees of all sorts to grow, which shall bring forth fruicte, far greater
then commonly they do Idem. page 2. To soften and mollify Olives with Lie, in
less then eight hours Fol. 109. To make a water that will Die or color all
things be it bone or woo^^ Fol. 111. A water to make teeth white Idem. The
true secret and manner how to make beyond sea Azure, or else for all tutches or
Paragon. Also for to make strong paste, for to incorporate the Azure stone in
it, called Lapis Lasuli, and to take it out a^^ain in his time, and when you
think good. ide^. pa. 2. To make the paste, softer for beyond sea azure. 113.
To purify the oil of Lineseede for the azure. ide^. pa. 2 Lie for to wash
beyond sea azure Fol. 115. How the vessel ought to be, wherein all the
waters are put that the azure is washed with. Idem. pa. 2. The first part
how to know the virtuous, goodness, and signs of Lapis Lazuli, and to make
true beyond Sea Azure most parfectly and expertly. Idem. The manner how to
prepare the stone Lapis Lasuli, and to calcine it when you will grind it. Fol.
117. To get out the gold of lapis Lazuli, after it. ide^. pa. 2. The manner how
to make the licour wherewith men braie the lapis Lasuli, for to make beyond
sea. 119. To know whether the sublime be good or (...), or whether it be made
with Arsenick Idem. To take letters out of Paper. Idem. page 2. To renew old
and worn letters Idem. To mollify or make soft Iuerie and bones, to work
what thing you will on them, or with them. Idem To take out the marks that are
commonly made in the faces of Sclaues, for to know them, and also soche as
many men carry upon their bodies, for diverse causes Fol. 159. For one that is
stong with a Scorpion. Idem. For one that is stong with Waspes or Bees. Idem.
When a man is touched or poisoned of a spider. idem For one that has eaten
Todes, or the spettle that to^meth from the^, which is a dedly thing. Idem.
page 2. To heal cleft or kibed heels Idem. To heal the Canker, that
happens upon the yard of a man, or in the nature of a woman. Idem. To heal
a foundred horse Idem. To kill the worms in horses Fol. 161. For a horse that
cannot stale Idem. For a horse that is ^l^ied with a neile in shoyng. idem To
make a horse to have a good hoof. Idem.
Finis tabulae.
Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston: for Nicholas England.


